Yellow Nail Syndrome: Causes and Natural Treatment Options

Picture Source iSTock.com

So, our new problematic topic is not that new. It has been a disturbing thing in the world of cosmetics and beauty. Yellow nail syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by abnormalities in the fingernails and toenails, respiratory issues affecting the lungs and airways, and swelling in various parts of the body due to a buildup of protein-rich fluid (lymphedema) in the soft tissues under the skin. This condition typically affects older adults. [1] After knowing its root causes, we will be good to go with finding the solution to each cause of yellow nail syndrome and let us be fast on getting rid of it

Causes

As the underlying cause of YNS is unknown, the pathophysiology is also unclear. The possible causes of YNS are as follows:

Lymphatic abnormalities

Respiratory conditions

Genetic factors

Exposure to titanium

Drug association

Fungal nail infections

Postpartum

Yellow nail syndrome develops most often in adults over 50. More rarely, yellow nail syndrome sometimes occurs in children. Some reports show higher rates of yellow nail syndrome in people with:

Autoimmune diseases

Cancer

Nephrotic syndrome

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)

Thyroid disease [2]

1.Lymphatic Abnormalities

The most widely accepted cause of YNS is thought to be related to abnormalities in lymphatic flow. Based on their investigations involving quantitative lymphoscintigraphy, Bull et al. argued that, unlike primary lymphedema due to permanent structural lymphatic abnormalities, the abnormalities observed in YNS appear to be potentially reversible. They propose that perhaps an inflammatory component that leads to altered capillary permeability, fluid shifts, and alterations in blood flow is likely the cause of the oedema in YNS. [3]

Picture Source iSTock.com

Respiratory Conditions

It may be seen in patients with chronic bronchiectasis or sinusitis, pleural effusions but the exact cause of YNS is unknown. These respiratory conditions in YNS may result from or exacerbate lymphatic abnormalities or systemic dysfunctions ultimately leading to exacerbated YNS. [4]

Picture Source iSTock.com

Genetic Factors

Some sources in the medical literature currently classify yellow nail syndrome as a primary genetic disorder. Some cases of yellow nail syndrome have run in families, suggesting that, in these cases, genetic factors may play a role in the development of the disorder. Some researchers have speculated that yellow nail syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, although the evidence remains scarce. Dominant genetic disorders occur when only a single copy of an abnormal gene is necessary for the appearance of the disease. The abnormal gene can be inherited from either parent or the result of a new mutation (gene change) in the affected individual. The risk of passing the abnormal gene from the affected parent to offspring is 50% for each pregnancy. The risk is the same for males and females. [1]

Picture Source iSTock.com

Exposure to Titanium

It has also been associated with exposure to titanium from dental implants, in industries or consuming food containing titanium dioxide. Accumulation of titanium may trigger an inflammatory or immune mediated response disrupting lymphatic function leading to YNS. Some people are also hypersensitive to titanium exposure. [5]

Picture Source iSTock.com

5. Drug Association

Yellow nail syndrome has been associated with some drugs, e.g. penicillamine, bucillamine and gold sodium thiomalate. Drugs that can trigger an immune response or which can cause fluid retention and also that inhibit nail growth like chemotherapeutic drugs can cause or increase symptoms of YNS. [5]

Picture Source iSTock.com

6. Fungal Nail Infections

Rachel Maiman, a board-certified dermatologist at Marmur Medical, says fungal infections can lead to thickening of the nail plate and accumulation of debris beneath it, leading to a yellow hue. [6]

Picture Source iSTock.com

Keep In Mind:

Individuals who smoke heavily may show a characteristic yellowish discoloration of the nails due to the deposition of nicotine. [7]

7. Postpartum

Here, I find an opportunity to mention a 38-year-old woman case suffering from dystrophic yellowish nails and mild peripheral oedema shortly after giving birth which are typical symptoms of YNS. She presented with chronic cough and increasing shortness of breath within 2 weeks of postpartum. [8]

Picture Source iSTock.com

Natural Treatment Options

Tea tree oil

Baking soda

Oregano oil

Dietary restrictions

Hydrogen peroxide

Vitamin E

Corticosteroids

Prescription drugs

Tea tree oil

If your nails are discoloured because of a bacterial infection or fungus, tea tree oil is an easy treatment you can try. A study has shown that tea tree oil can effectively stop common strains of nail fungus from growing. [9]

Mix 1 to 2 drops of tea tree oil with a carrier oil (e.g., coconut or olive oil)

Wash and dry your nails

Use a cotton swab to apply the diluted tea tree oil directly to the affected nails, covering the entire nail surface and under the tips

Gently massage the oil into nail surrounding skin for better absorption

Let the oil air-dry completely before covering the nails

Apply 1 to 2 times daily for at least 8 to 12 weeks

Picture Source iSTock.com

Baking soda

Fungus can only grow in an environment where the pH level is acidic. Soaking your feet or toes in hot water mixed with baking soda may prevent the fungus from spreading. Baking soda creates an alkaline environment and, for a few soaks, may leave your nails much clearer. [9]

Mix 2 tbs. of baking soda with a few drops of water to form a thick paste

Wash your nails with soap and water and dry them thoroughly to remove dirt and oil

Apply baking soda paste on nails using cotton swab or fingers

Let the paste sit for 10 to 15 minutes

Rinse off the paste with warm water and pat your nails dry

Repeat the process 2 to 3 times per week for at least 8 to 12 weeks

Picture Source iSTock.com

Oregano oil

Oregano oil has been found to have antimicrobial properties. It’s effective against bacteria and fungi, making it an excellent treatment if you’re unsure what’s causing your nails to become yellow. [9]

Mix 2 to 3 drops of oregano oil with a teaspoon of carrier oil

Wash the nails with soap and warm water then let them dry

Apply the diluted oregano oil using a cotton swab or clean fingers on the affected nails and the surrounding surface and under the nail tips if possible

Let the oil air-dry

Apply once daily for milder discoloration or twice daily for severe discoloration

Apply for at least 8 to 12 weeks as the nails grow slowly

Picture Source iSTock.com

Dietary Restrictions

Chylous ascites have rarely been reported in yellow nail syndrome. A case of Chylous ascites in yellow nail syndrome was treated successfully with dietary restriction of fat and supplements of medium-chained triglycerides. She was started on a low-fat diet with medium chain triglyceride (MCT 50 ml/day) to avoid deficiency of essential fatty acids. This diet aimed to provide approximately 2500 to 2700kJ in the form of medium-chain triglycerides and to reduce the intake of long-chain fatty acids. The symptoms resolved within 3 weeks of this dietary modification. [10]

Low fat diet with MCT may include smoothies containing unsweetened almond milk, spinach, chia seeds, berries and a small amount of MCT oil ,cooked oats with light coconut milk, boiled eggs with toast in breakfast

Grilled chicken salad, vegetable soup, quinoa bowl in lunch

Grilled fish with vegetables, lentil curry in dinner

You can taste fruit salad with coconut milk drizzle in dessert

Or have coconut yogurt, vegetable sticks with hummus, chia pudding in snack

Start with 8 to 12 weeks to observe improvements in symptoms

Continue for 6 to 12 months if you notice improvement

Picture Source iSTock.com

Hydrogen Peroxide

The dye from dark nail polish can seep into the nail enamel, permanently staining it. Hydrogen peroxide goes deep into the nail and lightens the colouring, similar to how bleach strips the colour out of hair. Mixing hydrogen peroxide into warm water and soaking the nails may improve the appearance of stains, and adding baking soda will make it even more effective. [9]

Mix 1 part of hydrogen peroxide with 2 parts of water

Soak your nails for 10 to 15 minutes in mixture

Rinse the nails with warm water and let them dry as moisture can worsen fungal infections

Repeat 2 to 3 times per week

Picture Source iSTock.com

Quick Tips:

Careful nail hygiene can prevent nail discolouration. Be mindful of nail salons and spas that could infect customers with fungal infections and diseases.

A good manicurist will use a clean or new manicure kit on each person.

Don’t use nail polish remover on your nails more than once a week, and use a remover that is less harsh by choosing one that does not contain acetone.

Trim your nails frequently and sweep dirt underneath them with a nail brush once or twice weekly.

Always wear fresh socks and often expose your feet to fresh air to avoid toenail infections like athlete’s foot. [9]

Vitamin E

Vitamin E is known for helping cells retain moisture, contributing to healthier skin, hair, and nails. When you have an adequate amount of vitamin E, these areas of your body appear more vibrant. Furthermore, vitamin E has been clinically studied as an effective treatment for yellow nail syndrome. Yellow nail syndrome is characterized by discoloured, ridged, and thick nails. Because vitamin E promotes healthy nail growth; it can be applied topically and orally to help nails grow more quickly. [9]

Pierce a vitamin E capsule to extract the oil

Apply the oil directly to the nails

Massage gently for 2 to 3 minutes

Leave the oil on overnight

Repeat daily, preferably before bedtime

Use topical vitamin E for at least 3 to 6 months

You can take 200 to 400 IU of vitamin E daily for a time being as per your doctor’s recommendation

Picture Source iSTock.com

Corticosteroids

Corticosteroids are used to treat underlying inflammatory conditions that lead to yellow nail syndrome. They can be applied topically or taken orally in severe oedematous conditions, and inhalational Corticosteroids can be used when respiratory symptoms are also present. However, be aware of the side effects caused by the usage of Corticosteroids. [1]

Topical corticosteroids is used when there is associated inflammation. Apply a thin layer of prescribed corticosteroid cream (e.g., hydrocortisone 1%) to the nail beds and surrounding skin. Use once daily for at least 2 to 4 weeks.

If there is associated systemic inflammation use 10 to 20mg daily oral dosage of corticosteroids for 4 to 6 weeks

You can take 1 to 2 puffs of inhalational corticosteroids if there is associated respiratory symptoms. It may continue for weeks to months.

Don’t forget to taper off the steroids if you discontinue its usage in the form of oral tablets or inhalational puffs

Picture Source iSTock.com

Prescription Drugs for Yellow Nails

If yeast or bacteria is causing your yellow nails, consider trying some treatments to help resolve the issue.

Oral prescriptions like terbinafine (Lamisil) 250 mg once daily for 6 to 12 weeks

Oral itraconazole (Sporanox) 200 mg daily for 12 weeks can be effective in cases where a fungus is responsible for the yellowing.

However, both of these medications have been flagged by the FDA for potentially being harmful to the liver with long-term use. They may also cause common side effects such as diarrhoea and abdominal pain.

As an alternative, you might ask for ciclopirox (Penlac Nail Lacquer) for 6 to 12 weeks, which is applied to the nail-like nail polish.

It’s important to note that these prescribed treatments can take weeks to months to show improvement. Healthy nail growth will gradually replace the yellowed appearance of your nails. Remember that no oral or topical antifungal treatment is 100% effective, and nail fungus often recurs. [9]

Summary:

So here we conclude with the coverage of almost all the causes of YNS and the possible remedies that can be applied easily to regain your beautiful, healthy nails. But it’s something more than gaining a look. It can be something more significant than just a symptom with underlying causes. Treating these conditions is necessary for a better quality of life and a beautiful look cosmetically.

Key Takeaways:

Identify the root cause leading to the yellowish colouration of nails

Treating underlying conditions is necessary to get back beautiful pinkish hair

Reducing a high-fat diet can prove magical in treating YNS

Vitamin E has better-proliferating action on nails

Corticosteroids can be used in severe associated conditions.

Tea tree oil, oregano oil, baking soda and hydrogen peroxide have evidence-based good results

Prescribed drugs can be used

Q: What causes yellow nail syndrome?

The exact cause of YNS is still unknown. But evidence based study shows lymphatic system obstruction leads to accumulation of fluids in body which further leads to YNS.

Q: What are the symptoms of yellow nail syndrome?

Swelling of legs and arms, yellowing of nails, respiratory tract infections and sometimes with shortness of breath.

Q: How yellow nail syndrome can be diagnosed?

It can be diagnosed by physical examination, CT scan and blood tests for further evaluation

Q: Can lifestyle modifications help manage yellow nail syndrome?

Yes. Quitting smoking, changing dietary habits, and practising exercise will do wonders.

Q: Is yellow nail syndrome life-threatening?

No, it’s not life-threatening itself. However, the underlying causes, if not treated, can lead to severe respiratory problems, which may be concerning.

References:

Yellow Nail Syndrome

https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/yellow-nail-syndrome/

Yellow Nail syndrome

https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/diseases/23009-yellow-nail-syndrome

Lymphatic Abnormalities

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557760/

Respiratory Conditions

https://dermnetnz.org/topics/yellow-nail-syndrome

Exposure to Titanium

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yellow_nail_syndrome

Ask a Derm: Understanding the Link Between Yellow Fingernails and Vitamin Deficiencies

https://www.byrdie.com/yellow-fingernails-vitamin-deficiency-5097207

Yellow Nail Syndrome

https://www.news-medical.net/health/Yellow-Nail-Syndrome.aspx

Yellow nail syndrome presenting with postpartum massive pleural effusion

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24279775/

Yellow Nails: Causes and Treatment

https://www.healthline.com/health/yellow-nails

Dietary treatment of chylous ascites in yellow nail syndrome

https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC1434336/