The Best Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreens, According to Dermatologists

Best Sunscreens for Pregnancy

QUICK SUMMARY

The best pregnancy-safe sunscreen is the Supergoop Mineral Mattescreen. Doctors like that it’s a mineral sunscreen free from harsh chemicals , and moms appreciate that it’s smooth and super easy to apply.

As the temperatures rise, my bump and I are gearing up for some serious beach time. That means stocking up on pregnancy-safe sunscreen to protect my newly sensitive skin from the sun.

While everyone should slather on SPF, the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) stresses that it’s especially important for pregnant people to wear sunscreen daily . “During pregnancy, the skin tends to be more sensitive overall due to hormonal changes, which also affect how it reacts to sunlight,” explains Dendy Engelman, M.D. , a cosmetic dermatologist and Mohs surgeon at the Shafer Clinic in New York City.

Beyond sensitivity, pregnancy hormones can also ramp up skin pigmentation, leading to conditions like melasma. “These dark patches can become even more pronounced with sun exposure,” says Iffath Hoskins, M.D. , an OB-GYN at NYU Langone Health.

The tricky part? Hardly any sunscreens are labeled pregnancy-safe. (Why make things easy for us, right?) And if you’ve ever gone down the rabbit hole of Googling skincare ingredients to cross-check with sunscreen labels, you know it’s enough to make you want to throw in the (beach) towel. Making things even more complicated is a recent report from non-profit Environmental Working Group (EWG) that found just 25% of the sunscreens tested delivered effective protection from UV rays. Basically, there’s a lot to consider when choosing a sunscreen, especially when you’re pregnant.

Making things even more complicated is a recent report from non-profit Environmental Working Group (EWG) that found just 25% of the sunscreens tested delivered effective protection from UV rays. Basically, there’s a lot to consider when choosing a sunscreen, especially when you’re pregnant.

Luckily, I’ve already done the heavy lifting — diving into the research, consulting dermatologists and attempting to channel my inner chemist. Now, all you have to do is browse my curated list of dermatologist-approved, pregnancy-safe sunscreens and find the perfect one for you!

How I Chose the Best Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreens

To narrow down the dozens of sunscreens to the best pregnancy-safe options, I spoke to Dr. Engelman, Dr. Hoskins, Jessica Wu , M.D., a board-certified dermatologist based in Los Angeles, California and Deanne Mraz Robinson , M.D., a dermatologist with Modern Dermatology of Connecticut, Ife J. Rodney, M.D., a dermatologist and founding director of Eternal Dermatology + Aesthetics and Gary Goldenberg , M.D., assistant clinical professor of dermatology at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital to learn what they consider a good pregnancy-safe sunscreen.

Ife J. Rodney, M.D., a dermatologist and founding director of Eternal Dermatology + Aesthetics and Gary Goldenberg , M.D., assistant clinical professor of dermatology at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital

I also consulted safety and efficiency data from EWG’s 2025 Guide to Sunscreens, which analyzed more than 2,200 sunscreens and found that only 25 percent deliver safe and effective protection against the sun’s harmful rays.

“The EWG’s findings are concerning,” says Dr. Goldenberg, and Dr. Rodney agrees. “My takeaway is that mineral sunscreens are best,” she says. (In case you’re not familiar with them, mineral sunscreens sit on the skin’s surface and reflect and scatter sunlight, while chemical sunscreens absorb UV rays, per the American Academy of Dermatology .(AAD))

Although the EWG data was taken into consideration to provide a stricter assessment of what sunscreens are deemed most effective, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidelines were prioritized to ensure all sunscreens on the list to meet safety standards.

Per that guidance, as well as recommendations from the the AAD and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), all of the sunscreens on the list are:

Free from synthetic fragrances and harsh chemicals, such as oxybenzone and benzophenone-3. I also avoided sunscreens that contain cinoxate, dioxybenzone, ensulizole, homosalate, meradimate, octinoxate, octisalate, octocrylene, padimate 0, sulisobenzone, and avobenzone, given that the FDA is investigating whether they are absorbed through the skin and enter the body.

Mineral or physical sunscreens with active ingredients like titanium dioxide or zinc oxide

Broad-spectrum formulas with a minimum SPF of 30

Water-resistant

Recipients of an EWG rating of 3 or lower; the rating system goes from 0 to 10, with lower numbers having less hazardous ingredients.EWG Verified is considered the organization’s highest honor. “When you see the EWG Verified mark on a product, it means the product has gone through a rigorous review process and meets our strictest standards for health, ingredient safety and transparency,” explains Aya Matsumoto, director of EWG Verified.

Reef-safe

That said, you’re less likely to wear sunscreen if it’s difficult to apply, smells bad or irritates your skin. To learn which pregnancy-safe sunscreens are considered easy to apply, gentle and overall pleasant to use, I spoke to five What to Expect staff members who have endured summer pregnancies and utilized real-world feedback from What to Expect’s parent community, especially those with sensitive skin, rosacea or melasma. I prioritized products that received rave reviews for ease of application, lack of white cast, scent and packaging.

These recommendations, cross referenced with expert insight, resulted in the following list of 11 pregnancy-safe sunscreens.

Korin Miller contributed to this article.

Best Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreen

Supergoop Mineral Mattescreen

Vegan formula

matte finish

lightweight

Expensive

Size: 1.5 ounces

Application type: Lotion

SPF: 40

EWG Rating : 2

Why We Love It

Deemed the Best Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreen in the What to Expect Beauty Awards, the mineral-based Supergoop Mineral Mattescreen sunscreen is also a favorite brand among dermatologists and estheticians. The sheerness of this mineral sunscreen is what makes it a top pick among moms-to-be, with many in the What to Expect Community raving about how it’s the only one that doesn’t leave a white cast behind. Worth noting: EWG points out that there are no efficiency concerns with this sunscreen, so you can feel confident the product will deliver the protection it claims. And, even though it goes on smooth, it’s non-greasy and leaves behind a matte finish.

sunscreen is also a favorite brand among dermatologists and estheticians. The sheerness of this mineral sunscreen is what makes it a top pick among moms-to-be, with many in the What to Expect Community raving about how it’s the only one that doesn’t leave a white cast behind. Worth noting: EWG points out that there are no efficiency concerns with this sunscreen, so you can feel confident the product will deliver the protection it claims. And, even though it goes on smooth, it’s non-greasy and leaves behind a matte finish.

Robin Hilmantel, editorial director of special projects, has found that the Supergoop Matte Sunscreen lives up to the hype. “It’s the only mineral sunscreen I've used that has the smooth, easy application of a chemical sunscreen,” she says. “I also like that it has a slight tint to it to offer some coverage, although it might not work as well for darker skin tones.”

, editorial director of special projects, has found that the Supergoop Matte Sunscreen lives up to the hype. “It’s the only mineral sunscreen I've used that has the smooth, easy application of a chemical sunscreen,” she says. “I also like that it has a slight tint to it to offer some coverage, although it might not work as well for darker skin tones.”

This matte sunscreen can even be used as a primer, applied just before your makeup to create a more seamless look. “The whipped texture helps blur pores and blemishes, and the zinc is a natural anti-inflammatory ingredient to help calm breakouts,” explains Dr. Wu. It’s a particularly good choice for those with oily and acne-prone skin. By the way, Supergoop recommends reapplying at least every two hours.

Community Reviews

"I’ve been using mineral for years. I have sensitive skin and it’s so much more gentle, plus I prefer to avoid as many chemicals as possible. Supergoop and Neutrogena are great."

"Supergoop is the bomb! The only kind I use & not like paint when you put it on!"

"Another Supergoop fan! Ha it’s the best! :) I’ll definitely continue to use it after my pregnancy.”

“They’re pricey, but supergoop has preg / family safe sunscreens that go on like regular sunscreen vs the white cast mineral.”

Best Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreen for Face

EltaMD UV Pure Face and Body Sunscreen

Silky texture

Non-comedogenic

Lightweight

Expensive

Size : 4 ounces

Application type : Lotion

SPF : 47

EWG Rating : 3

Why We Love It

When I asked my colleagues about their go-to sunscreen, many were quick to rave about EltaMD UV Pure Face and Body Sunscreen — and after a little digging, I totally get why. While this mineral formula doesn’t have the matte texture of Supergoop, both staff and community members swear it goes on just as smoothly. Plus, since it’s lightweight and non-comedogenic ( aka it won’t clog your precious pores ), you can easily wear it under makeup without that heavy, greasy feeling.

— and after a little digging, I totally get why. While this mineral formula doesn’t have the matte texture of Supergoop, both staff and community members swear it goes on just as smoothly. Plus, since it’s lightweight and non-comedogenic (

), you can easily wear it under makeup without that heavy, greasy feeling.

Melissa Bykofsky , Executive Editor of What to Expect, first tried EltaMD after her dermatologist recommended it. (Bonus: There were samples in the waiting room.) But the reason she committed to a full-size bottle? The texture.

, Executive Editor of What to Expect, first tried EltaMD after her dermatologist recommended it. (Bonus: There were samples in the waiting room.) But the reason she committed to a full-size bottle? The texture.

"It’s silky like a regular chemical sunscreen and doesn’t leave behind that chalky white finish that so many mineral sunscreens do," she shares.

And if your nose is extra sensitive these days, Melissa assures that EltaMD “doesn’t have a repulsive smell.”

Another perk? EltaMD is safe for kids 3 and up. So if you’re waddling around the beach with a toddler in tow, you don’t have to lug around a separate SPF just for them. One bottle, less hassle — sounds like a win to me!

Some housekeeping with this sunscreen: EltaMD recommends reapplying after 80 minutes of swimming or sweating, immediately after towel drying and at least every two hours, so file that away for the future. EWG also notes that you’ll want to toss the bottle if the sunscreen starts to clump or separate to ensure there are no efficiency issues.

Community Reviews

clanin97 “EltaMD mineral- the absolute best, goes on so smooth and worth the price! Pregnancy safe. I’ve been told almost all mineral sunscreens are safe but this is the only one I’ve found that I don’t get white casted and works SO GOOD and isn’t greasy.”

Best Pregnancy-Safe Lip Sunscreen

Badger Mineral Sunscreen Lip Balm

Moisturizing and protective

doubles as a face stick simple

easy-to-pronounce ingredients

Shea butter smell may be strong for some

Size : 0.17 ounces

Application type : Stick

SPF : 30

EWG Rating : 1

Why We Love It

While your lips need protection from the sun’s harsh UV rays, rubbing traditional sunscreen on top will usually leave you with a white cast and weird taste in your mouth. The Badger Mineral Sunscreen Lip Balm bypasses that with a sunscreen-balm combo. This is an SPF 15 sunscreen stick that features a blend of zinc oxide for protection, along with olive oil, beeswax and shea butter to pamper your pout. It goes on easily, and doesn’t leave a white cast, too. (Badger recommends reapplying every two hours, by the way.)

Since zinc oxide is the main ingredient, this stick isn’t likely to be as moisturizing as your go-to lip balm. But it can still provide plenty of protection from UV rays without leaving your lips feeling dry. This lip balm has an impressive EWG rating of 1, with the non-profit noting that it has zero concerns about efficiency. You can even use it on your face in a pinch.

Since zinc oxide is the main ingredient, this stick isn’t likely to be as moisturizing as your go-to lip balm. But it can still provide plenty of protection from UV rays without leaving your lips feeling dry. This lip balm has an impressive

rating of 1, with the non-profit noting that it has zero concerns about efficiency. You can even use it on your face in a pinch.

Best Mineral Sunscreen for Pregnancy

Thinksport Clear Zinc Sunscreen Lotion

Fragrance-free

no white cast

EWG Verified

Thick

Size : 6 ounces

Application type : Lotion

SPF : 50

EWG Rating : EWG Verified

Why We Love It

Pregnancy can make your sense of smell extra sensitive, making it tricky to use anything scented — let alone repeatedly slather it all over your body. The Thinksport Clear Zinc Sunscreen Lotion is truly unscented, so you don’t have to stress about it setting off your sniffer. The lotion is EWG Verified, too, making it one of the safest sunscreen options you can buy.

Pregnancy can make your sense of smell extra sensitive, making it tricky to use anything scented — let alone repeatedly slather it all over your body. The

is truly unscented, so you don’t have to stress about it setting off your sniffer. The lotion is EWG Verified, too, making it one of the safest sunscreen options you can buy.

This mineral sunscreen relies on zinc oxide to deliver protection and, while the compound is known for its white hue, this particular formulation is clear, so there’s no cast left behind. It also contains conditioning ingredients like vitamin E and jojoba oil to moisturize your skin, along with that sun protection.

Thinksport’s sunscreen lasts for up to 80 minutes in the water or when you’re sweaty before needing a reapplication, although the brand recommends reapplying every two hours when you’re dry. The formula is thick, so some rubbing is involved. But for the clean sun protection it delivers without a funky smell, most people find it’s worth it.

Best Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreen for Sensitive Skin

Coola Mineral Body Sunscreen Lotion

Sheer

non-greasy

vegan formula

bottle lasts a long time

Expensive

Size: 5 ounces

Application type: Lotion

SPF: 50

EWG Rating : 3

Why We Love It

Your skin is already more sensitive during pregnancy, so if you were sensitive-prone prior, you’ll definitely want to opt for a mineral-based sunscreen that’s extra gentle on your skin. The Coola Mineral Body Organic Sunscreen Lotion is a sheer, lightweight, fragrance-free option that’s a popular pick for sensitive skin because of its natural ingredient list that contains items like coconut oil, aloe and jojoba oil. In fact, over 70 percent of the ingredients are certified organic. It’s also great for oily or dry skin, so it’ll work with a variety of people who have sensitive skin. ( EWG just recommends keeping an eye out for the lotion clumping or separating—those are the signs its losing efficacy.)

Your skin is already more sensitive during pregnancy, so if you were sensitive-prone prior, you’ll definitely want to opt for a mineral-based sunscreen that’s extra gentle on your skin. The

is a sheer, lightweight, fragrance-free option that’s a popular pick for sensitive skin because of its natural ingredient list that contains items like coconut oil, aloe and jojoba oil. In fact, over 70 percent of the ingredients are certified organic. It’s also great for oily or dry skin, so it’ll work with a variety of people who have sensitive skin.

The hydrating organic formula blends into skin for strong protection and is true to its word that it rubs in clear. Just ask Christine Mattheis , Group VP of Content & Brand Solutions at What to Expect, who used this sunscreen while pregnant and still does to this day. “What I love most about it is how easy it rubs into my skin without leaving even a trace of the ghastly white cast you normally get from natural sunscreens,” she says. “It works just as well day-to-day under makeup as it does out on the beach in direct sun. It also smells really good.”

The hydrating organic formula blends into skin for strong protection and is true to its word that it rubs in clear. Just ask

, Group VP of Content & Brand Solutions at What to Expect, who used this sunscreen while pregnant and still does to this day. “What I love most about it is how easy it rubs into my skin without leaving even a trace of the ghastly white cast you normally get from natural sunscreens,” she says. “It works just as well day-to-day under makeup as it does out on the beach in direct sun. It also smells really good.”

To top it all off, the tube is made from sustainably sourced sugar-cane resin and is 100 percent recyclable, according to the brand. Coola suggests reapplying after 80 minutes of swimming or sweating, or every two hours.

Community Reviews

kpdavenport I have used Coola face sunscreen and it is AWESOME! I think I am going to splurge and buy Coola's body sunscreen as well.”

sarah_ashley310 I love the brand coola! The scents are amazing too!

Best Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreen for Oily Skin

La Roche-Posay Anthelios Mineral Sunscreen

Hydrates for up to 12 hours

not greasy

includes hyaluronic acid

Expensive

Size: 4 ounces

Application type: Lotion

SPF: 50

EWG Rating : 2

Why We Love It

Breakouts are not only common during pregnancy, but they can also pop up after applying sunscreen — especially if you have oily skin. And while most pregnancy-safe sunscreens check the key boxes (mineral-based, non-comedogenic and fragrance-free), La Roche-Posay’s Anthelios Mineral Sunscreen goes a step further with the addition of silica.

Breakouts are not only common during pregnancy, but they can also pop up after applying sunscreen — especially if you have oily skin. And while most pregnancy-safe sunscreens check the key boxes (mineral-based, non-comedogenic and fragrance-free),

goes a step further with the addition of silica.

Silica helps absorb oil, sebum and sweat, making it a game-changer if your skin produces excess oil. (But if you don’t? Skip this one — your skin needs some oil and sebum to stay hydrated!) It also keeps the formula from feeling greasy after application.

La Roche-Posay recommends reapplying this after 80 minutes of swimming or sweating or at least every two hours, by the way. Also worth pointing out:EWGhas no concerns about efficacy with this sunscreen.

Most users say it doesn’t leave a white cast, but some warn that using too much can make it harder to rub in. Luckily, a little goes a long way! According to the AAD, most adults need about 1 ounce of sunscreen — roughly a shot glass-full — to fully cover exposed skin.

Community Reviews

MDuckens "I use LA Roche Posay' mineral sunscreen. It's a bit more expensive than your standard sunscreen, but if you have sensitive skin like I do, it's great."

MargotandMaevesMom “I’ve used La Roche-Posay moisturizer and sunscreen daily for all five of my pregnancies with no issues.”

Best Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreen for Dry Skin

CeraVe Hydrating Mineral Sunscreen

Nourishing ingredients

Easy to apply

No white cast

A tad runny

Size : 5 ounces

Application type : Lotion

SPF : 30

EWG Rating : 3

Why We Love It

Since my dermatologist (along with dozens of others) gave CeraVe the OK during pregnancy, it only made sense to try the brand’s sunscreen. CeraVe Hydrating Mineral Sunscreen is packed with essential ceramides, which not only hydrate the skin but also help lock in moisture throughout the day.

Since my dermatologist (along with dozens of others) gave CeraVe the OK during pregnancy, it only made sense to try the brand’s sunscreen.

is packed with essential ceramides, which not only hydrate the skin but also help lock in moisture throughout the day.

Unlike other sunscreens that leave my skin feeling dry after application, this one actually makes it feel soft and — dare I say — smooth.

It’s also noticeably lighter than the CeraVe AM Facial Moisturizing Lotion, which makes it much easier to rub in. It’s also noticeably light and easy to rub in, somthing Sarah Darby , Senior SEO Strategist, also noticed.

It’s also noticeably lighter than the CeraVe AM Facial Moisturizing Lotion, which makes it much easier to rub in. It’s also noticeably light and easy to rub in, somthing

“It's a thin consistency so it's really easy to apply and soaks in really well for mineral sunscreen — no white hue once applied,” Sarah says. This also means it comes out of the bottle fast — so be prepared for a surprise squeeze!

Sarah adds that it smells like you’re typical sunscreen, so it may bother you if you’re extra sensitive to smells.

While this was given a favorable 3 rating by EWG , the non-profit recommends tossing your bottle if you happen to notice the sunscreen clumping or separating over efficacy concerns. You’ll want to reapply this every two hours, according to CeraVe.

Community Reviews

OhBB "I used Cerave on my body. It has hyaluronic acid in it which has actual studies showing it’s beneficial to prevent and treat stretch marks."

Best Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreen Stick

Stream2Sea EcoStick Sport Mineral Sunscreen Stick

Glides on easily Hypoallergenic blend

EWG Verified

May need to be rubbed in

Size : 0.5 ounces

Application type : Stick

SPF: 35

EWG Rating : EWG Verified

Why We Love It

A sunscreen stick makes it easy to get UV protection on your face, especially in hard-to-reach spots like directly under your eyes. The Stream2Sea EcoStick Sport is a mineral sunscreen that leans heavily on ingredients like titanium dioxide and zinc oxide, with a few antioxidant ingredients in the mix like green tea and olive leaf. This sunscreen stick also earned the coveted EWG Verified certification, which is the organization’s highest mark of approval.

A sunscreen stick makes it easy to get UV protection on your face, especially in hard-to-reach spots like directly under your eyes. The

is a mineral sunscreen that leans heavily on ingredients like titanium dioxide and zinc oxide, with a few antioxidant ingredients in the mix like green tea and olive leaf. This sunscreen stick also earned the coveted

certification, which is the organization’s highest mark of approval.

Stream2Sea EcoStick Sport comes in a petite package, making it easy to toss in a bag and use on the go. It’s water resistant for up to 80 minutes, so you can get in a solid swim before needing to reapply. (If you’re not swimming or sweating, Stream2Sea recommends reapplying it every two hours.) The creamy sunscreen glides on easily, although you may need to rub it in a little after applying.

This sunscreen is eco-friendly, too. It’s safe for freshwater fish, saltwater fish, and coral larvae, and has earned the HEL Labs Protect Land + Seacertification, verifying that it doesn’t contain harmful environmental pollutants. We like that it comes in several color options, including tinted and subtle pink and blue shades.

This sunscreen is eco-friendly, too. It’s safe for freshwater fish, saltwater fish, and coral larvae, and has earned the

certification, verifying that it doesn’t contain harmful environmental pollutants. We like that it comes in several color options, including tinted and subtle pink and blue shades.

Community Reviews

oceanlovingmamma “Stream2Sea! They have a few different types, but they are all mineral. Safe for you, the baby, and the reefs/oceans! Plus they have a tinted version for those that don’t like the white glow from most mineral sunscreens.”

Best Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreen Spray

Supergoop PLAY 100% Mineral Body Mist

Lightweight

easy to apply

sprays from all angles

skin-nourishing ingredients

Smaller bottle runs out quickly

Size : 3 ounces

Application type: Spray

SPF : 50

EWG Rating : 3

Why We Love It

Spray sunscreens are convenient because they allow you to cover your body with ease; however, most spray sunscreens have chemical formulas. That’s what’s so refreshing about Supergoop's PLAY 100% Mineral Body Mist . It’s a mineral sunscreen that relies on zinc oxide, with antioxidants like vitamin C, green tea and acai extracts to leave your skin feeling soft.

Spray sunscreens are convenient because they allow you to cover your body with ease; however, most spray sunscreens have chemical formulas. That’s what’s so refreshing about

Many users report how easy it is to apply this sunscreen, which comes out in a fine mist and can even be sprayed at weird angles. It also has a lightweight feel and doesn’t leave a residue. It feels refreshing and non sunscreen-y at all when it goes on, making application something you’ll actually look forward to on hot days. The sunscreen is water resistant up to 80 minutes before needing a reapplication, although Supergoop says you can extend that to every two hours if you don’t go swimming or get sweaty. It’s not recommended that you spray this directly on your face, since inhaling the small particles in mineral sunscreen sprays can be bad for your lungs. (Instead, Supergoop suggests spraying it onto your hands and applying it that way.)

Because this is a spray formula , there’s a chance that you might not get as much coverage as you would with lotion or stick sunscreen. Just make sure you don’t apply it in a windy location and that you rub it in after spraying it on. One more thing to consider: The 3-ounce container is relatively small, so you’ll want to make sure you pack extra if you’re going on a trip.

, there’s a chance that you might not get as much coverage as you would with lotion or stick sunscreen. Just make sure you don’t apply it in a windy location and that you rub it in after spraying it on.

One more thing to consider: The 3-ounce container is relatively small, so you’ll want to make sure you pack extra if you’re going on a trip.

Community Reviews

ks-day “I just use my own Supergoop Play sunscreen. It’s mineral, very liquidy and easy to apply.”

Best Reef-Safe Sunscreen for Pregnancy

Badger SPF 40 Sport Mineral Sunscreen Cream

Organic

hypoallergenic

made with just four ingredients

Thick

not vegan-friendly

Size: 2.9 ounces

Application type: Lotion

SPF: 40

EWG Rating : 1

Why We Love It

The Badger Sport Mineral Sunscreen is not only chemical-free, thanks to zinc oxide being the main ingredient, but it’s formulated with 98 percent organic ingredients. What’s even more impressive is that in addition to zinc oxide, there are only four ingredients, which are beeswax, vitamin E and sunflower oil. Plus, you’ll get all the benefits of natural, organic ingredients with a high-performing sunscreen since this one is also water resistant for 80 minutes, making it a great option for swimming or exercising outdoors. (You’ll want to reapply after two hours if you don’t swim or sweat, according to Badger .)

The Badger Sport Mineral Sunscreen is not only chemical-free, thanks to zinc oxide being the main ingredient, but it’s formulated with 98 percent organic ingredients. What’s even more impressive is that in addition to zinc oxide, there are only four ingredients, which are beeswax, vitamin E and sunflower oil. Plus, you’ll get all the benefits of natural, organic ingredients with a high-performing sunscreen since this one is also water resistant for 80 minutes, making it a great option for swimming or exercising outdoors.

EWG gives this sunscreen an impressive rating of 1, noting that the non-profit has zero concerns about efficacy.

gives this sunscreen an impressive rating of 1, noting that the non-profit has zero concerns about efficacy.

Because this sunscreen mostly relies on zinc oxide for sun protection, it’s on the heavier side (but that’s not a bad thing!). Although reviewers said that it might take some time to rub the lotion into your skin, many raved about how well it covers their skin and blocks the sun.

Because this sunscreen mostly relies on zinc oxide for sun protection, it’s on the heavier side (but that’s not a bad thing!).

Community Reviews

Katesred "Badger is a really good brand, for both mama & when baby comes."

allieee12345 “I’ve used badger sunscreen which is mineral based (zinc oxide), I use it on my kids too! Just bought more of the kids one so I’ll just use that but I do think they have an “adult” one haha. They are natural and no toxic ingredients!!”

FAQ

Is sunscreen safe to use during pregnancy?

As previously mentioned, sunscreen is essential for skin protection — and not just when you’re pregnant. During pregnancy, however, hormones may cause your skin to react differently to sunlight. As a result, your regular sunscreen may not be as effective.

Because of your skin sensitivity, you may want to stick to a mineral-based sunscreen when pregnant. Neither the AAD nor ACOG specifically advise pregnant people to use mineral sunscreen, but your skin may have a reaction to the ingredients in chemical sunscreen.

Is chemical sunscreen safe during pregnancy?

There is limited research as to whether chemical sunscreen is safe to use during pregnancy. The concern being ingredients in chemical sunscreen, such as oxybenzone, avobenzone and homosalate, could be absorbed into the bloodstream. But more research needs to be done to determine how this could impact pregnant women and their fetuses.

Though organizations don’t advise against chemical sunscreens, the American Academy of Dermatology and the American Academy of Pediatrics both say mineral sunscreens are preferred for pregnant people. for children, people who are pregnant or nursing, and those with sensitive skin or allergies. Dr. Wu also recommends pregnant people using mineral-based sunscreens, as chemical sunscreens are more likely to cause skin sensitivity or an allergic reaction. Similarly, Dr. Engelman recommends looking for, “hypoallergenic [sunscreens], as these varieties tend to lack irritants.”

In the past, mineral sunscreens were thick and left a white cast on the skin. Fortunately, newer formulas go on much more smoothly and discreetly. Dr. Wu recommends looking for sunscreens labeled “sheer,” “clear” or “invisible,” as they are less likely to leave a white film.

Ultimately, however, wearing any sunscreen during pregnancy is better than wearing none. If you do have concerns, you should consult with your healthcare provider.

When should I apply sunscreen during pregnancy?

A pregnant person should apply sunscreen daily, ideally as part of their morning routine (after cleansing and applying a pregnancy-safe serum or moisturizer). “If exposed to the sun for much of the day, the sunscreen should be reapplied every few hours,” says Dr. Engelman. “Even when staying inside but near a window, sunscreen should be used.”

What should I look for when reading a sunscreen label?

Sometimes it can feel like you need a special degree in chemistry to decipher a sunscreen label. Still, there are certain things to be aware of to help you make the best decision for you and your family. Here’s what EWG recommends keeping in mind

SPF : SPF stands for “sun protection factor.” This is a measure of how well a protect will protect against UVB rays, which are the main cause of sunburn. However, SPF doesn’t factor in UVA rays, which can contribute to the risk of developing skin cancer and wrinkles.

Broad Spectrum : This label means that a product protects against UVA and UVB rays, per the FDA . However, EWG notes that some products that claim in the U.S. to offer broad spectrum coverage may not meet UVA protection standards set in other countries.

Water-resistant : No sunscreen is truly waterproof. Water resistant products are tested for SPF after a tester has spent 40 minutes in a pool or tub. Those that are considered “very water resistant” pass inspection after 80 minutes, per the FDA .

Zinc Oxide vs. Titanium Dioxide : Zinc oxide and titanium dioxide are common mineral sunscreen ingredients. Both are considered generally recognized as safe (or GRASE) by the FDA. Research suggests that little, if any, zinc or titanium particles penetrate the skin. However, these particles could impact your lungs if you inhale them, making it important to be cautious with spray and powdered formulas. Zinc oxide is known for providing better broad-spectrum protection against long-wave UVA rays, while titanium dioxide is considered better for blocking UVB and short-wave UVA rays, per Dr. Rodney.

American Academy of Dermatology, Sunscreen FAQs , 2023. American Academy of Dermatology, How to Use Stick and Spray Sunscreens , 2022. American Academy of Dermatology, Is Sunscreen Safe? , 2022. American Academy of Dermatology, Melasma: Tips for Managing , 2023. American Academy of Dermatology, Prevent Skin Cancer . American Academy of Dermatology, What to Wear to Protect Your Skin from the Sun . American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Reducing Your Risk of Cancer: Lifestyle Changes and Screening Tests , January 2023. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Skin Conditions During Pregnancy , July 2022. Deanne Mraz Robinson, M.D. , Dermatologist, Wesport, Connecticut. Dendy Engelman, M.D. , Dermatologist and Mohs surgeon, New York, New York. Environmental Working Group, EWG’s 19th annual guide to sunscreens , May 2025. Gary Goldenberg, M.D. , assistant clinical professor of dermatology at Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital Ife J. Rodney, M.D. , dermatologist and founding director of Eternal Dermatology + Aesthetics Iffath Hoskins, M.D. , OB/GYN, New York, NY. Jessica Wu , M.D., Dermatologist and Member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board, Los Angeles, California. Photodermatology photoimmunology and photomedicine, A review of inorganic UV filters zinc oxide and titanium dioxide , November 2018 U.S. Food and Drug Administration, An Update on Sunscreen Requirements: The Deemed Final Order and the Proposed Order , December 2022 U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Sunscreen: How to Help Protect Your Skin from the Sun , August 2024 WhatToExpect.com, What Sunscreen Is Safe During Pregnancy? , May 2020.

Your Next Read

Why Supergoop's Splurge-Worthy Sunscreen is Essential for My Sensitive Skin Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Should I Use Sunscreen When I'm Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why You're More Likely to Get Sunburned During Pregnancy (and How to Prevent It) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The 9 Best Prenatal Vitamins That OB/GYNs Recommend — and Moms Actually Take Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Sunscreen and Sun Protection for Babies: What Parents Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Best Pregnancy-Safe Hair Dye Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

6 Stretch Mark Creams Moms-to-Be Can’t Stop Buying (and Derms Approve, Too) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Most-Bought Prime Day Baby Deals: Sunscreen, Stroller Fans, and More Summer Essentials By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Is Better Skin Hiding in Your Grocery Cart? What Dermatologists Want Pregnant Moms to Eat (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Why Pregnancy Makes Your Skin Sensitive — and What Actually Helps Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window