The 10 Best Stroller Footmuffs To Keep Your Baby Warm on the Coldest Winter Walks

Best Stroller Footmuffs

QUICK SUMMARY

The best stroller footmuff is the JJ Cole Bundle Me Bunting Bag. It wins points from parents for being compatible with all strollers, as well as its adjustable design and removable hood.

You probably know to stock up on baby mittens , snowsuits , and warm hats before your little one’s first winter. But one item you might not have on your radar is a stroller footmuff.

Also called stroller buntings, footmuffs attach to your stroller to keep baby warm and dry during cold-weather walks. They look like little sleeping bags, cocooning baby in insulated, water- or wind-resistant materials for added comfort.

A stroller footmuff might not be a must-have for every parent, but they can come in handy depending on where you live — especially in colder climates where most days are plagued by freezing temps, snow, or rain. And, unlike a blanket, footmuffs aren’t easily kicked off by a wiggly passenger.

As a mom of two living in Brooklyn, New York, I relied on mine for four winters. While not exactly an essential product, I absolutely found my footmuff much easier to use and more secure than wrapping my babies in multiple blankets during walks.

A Doctor's Note on Footmuffs

“If you live in a city and are walking around with your child in a stroller, a footmuff can be really helpful, especially for babies who are not as good at regulating temperature,” says Micah Resnick , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician in Cincinnati, Ohio, with TriHealth and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. Of course, you can still bundle up baby in layers, he notes, but a footmuff provides “a great level of convenience and ease.”

Just note that any footmuffs designed for car seats should never include a layer of fabric between baby and the car seat or harness straps, and their face should always be uncovered in the car, per the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) . Any added bulkiness is unsafe because it can impede the way the harness works. “If using a footmuff with a car seat that you put in the stroller, remember to ALWAYS remove the footmuff before putting the car seat back in the car, as the fabric behind baby is not safe to be in the car seat when operating the vehicle,” says Tina Feeley , M.D., M.P.H., a board-certified pediatrician practicing at Chestnut Hill Pediatrics in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

How I Chose the Best Stroller Footmuffs

When putting together a list of the best stroller footmuffs for babies, I started by comparing feedback on stroller footmuffs from What to Expect community and staff members. Referencing their reviews and recommendations, I compiled a list of around two dozen stroller footmuffs that received praise for their quality, compatibility, and ease of use.

Next, I interviewed three pediatricians (Dr. Resnick; Gina Posner , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician practicing at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California; and Dr. Feeley, for additional information about stroller footmuffs, including how to use them safely. I also referenced information from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). And since I’m a mom of two and a former parenting editor who has tested several stroller footmuffs myself, I took my own experience into consideration, too.

Based on all of this research, I narrowed down our list of the best stroller footmuffs to the top 10 that checked the following boxes:

Made from comfortable, weather-resistant materials

Easy to use and adjust

Has anti-slip features to prevent bunching

I also awarded “bonus points” for any compelling additional features, such as extra insulation (for footmuffs for babies in very cold climates), universal compatibility, and machine-washable constructions (they tend to get pretty dirty after walks in the snow or slush).

Ready to make your winter walks warm and cozy? Below are all of the infant- and toddler-sized bunting bags What to Expect editors and parent testers highly recommend — including the very footmuff I used throughout multiple winters without any issues.

Best Overall Footmuff

JJ Cole Bundleme Bunting Bag

Adjustable length

Removable hood

Machine-washable

Universal fit

Some parents said they’d prefer a zipper over the large buttons

Dimensions: ‎16 x 25 inches for small size; 18 x 35 inches for large size

Sizes: Infant and Toddler

Why We Love It

Providing optimal warmth and versatile features at a reasonable price, the JJ Cole Bundleme Bunting Bag is our overall pick for best stroller footmuff. This product has a soft inner lining to keep your child warm in the winter, plus a nylon outer layer to keep them dry when the elements strike. I also like that it has a removable hood to better control baby's temperature.

is our overall pick for best stroller footmuff. This product has a soft inner lining to keep your child warm in the winter, plus a nylon outer layer to keep them dry when the elements strike. I also like that it has a removable hood to better control baby's temperature.

Christine Mattheis, Group VP of Content & Brand Solutions at What to Expect, used the JJ Cole Bunting Bag with daughter Rose for two winters — first when she was between 3 and 7 months old, and again between 15 and 19 months — and found it well-insulated and easy to use.

Indeed, the ease of use is a quality many parents mention. Most rave about the multiple access points — zippers on both sides and buttons on the front — make it a breeze to adjust if the weather changes during your walk. The footmuff includes three elastic straps, one at the top and two at the sides, that fit most strollers. It also comes with a removable back panel so you can ensure baby's back remains flat when strapping them in to prevent any sliding.

Another pro for parents: JJ Cole's bunting bag is machine washable. "It got super dirty every winter and we'd throw it in the wash at least a couple of times each season, especially after we had a big snow," Christine recalls.

Tested by Christine Mattheis , mom of two and What to Expect's Group VP of Content & Brand Solutions:

"We brought Rose out in the cold down to the single digits, and she always stayed toasty. It was very simple to install, and very easy to get her in and out of the stroller with the bunting bag."

Community Reviews

ahals "I used the JJ Cole Original Bundle Me footmuff all last winter with my son and it was great. Very easy to put in the stroller and adjust straps as he grew."

trixiemcpickles "We use the JJ Cole fleece one and she is extremely cozy. It's also a lot less expensive than some of the others and works with pretty much every stroller."

Best Infant Footmuff and Car Seat Cover

Skip Hop Winter Car Seat Cover

Two layers of protection

Universal fit

Fleece-lined

Machine-washable

Does not grow with baby

Dimensions:‎ 3 x 27 x 16 inches

Size: Newborn to 12M

Why We Love It

Parents from cold, snowy areas of the country like Alaska, Ohio and Minnesota love how warm and cozy the Skip Hop Winter Car Seat Cover keeps their infants. Technically a car seat cover, this product also functions as a footmuff if you have a travel system; it comes with a roll-away flap, which makes it easier to get baby out of a car seat with minimal disturbance. Plus, there's no extra fabric between your baby and the back of the car seat, reducing slip risk.

keeps their infants. Technically a car seat cover, this product also functions as a footmuff if you have a travel system; it comes with a roll-away flap, which makes it easier to get baby out of a car seat with minimal disturbance. Plus, there's no extra fabric between your baby and the back of the car seat, reducing slip risk.

The two layers also make this footmuff unique. You can zip the front flap to keep your little one extra warm and protected from the elements or unzip it so their face is free on a walk . Plus, it's windproof and water-resistant for any windy or wet days.

Just remember that if your baby falls asleep in the car seat — whether in the car or stroller —you should move her to a firm, safe sleep space (like a crib, bassinet or playard) and place them on their back as soon as possible, per the AAP. (And although there isn't a set amount of time on how long baby can sleep in the car seat in the car or stroller, it’s best not to let her sleep longer than necessary.) Before you get home, keep a close eye to make sure she doesn't slump into a chin-to-chest position and that their nose or mouth aren’t covered.

as soon as possible, per the AAP. (And although there isn't a set amount of time on how long baby

in the car or stroller, it’s best not to let her sleep longer than necessary.) Before you get home, keep a close eye to make sure she doesn't slump into a chin-to-chest position and that their nose or mouth aren’t covered.

Tested by Korin Miller , mom of four and freelance writer for What to Expect:

"After I got stuck in a sleet storm with my baby, I can’t recommend Skip Hop's car seat cover enough — it kept my son warm and dry while I was absolutely soaked in the short trek from the front door to my family's vehicle.'

Community Reviews

kcp "The 7 am is likely the warmest, but I'd strongly suggest considering the Skip Hop because of its versatility. It has two warmth layers which makes it an amazing option for spring and fall, in addition to being plenty warm enough for winter. The double layer is also helpful when it's super cold outside but you're going to somewhere inside, because you can just unsnap the second layer to give baby some air/less bulk, as opposed to unzipping completely, letting the spring layer stay on/zipped as a blanket."

arielllllllllll7777 “I got a Skip Hop bunting bag that just pulls over the top of the car seat so that I don’t have to worry about safety with any part of a bunting bag being behind baby.”

Best Splurge Footmuff

7AM Enfant Stroller Footmuff

Multiple colors

Adjustable length

Universal fit

Machine-washable

Expensive

Dimensions: ‎‎17 x 38 for small size; 17 x 43 for medium size; 17 x 48 for large size

Sizes: 6M to 4T

Why We Love It

The 7AM Enfant Stroller Footmuff will last for years, and not just because it's made of a durable water-repellent nylon. Thanks to the strategically placed zippers, you can adjust the length and width of this footmuff to accommodate a growing baby. It can easily and comfortably fit a little one anywhere from 6 months to 4 years of age, making it a splurge-worthy investment in many parents' eyes — especially if you anticipate having multiple children.

will last for years, and not just because it's made of a durable water-repellent nylon. Thanks to the strategically placed zippers, you can adjust the length and width of this footmuff to accommodate a growing baby. It can easily and comfortably fit a little one anywhere from 6 months to 4 years of age, making it a splurge-worthy investment in many parents' eyes — especially if you anticipate having multiple children.

Available in a micro-fleece or plush lining, 7 AM Enfant's footmuff keeps baby warm, no matter the temperature. Many What to Expect community members reported that the fantastic insulation justifies the higher price tag alone. But, if that's not enough, there are also hook and loop attachments that allow it to fit most strollers. The water-repellent outer nylon layer will keep your baby warm, while the machine-washable design means you can easily add it to your laundry pile when it gets dirty.

Community Reviews

"I went with the 7am Enfant footmuff. Can double as a blanket and it is temperate rated to -4F which will come in handy in NY!"

"I use the 7am Enfant with my Cruz. It's great."

"We have the 7am 212 and love it. I like that it is extendable and has a hood."

We bought the 7am Enfant. such a good purchase. We live in MN and it let us get out and go for walks comfortably this winter!

Best Footmuff for Umbrella Strollers

CozyMe Universal Winter Stroller

Machine-washable

universal fit

water- and windproof

adjustable length

Parents said it could be a little wider if you have a large full-size stroller

Dimensions: ‎38.5 x 19 x 2 inches

Size: One size

Why We Love It

The CozyMe Universal Winter Stroller is lightweight and versatile enough to comfortably fit inside an umbrella stroller. Many parents who reviewed this footmuff said it was quick and easy to set up, which would make it a great option if you plan on using it with more than one stroller. Other noteworthy features include a durable exterior fabric that repels moisture, and a weather strip to keep wind and cold air from sneaking in through the zipper. There’s even a zippable foot area to easily take baby’s shoes on and off, as well as bright reflective stirps to increase safety if used when the sun goes down early in winter. For all of these amenities, I think it’s more than reasonably priced.

is lightweight and versatile enough to comfortably fit inside an umbrella stroller. Many parents who reviewed this footmuff said it was quick and easy to set up, which would make it a great option if you plan on using it with more than one stroller. Other noteworthy features include a durable exterior fabric that repels moisture, and a weather strip to keep wind and cold air from sneaking in through the zipper. There’s even a zippable foot area to easily take baby’s shoes on and off, as well as bright reflective stirps to increase safety if used when the sun goes down early in winter. For all of these amenities, I think it’s more than reasonably priced.

Community Reviews

khk612 "I got the CozyMe off Amazon and it's pretty legit. The foot area has like a nylon thing going on so it doesn't get too dirty from shoes etc. and I like that you can cinch it around the head/face."

khk612 I got the CozyMe off Amazon and it’s pretty legit. The foot area has like a nylon thing going on so it doesn’t get too dirty from shoes etc. and I like that you can cinch it around the head/face.

Best Affordable Footmuff

Orzbow Warm Bunting Bag

Waterproof

machine-washable

universal fit

Not compatible with Uppababy Vista

Dimensions: 18 x 14 inches; 40 x 22 inches

Sizes: Small, Large

Why We Love It

The Orzbow Warm Bunting Bag is an affordable footmuff that doesn't sacrifice warmth or functionality. Coming in at just $50, it's lined with a soft, plush velvet that many parents say successfully keeps their little ones warm, even in the coldest weather. This footmuff also includes a variety of handy features, such as a middle zipper that makes it easy to take baby in and out. And, because it zips in both directions, you can just remove the bottom for quick diaper changes or putting on baby's shoes.

is an affordable footmuff that doesn't sacrifice warmth or functionality. Coming in at just $50, it's lined with a soft, plush velvet that many parents say successfully keeps their little ones warm, even in the coldest weather. This footmuff also includes a variety of handy features, such as a middle zipper that makes it easy to take baby in and out. And, because it zips in both directions, you can just remove the bottom for quick diaper changes or putting on baby's shoes.

Community Reviews

ltk11037 "I just got this about a week and half ago for our stroller, we live in Midwest and temps have started to drop but we do daily walks with our dog through the park and I was tired of trying to keep blankets on lap! There’s a bunch on Amazon but I didn’t want to spend too much. It keeps my babe nice and cozy."

Best Footmuff for Inclement Weather

Thule Stroller Footmuff

Machine-washable

universal fit

adjustable hood

Not water-resistant

Dimensions: ‎25.28 x 19.88 x 4.88 inches

Sizes: One size

Why We Love It

The Thule Stroller Footmuff earned praise from parents who live in snowy areas like Alaska and New England for keeping their little ones warm on winter walks. The secrets: the soft fleece lining and adjustable hood.

earned praise from parents who live in snowy areas like Alaska and New England for keeping their little ones warm on winter walks. The secrets: the soft fleece lining and adjustable hood.

But even though it’s extremely well-insulated, this footmuff comes with side zippers to prevent overheating. I also like that it's machine-washable, which reviewers say makes it easy to remove dirt from the exterior fabric.

The Thule footmuff is compatible with any five-point harness systems, so it should work with most strollers. (The AAP says the stroller you buy should always have a five-point harness for safety.) Parents also like the roominess of the footmuff — it’s one size, which gives baby room to grow without ever bunching uncomfortably.

The Thule footmuff is compatible with any five-point harness systems, so it should work with most strollers. (The AAP says the stroller you buy

for safety.) Parents also like the roominess of the footmuff — it’s one size, which gives baby room to grow without ever bunching uncomfortably.

Community Reviews

mrsl103 "We ended up going with the Thule and we were so happy we did because it fits perfectly on the stroller and is so easy to take on and off."

Best Footmuff for Snow

L.L.Bean Snow Bunting

High-quality hardware

Ultra durable shell

Washes well

Long but roomy enough for baby to grow into

Limited colors

Dimensions: 40 x 16.5 inches

Sizes: One size

Why We Love It

If you live somewhere that experiences particularly snowy winters, you can’t go wrong with the L.L.Bean Snow Bunting . This company knows a thing or two about winter outerwear, and the brand’s stroller footmuff is designed with the same highly durable shell as its camping bags — so you know it’s legit. Parents appreciate the cozy shearling interior, removable top cover and hood and back snaps that are compatible with most stroller brands like Bob and Uppababy. At 40 inches long, this footmuff is also roomier than many others on the market (one parent says it still fits their 3-year-old).

Community Reviews

rayofsunshine19 We got the LLBean one and love it. He’s so warm when I get him out.

Best Footmuff for UPPAbaby Stroller

UPPAbaby CozyGanoosh Footmuff

Lots of color options Adjustable fit that’s easy to attach

Has a zip-out extension

Machine-washable

Expensive

Only compatible with UPPAbaby strollers

Dimensions: 41 x 16 x 6 inches

Sizes: One size

Why We Love It

At $170, the UPPAbaby CozyGanoosh Footmuff is undeniably on the more expensive side. But parents with UPPAbaby strollers (such as the Vista, Cruz, Ridge, Minu, or RumbleSeat accessory), swear it’s worth the investment. Not only is it extremely soft and warm, thanks to luxurious fleece lining, but it can grow with your little one. The foot barrier has a zip-out extension that instantly creates extra legroom for bigger babies and toddlers. “Keeps baby warm even on frigid Chicago winter days near the lake,” writes one What to Expect parent . “It’s perfect in the spring too because I don’t have to fuss with putting extra clothes on baby for a walk, I just use the Ganoosh and a long sleep shirt and he’s perfectly cozy!”

At $170, the UPPAbaby CozyGanoosh Footmuff is undeniably on the more expensive side. But parents with UPPAbaby strollers (such as the Vista, Cruz, Ridge, Minu, or RumbleSeat accessory), swear it’s worth the investment. Not only is it extremely soft and warm, thanks to luxurious fleece lining, but it can grow with your little one. The foot barrier has a zip-out extension that instantly creates extra legroom for bigger babies and toddlers. “Keeps baby warm even on frigid Chicago winter days near the lake,” writes one

. “It’s perfect in the spring too because I don’t have to fuss with putting extra clothes on baby for a walk, I just use the Ganoosh and a long sleep shirt and he’s perfectly cozy!”

Community Reviews

“Yes, it was definitely worth it. We walk our son in it, especially through the winter and he was super cozy. He also naps really well when we take him out too cos it’s so snuggly and warm. It’s also amazing quality and just looks really great with the stroller. I’d definitely recommend it.”

“I love the UPPAbaby footmuff! It is so easy to use and keeps my LO toasty warm!”

“We love our UPPAbaby Ganoosh but we walk a lot, even on chilly days. Our baby is always warm in it. So for us it’s worth it.”

Best All-Season Footmuff

Bugaboo Footmuff

Sleek design

Warm but breathable fabrics for all seasons

Reflective

Compatible with many stroller brands

Expensive

Dimensions: 23 x 16.25 x 3 inches

Sizes: One size

Why We Love It

There’s no question that the Bugaboo Footmuff will keep your little one warm during cold-weather walks. But the beauty of its design is that it’s equally useful year-round and in all types of weather: The material is soft and breathable enough to use both in winter storms or cooler spring and autumn mornings; there’s a handy two-way zipper and dual side opening; and the exterior is water-repellent. The unique cocoon design shields your baby’s head from the elements, plus reflective safety details alert passersby when walking at night. Parents also appreciate the sleek design and gorgeous color options. While it’s perfect for most Bugaboo strollers (aside from the Ant), the design works with most other brands, too.

Community Reviews

willow24 "I’ve had a bugaboo footmuff for the past two years and love it."

Best Lightweight Footmuff

Stokke Babyzen YOYO Footmuff

Lightweight but warm

Easy to transport

Can fold stroller down with footmuff attached

Designed only for the Babyzen Yoyo

Dimensions: ‎35.43 x 35.4 inches

Sizes: One size

Why We Love It

If you have the Babyzen YOYO , the brand’s stroller footmuff — while on the pricier side — is excellent. I used this stroller footmuff with my two sons spanning four winters, and found it extremely easy to get on and off. It’s also surprisingly lightweight (though still very warm, thanks to a cozy sherpa interior) and durable. Footmuffs get surprisingly dirty, especially when you start using them with a toddler, but this one held up well to countless washes. The footmuff rolls up into a little storage bag, making it a breeze to take with you when traveling or store during the warmer months when you don’t need it. I also appreciated that you could fold up the YOYO while the footmuff was still attached.

What to Look for in Stroller Footmuffs

To make sure you are going to get the right stroller footmuff for your family, these are some important aspects to keep in mind when shopping for a footmuff:

Material: Just like when you're shopping for a coat, the climate you live in will most likely inform what type of material to look for in a footmuff. For instance, if you live in colder climates, you might want to look for bunting that's insulated with multiple layers of protection. However, if your area doesn't get too cold, opt for a more lightweight option to prevent overheating.

Size: Most footmuffs are designed either for newborns to 6 months or 6 months to 4 years old. When in doubt, look to the sizing guide for each product to make sure it will fit your child. “Ideally, a footmuff comes up to baby’s armpits, so the face should always not be obstructed,” says Tina Feeley , M.D., M.P.H., a board-certified pediatrician practicing at Chestnut Hill Pediatrics in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

Adjustability: There are a few features that can make it easier to adjust your footmuff. Some, for example, prioritize designs that include sections that you can unzip to extend the length of the bag to fit baby as she grows. A few others on our list also provide front panels that can fold down to allow more air in if it isn't too cold out or fold up to keep baby more bundled. Your footmuff may also have an adjustable harness to ensure it's secured to the stroller.

FAQs

Are footmuffs safe?

Footmuffs are perfectly safe to use as long as they're the appropriate size for your child and properly fit your stroller. If the footmuff doesn't fit the stroller or baby correctly, the fabric could potentially cover baby's mouth as a result of bunching or the footmuff moving and pose a suffocation risk. That’s why Dr. Posner recommends footmuffs with anti-slip features to ensure your little one can’t move in their harness.

It’s also important to monitor your little one for signs of overheating , adds Dr. Resnick. “If your baby feels warm to the touch, is sweating, if their skin is red and clammy, or if they are breathing fast, unzip the footmuff.”

How do I determine if a footmuff is compatible with my stroller?

The easiest way to ensure that a footmuff you’re considering works with your stroller is to buy one provided by the same brand. (For example, if you have a Nuna stroller, you’d purchase the brand’s compatible footmuff.) But that shouldn’t rule out other universal footmuffs. For these, check the product description to see if the manufacturer lists specific brands or styles it’s compatible with. Or, prioritize adjustable features that work on a variety of strollers, such as adjustable straps and zippers, a removable back panel or expandable fabrics.

American Academy of Pediatrics, How to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy Explained , July 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics, Winter Car Seat Safety Tips from the AAP , December 2022.

Your Next Read

The Best Winter Car Seat Safety Gear to Keep Baby Warm By Korin Miller, Contributing Writer

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

How to Buy a Baby Stroller By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

12 Best Maternity Coats When You Can No Longer Zip Your Jacket, According to a Mom of 2 Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How to Find the Best Stroller for Your Family: A Comprehensive Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

How to Prepare for a Rainy Day Walk With Baby Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

What to Do When Your Baby Hates the Car Seat, Bouncer or Stroller Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Stroller Travel Systems That Parents Say Make Life Easier Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Dress a Toddler for the Weather Fact Checked by Jill Malter

How to Protect Babies and Toddlers in the Cold Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Dress a Newborn Baby for the Weather Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window