10 Best Baby Sunscreens, Tested by Moms and Approved by Doctors

QUICK SUMMARY

The best baby sunscreen, according to experts and moms, is Thinkbaby SPF 50+ Baby Sunscreen , because it is free of harmful chemicals and really silky and easy to rub on your baby's skin.

really silky and easy to rub on your baby's skin.

My 3-year-old would probably live outside if she could. Her love for the great outdoors means I always have an arsenal of skin-protecting tools at the ready — yes, even in the winter! By our door, I keep a basket stocked with essentials: a hat, a few pairs of sunglasses and, of course, baby sunscreen.

I've been buying and testing baby-safe sunscreen since she was 6 months old — the age both the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) and American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) say it's safe for little ones to start wearing SPF. My credit card company may have been alarmed by the sheer amount I spent on sunscreen that first year. But thanks to all that trial and error, I’ve found the best baby sunscreens to protect sensitive skin—ones that kids will actually wear without a meltdown.

And because sharing is caring, I’m passing on my discoveries! Here’s everything you need to know about choosing baby sunscreen, plus my top picks for the best ones you can buy today.

How I Chose the Best Baby Sunscreen

It’s not hard to find a baby-safe sunscreen; almost all of them have “baby” somewhere on the packaging. The challenge is choosing the best sunscreen for your baby, because each one is different.

To learn what parents should look for in a baby-safe sunscreen, I spoke to Bernard Cohen, M.D. , Director of the Johns Hopkins University Pediatric Dermatology and Cutaneous Laser Center; Ife J. Rodney, M.D., a dermatologist and founding director of Eternal Dermatology + Aesthetics; and Marissa J. Perman, M.D. , a pediatric dermatologist at the University of Philadelphia. I also consulted recommendations from the AAP and AAD, along with the Environmental Working Group (EWG)’s Guide to Sunscreens , which analyzed more than 2,200 sunscreens and found that only 25 percent deliver safe and effective protection. Based on the non-profit organization’s findings, Rodney says, “It’s a good idea to focus on sunscreens that contain zinc oxide and titanium dioxide because they reflect the harmful rays away from the skin.”

Per this guidance, all of the baby sunscreens I selected are:

Broad spectrum formula to protect against both UVA and UVB rays

Mineral sunscreens (also known as physical sunscreen), which include titanium dioxide or non-nano zinc oxide for optimal protection and stay on the surface of the skin

Rated a 3 or lower based by theEWG; the rating system goes from 0 to 10, with lower numbers having less hazardous ingredients. A few products are also designated as EWG Verified, which means they meet the non-profit’s strictest criteria for efficacy.

Aligned with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) guidelines to meet safety standards

Free of synthetic fragrances and harsh chemicals, such as homosalate, oxybenzone and octinoxate — ingredients that the FDA is investigating to see if they are absorbed through the skin

Reef-safe

A minimum sun protection factor (SPF) of 30, which filters out 97% of UVB rays

Even with this guidance in mind, however, I was still left with dozens of options. To further narrow down the list, I spoke to five What to Expect staff members who have seven kids between them and have tried all of the sunscreens on this list. I also relied on my own experience as well as recommendations from What to Expect community members, specifically those whose children are prone to eczema or have sensitive skin.

Of course, I kept the overall application experience top of mind, too. (Lathering yourself in SPF is tough enough, let alone a wiggling infant.) That’s why I carefully considered elements such as the ease of application, whether sunscreens left a white cast, and the packaging's ease of use. These recommendations, paired with our experts’ insight, resulted in the following list of 10 baby-safe sunscreens that are easy to apply, smell good and don't leave baby’s skin feeling sticky.

Of course, I kept the overall application experience top of mind, too. (Lathering yourself in SPF is tough enough, let alone a wiggling infant.) That’s why I carefully considered elements such as the ease of application, whether sunscreens left a white cast, and the packaging's ease of use.

Korin Miller contributed to this article.

Best Baby Sunscreen Overall

Thinkbaby SPF 50+ Baby Sunscreen

Free of harmful chemicals

reef-safe

vegan formula

Some found it greasy

Size: 3 ounces and 6 ounces

Type: Lotion and stick

SPF: 50 lotion; 30 stick

EWG Rating: 1

Why We Love It

A favorite of WTE parents and editors alike is Thinkbaby SPF 50+ sunscreen uses zinc oxide as its active ingredient and is free of oxybenzone, parabens and phthalates. Unlike some mineral sunscreens which can be thick and hard to spread, Thinkbaby’s sunscreen goes on creamy and blocks 98 percent of UVB rays. It's also extra water-resistant because it lasts up to 80 minutes, so you can head to the pool with baby and know that she's protected. Another nice perk? It absorbs quickly, so your little one won't feel sticky or have a chalky residue on her skin after you apply.

uses zinc oxide as its active ingredient and is free of oxybenzone, parabens and phthalates. Unlike some mineral sunscreens which can be thick and hard to spread, Thinkbaby’s sunscreen goes on creamy and blocks 98 percent of UVB rays. It's also extra water-resistant because it lasts up to 80 minutes, so you can head to the pool with baby and know that she's protected. Another nice perk? It absorbs quickly, so your little one won't feel sticky or have a chalky residue on her skin after you apply.

Olivia DeLong, What to Expect's senior health editor, uses Thinkbaby for both herself and her daughter. "I did a lot of research during pregnancy and actually started using it then and loved it," she says. “It goes on super easily, and I always felt like my daughter was protected and I wasn't using anything with lots of chemicals or junk in it." She also notes that the lotion is great for covering her daughter's body, while she uses the stick format for her face, ears and neck.

I also tried Thinkbaby sunscreen (along with several other options) and found this one truly lives up to the hype. I appreciate that the formula is thick for easier application, but still goes on smoothly. It's also hypoallergenic which is great for children, like my daughter who has sensitive skin but requires regular sunscreen application.

(along with several other options) and found this one truly lives up to the hype. I appreciate that the formula is thick for easier application, but still goes on smoothly. It's also hypoallergenic which is great for children, like my daughter who has sensitive skin but requires regular sunscreen application.

One minor downside is that it isn't readily available in drugstores, so you don't want to be caught without it on vacation. But given that it's often on sale, you can stock up at the start of summer and make it through the season burn-free.

Community Reviews

"I use what I use on my son, Thinkbaby. I love it. No harsh chemicals and goes on smooth."

"I use Thinkbaby on my toddler and baby. It's not always easy rubbing it on a squirmy kid, but I feel comfortable with the ingredients. Toddler's very fair and hasn’t had a burn while using it."

“Thinkbaby is fantastic! We used it with my now 4 year old son, we transitioned him to Think kids. We'll be using Thinkbaby for our daughter as well.”

Another What to Expect Favorite

Tubby Todd Mineral Sunscreen

Creamy

Easy to apply

Lovely smell

Not available in stores

Size : 4 ounces

Type : Lotion, mist , stick and lip

SPF : 50 lotion and mist; 30 stick and lip balm

EWG Rating : 3

Why We Love It

Many WTE community members rave about Tubby Todd products for being gentle yet effective at tackling baby eczema , cradle cap and more. (The All Over Ointment is a true skincare MVP!) So it only makes sense that Tubby Todd’s Baby Sunscreen is always in their beach bags—and mine, too!

is a true skincare MVP!) So it only makes sense that Tubby Todd’s Baby Sunscreen is always in their beach bags—and mine, too!

The mineral formula is creamy but not heavy, making it easy to smooth onto a wriggly little one. I also found that it rubs in beautifully — no white cast, no sticky mess and no dry feeling afterward. In fact, my daughter’s skin actually feels softer after we apply it. That’s likely thanks to nourishing ingredients like cacao seed butter, shea butter and coconut oil, which also give it a light, pleasant scent. Bonus: it passes the toddler sniff test (because let’s be real, many sunscreens are deemed “too stinky” — my daughter’s words, not mine).

Like all Tubby Todd products, a little goes a long way — great news for your wallet. And with up to 80 minutes of water resistance, I don’t have to interrupt playtime to reapply. Just be mindful of the lotion separating or clumping — if that happens, the EWG recommends discarding it due to efficacy concerns.

The only downside? You won’t find it in stores. Tubby Todd is currently sold out on the brand’s website, although you can find it available in bundles via the brand’s Amazon storefront ($60 for a sunscreen and two sunsticks). if you’re running low, better hit “order” before your next sunny adventure!

Community Reviews

MommaSharkx2doodoo “We use Tubby Todd or Blue Lizard.”

Best Fragrance-Free Baby Sunscreen

Alba Botanica Kids Mineral Sunscreen Lotion SPF 30

Unscented

Lightweight feel

Blends in nicely

Pricey

Size : 4 ounces

Type : Lotion

SPF : 30

EWG Rating : 2

Why We Love It

Fragrances are common in sunscreen, but they can irritate baby’s delicate skin. Alba Botanica’s Mineral Sunscreen is totally unscented, so there’s no need to worry about a reaction due to synthetic or strong smells. In fact, many WTE community members give this brand a thumbs up for its transparency around ingredients.

This sunscreen comes in the form of a creamy lotion with a titanium dioxide and zinc oxide base that rubs in easily. It feels surprisingly lightweight, but provides up to 80 minutes of SPF 30 protection in the water before you need to slather it on again. The EWG has no concerns about efficacy with this product, so you can use it with confidence until the expiration date.

This sunscreen comes in the form of a creamy lotion with a titanium dioxide and zinc oxide base that rubs in easily. It feels surprisingly lightweight, but provides up to 80 minutes of SPF 30 protection in the water before you need to slather it on again. The

has no concerns about efficacy with this product, so you can use it with confidence until the expiration date.

Alba Botanica’s formula includes protective and moisturizing ingredients like niacinamide, squalene and vitamin E. It’s also gluten-free, in case that’s a concern for your little one, and non-comedogenic, so it won’t clog baby’s poress. I like to use it on my face after I’ve slathered up my little one and have never had sunscreen-induced breakouts with it.

Admittedly, it is a bit pricey, but a little truly goes a long way when it comes to this sunscreen. Plus, the cruelty-free formula is reef-safe, too.

Community Reviews

Olive4000 “My family uses Alba sunscreen (no sprays). It works really well, no funky ingredients, it’s also reef safe.”

JMB0725 “I love Alba Botanica! But I'm also wanting to try La Roche Posay for my facial sunscreen, because I've heard it's great!”

Best Baby Sunscreen Stick

Mustela Mineral Baby Sunscreen Stick - SPF 50

Fragrance-free

travel size

reef-safe

Some wished it came in a larger size

Size: 0.6 ounces

Type: Lotion , spray and stick

SPF: 50

EWG Rating: EWG Verified

Why We Love It

When baby is dressed from head to toe in sun-protective clothing, a few quick swipes of a sunscreen stick might be all you need to protect her exposed skin. "Sticks are especially nice for the face, as they are easier to control keeping out of the eyes," Dr. Perman says. What makes this Mustela Mineral Baby Sunscreen Stick stand out is that it goes on surprisingly smooth — thanks to the addition of organic ingredients like shea butter, avocado oil and jojoba — whereas other mineral sunscreen sticks can be thick and hard to spread.

When baby is dressed from head to toe in sun-protective clothing, a few quick swipes of a sunscreen stick might be all you need to protect her exposed skin. "Sticks are especially nice for the face, as they are easier to control keeping out of the eyes," Dr. Perman says. What makes this

stand out is that it goes on surprisingly smooth — thanks to the addition of organic ingredients like shea butter, avocado oil and jojoba — whereas other mineral sunscreen sticks can be thick and hard to spread.

After getting sunscreen in my daughter’s eyes one too many times, I made the switch to the Mustela stick for her face—and let me tell you, it was a game-changer. From that moment on, most of our sunscreen applications were tear-free.

I love how smoothly the stick glides on — no need to press hard, which is a win when dealing with a squirmy toddler. Plus, the tint makes it easy to see where it’s applied, without requiring extra rubbing (because we all know that rubbing + wiggly child = sunscreen in the eyes and tears for hours). This sunscreen stick is EWG Verified , which is the organization’s highest mark of approval.

The organic formula is also hypoallergenic and approved by the National Eczema Association, making it a great choice for sensitive skin. And bonus — it’s water-resistant for up to 80 minutes!

Community Reviews

lolomommy "We used mustela last year and during that time my son had pretty bad eczema and it never irritated his skin. Now we have his eczema pretty under control but I still am using mustela because I don't want to take a chance with anything else. They have a sunscreen lotion but I prefer the spray and also love the sunscreen stick for face, ears, back of neck, etc."

jhk017 “We use the baby and child SPF 50 Mustela for face and body and haven't had any issues. It rubs in easier than some mineral sunscreens we've tried and is approved by the national eczema foundation which is good because I have eczema and keep using this sunscreen when I'm out with the babe instead of packing my own!”

Best Baby Sunscreen for Sensitive Skin

Badger Mineral Baby Sunscreen Cream SPF 40

Clean formula

hypoallergenic

soothing ingredients

Thick cream needs to be rubbed in well

Size: 2.9 ounces

Type: Lotion

SPF: 40

EWG Rating: 1

Why We Love It

Badger’s Mineral Baby Sunscreen Cream is a gentle choice for your little one, featuring soothing ingredients like chamomile and calendula. This mild lotion offers peak protection for sensitive skin, along with a subtle scent.

This sunscreen mostly relies on zinc oxide to block UV rays, but that does mean it goes on thick. (Several parents point out that rubbing the lotion between your hands first allows it to glide on more easily.) Badger’s sunscreen has an impressively low EWG rating of 1 , and the non-profit notes that it has zero concerns around efficacy.

This sunscreen mostly relies on zinc oxide to block UV rays, but that does mean it goes on thick. (Several parents point out that rubbing the lotion between your hands first allows it to glide on more easily.) Badger’s sunscreen has an impressively low

, and the non-profit notes that it has zero concerns around efficacy.

Other important details include the fact that Badger’s sunscreen is water resistant for up to 80 minutes before needing a reapplication. The 2.9-ounce bottle is also TSA-friendly, in case you want to tote it along on vacation.

But perhaps the best part? Many high-quality baby sunscreens aren’t cheap, Badger is relatively affordable at $17 a bottle. That thicker formulation means you can get a lot out of a small amount, too.

Community Reviews

allieee12345 “I’ve used badger sunscreen which is mineral based (zinc oxide), I use it on my kids too! Just bought more of the kids one so I’ll just use that but I do think they have an “adult” one haha. They are natural and no toxic ingredients!!”

ayohs12 “Brought it to Mexico and baby never got burned. It takes a bit to rub in but we love it.”

Best Non-Greasy Baby Sunscreen

Stream2Sea Every Day Mineral Sunscreen Kids SPF 45

Glides on creamy

not greasy

lightweight feel

EWG Verified

Expensive

Size: 2.5 ounces

Type: Lotion

SPF: 45

EWG Rating: EWG Verified

Why We Love It

Some sunscreens can leave skin feeling sticky or greasy, making baby slippery in your arms. But Stream2Sea Every Day Mineral Sunscreen rubs in like a regular lotion, keeping that slick feel at bay. But it’s also incredibly hydrating, thanks to ingredients like chamomile and calendula, making it an equally great option for little ones who are prone to dryness.

Some sunscreens can leave skin feeling sticky or greasy, making baby slippery in your arms. But Stream2Sea Every Day Mineral Sunscreen

rubs in like a regular lotion, keeping that slick feel at bay. But it’s also incredibly hydrating, thanks to ingredients like chamomile and calendula, making it an equally great option for little ones who are prone to dryness.

This SPF 45 sunscreen is EWG Verified , relies on zinc oxide for protection and is water resistant for up to 80 minutes before you need to slather it on again. Stream2Sea also says its “wet boost technology” helps this sunscreen to perform even better after you get it wet. (Just apply it to dry skin to start!)

, relies on zinc oxide for protection and is water resistant for up to 80 minutes before you need to slather it on again. Stream2Sea also says its “wet boost technology” helps this sunscreen to perform even better after you get it wet. (Just apply it to dry skin to start!)

Stream2Sea Every Day Mineral Sunscreen is thick and it has a slight white cast when you first put it on — but that quickly fades, leaving a little shimmer behind. The 2.5-ounce container means this container is travel-safe, allowing you to pack it in your carry-on with no issue.

Community Reviews

oceanlovingmamma “Stream2Sea! They have a few different types, but they are all mineral. Safe for you, the baby, and the reefs/oceans! Plus they have a tinted version for those that don’t like the white glow from most mineral sunscreens.”

Best Moisturizing Baby Sunscreen

Pipette Mineral Sunscreen SPF 50

Vegan

safe for sensitive skin

reef-safe

Not water-resistant

Size: 3 or 4 ounces

Type: Lotion

SPF: 50

EWG Rating: 2

Why We Love It

When you're slathering sunscreen on baby all day long, you want to make sure it's something that not only prevents sun damage, but moisturizes her skin as well. The Pipette Mineral Sunscreen contains sugarcane-derived squalane that makes it so it goes on smooth and will actually moisturize baby's skin. Unlike many mineral-based options, it's surprisingly lightweight while still providing a physical barrier around your little one's delicate skin. It also absorbs quickly, so your child isn't left with a white cast on her skin.

When you're slathering sunscreen on baby all day long, you want to make sure it's something that not only prevents sun damage, but moisturizes her skin as well. The

contains sugarcane-derived squalane that makes it so it goes on smooth and will actually moisturize baby's skin. Unlike many mineral-based options, it's surprisingly lightweight while still providing a physical barrier around your little one's delicate skin. It also absorbs quickly, so your child isn't left with a white cast on her skin.

Christine Mattheis, Group VP of Content & Brand Solutions at What to Expect, found that many mineral sunscreens would severely dry out her daughter's cheeks, making them red and chapped. With Pipette, she finally found an option that worked. "No more redness, no more dryness — just soft, squishable cheeks," she says. "We have used Pipette sunscreen heavily for three years now, and Rose has never gotten a sunburn despite spending many hours outside." She also points out that unlike most mineral sunscreens, Pipette is a lightweight, non-sticky formula that rubs in and doesn't leave a white cast behind. Rated a 2 by EWG , this sunscreen uses zinc oxide for an active ingredient. EWG just recommends throwing out the bottle if the sunscreen clumps or separates over efficacy concerns.

One important thing to keep in mind is that Pipette is the only sunscreen on our list that isn't water-resistant. Because of this, you'll need to use a water-resistant option if your little one will be spending time in the pool or ocean.

Community Reviews

slovesrudy "Check out Pipette sunscreen, they make…nontoxic baby and mama products that are SO affordable!!!! The mineral sunscreen is so great."

secondtimemama24 “We love Thinkbaby and Pipette. Hello Bello is pretty good too.”

Best Sport Baby Sunscreen

TruKid Sunny Days Sport Sunscreen Lotion SPF 30

Won’t easily sweat or rinse off

Unscented

Contains moisturizing ingredients

Thick formula may need to be warmed up first

Size: 3 ounces

Type: Lotion and stick

SPF: 50

EWG Rating: 1

Why We Love It

While it’s unlikely your baby will be running laps in the sun, she is still going to sweat a little or get wet at some point. When that happens you want a good sport sunscreen that’ll prevent SPF from running into baby’s eyes and mouth. TruKid Sunny Days Sport Sunscreen Lotion is water-resistant up to 40 minutes before you have to even worry about reapplying.

While it’s unlikely your baby will be running laps in the sun, she is still going to sweat a little or get wet at some point. When that happens you want a good sport sunscreen that’ll prevent SPF from running into baby’s eyes and mouth. TruKid Sunny Days Sport Sunscreen Lotion

is water-resistant up to 40 minutes before you have to even worry about reapplying.

This sunscreen uses zinc oxide to block UV rays, but also features natural skin-pampering ingredients like aloe, coconut and jojoba oils to seal in moisture. While the sunscreen is technically unscented, those ingredients give it a pleasant, natural smell. TruKid Sunny Days also boasts an impressively low EWG rating of 1, with the nonprofit noting that it has no concerns about efficacy.

This sunscreen uses zinc oxide to block UV rays, but also features natural skin-pampering ingredients like aloe, coconut and jojoba oils to seal in moisture. While the sunscreen is technically unscented, those ingredients give it a pleasant, natural smell. TruKid Sunny Days also boasts an impressively low

rating of 1, with the nonprofit noting that it has no concerns about efficacy.

Contributing writer, Korin Miller, uses this on her youngest daughter whenever her family of five plans to be by the water all day. It’s consistently provided excellent protection without irritating her skin or running into her eyes. “TruKid is one of the few sunscreens my little one doesn’t mind wearing,” adds Miller. "It doesn’t have a funky smell and it rubs in easily. While the bottle looks small, the thick formula means you get a lot out of a little.”

his on her youngest daughter whenever her family of five plans to be by the water all day. It’s consistently provided excellent protection without irritating her skin or running into her eyes. “TruKid is one of the few sunscreens my little one doesn’t mind wearing,” adds Miller. "It doesn’t have a funky smell and it rubs in easily. While the bottle looks small, the thick formula means you get a lot out of a little.”

Because this sunscreen uses 20% zinc, it has a super thick consistency right out of the bottle. But that also means a little goes a long way (Miller's tip: just rub the sunscreen into your hands to thin it out before applying to baby’s skin).

Community Reviews

kristinaleerice "We use the Neutrogena baby mineral sunscreen or the tubby todd sunscreen! Both of those are the only things that keep my ginger nephew sunburn free all summer."

ck08am "Neutrogena Baby has always worked for my boys. And they have sensitive skin."

Best Baby Sunscreen for the Whole Family

Babo Botanicals Sensitive Baby Mineral Sunscreen Stick SPF 50

Won’t irritate skin

Fragrance-free

Glides on easily

Small size (pricey for what you get)

Size: .6 ounces

Type: Stick

SPF: 50

EWG Rating: EWG Verified

Why We Love It

Sharing sunscreen with the whole family is way more convenient, ultimately hogging less space in your beach or hiking bag. The Babo Botanicals Sensitive Baby Mineral Sunscreen Stick is a gentle formula that won’t irritate baby’s delicate skin — or yours.

Sharing sunscreen with the whole family is way more convenient, ultimately hogging less space in your beach or hiking bag. The Babo Botanicals Sensitive Baby Mineral Sunscreen Stick

is a gentle formula that won’t irritate baby’s delicate skin — or yours.

This sunscreen is EWG verified , relying on zinc oxide for protection. Yet it doesn’t leave behind the mineral compound’s signature white cast. Babo Botanicals also goes on easily with a slightly creamy feel that you won’t always get in a stick sunscreen.

, relying on zinc oxide for protection. Yet it doesn’t leave behind the mineral compound’s signature white cast. Babo Botanicals also goes on easily with a slightly creamy feel that you won’t always get in a stick sunscreen.

Though not a widely recognized brand (yet!), Babo Botanicals is praised by plenty of parents in the WTE community for its clean ingredients and dependable formula. Its compact size makes it ideal for on-the-go touch-ups, too.

Community Reviews

basil-thyme “Babo mineral baby sunscreen is the best mineral sunscreen I’ve found. I bought it for my baby, but I use it on myself, too. Some of the supergoop mineral sunscreens are great too, but the ingredient lists aren’t quite as clean as Babo.”

apcremna “We’ve always used Babo Baby sunscreen as it’s EWG verified so completely safe.”

Best Baby Sunscreen Tin

Raw Elements Baby + Kids Mineral Sunscreen Cream Tin, SPF 30

Easy to apply

Creamy texture rubs in easily

Doesn’t leave a white cast

Compact container

May melt in the heat

Size : 3 ounces

Type : Tin

SPF : 30

EWG Rating : 1

Why We Love It

Unlike stick or spray sunscreens, which require pressure to apply, tin sunscreens offer a thick, smooth application. The Raw Elements Baby + Kids Mineral Sunscreen Cream Tin is a great example, providing a surprisingly creamy consistency in a large container, allowing for flexible application.

This sunscreen received a stellar rating of 1 from the EWG, and parents in the WTE community also lauded Raw Elements for its clean ingredients and gentleness on sensitive skin.

Raw Elements provides 80 minutes of water resistance, after which reapplication is necessary. However, be aware that this zinc oxide sunscreen can melt in the heat. To prevent this, Miller stores it in an extra container around the tin in her beach bag, although she’s also found that storing it in a cooler or shading it from direct sunlight helps. Overall, the convenient scoop-and-apply feature is a practical benefit for most families.

Community Reviews

madmax4521 “Raw elements baby. Very clean ingredients and its reef safe (actually safe for the reef and not just green washed like a lot of brands).”

jesselyn18 “We also love raw elements.”

Best Baby Sunscreen Applicator

Solar Buddies Sunscreen Applicator

Easy to use

Toddler-approved

Difficult to clean

Why We Love It

It’s not necessary, but this TikTok-approved sunscreen applicator has cut down on some major toddler meltdowns, making beach days with my 3-year-old a little more pleasant. Simply fill the handle with sunscreen, screw on the top, shake and go! The rollerball and sponge tip make distribution and rubbing in the sunscreen a breeze! Although I don’t use this to apply the main base of sunscreen, it’s great for touch-ups and my daughter enjoys using it — making her more patient during application.

What To Look For in Baby Sunscreen

In addition to ingredients, formulas and SPF levels, there are a few other things to keep in mind when shopping for a baby sunscreen.

Application type: Baby sunscreens typically come in stick and lotion form, and the best type for you comes down to personal preference. You might even want to have both on hand, as stick sunscreen is easy to apply to the face to avoid baby's eyes and mouth, while cream is better for covering larger parts of baby's body. As for aerosol sunscreen sprays? Even though they might seem convenient for quickly applying SPF on a wiggly kid, Dr. Perman cautions against them. “I worry they are not applied with the appropriate thickness,” she says, particularly if you're on a windy beach, when the spray may blow away before it makes it onto baby. Plus, it's possible your baby could accidentally breathe in the chemicals from the spray. For these reasons, we kept aerosol sprays off of our list and included only lotion and stick options.

Water resistance: No sunscreen is waterproof , but you can buy water-resistant sunscreen which stays effective for 40 minutes in the water (some extra-resistant brands last up to 80 minutes). Even if your child won't be spending tons of time in the water, the AAD still recommends using a water-resistant sunscreen for optimal protection. For this reason, you'll find that almost all of our picks are water-resistant up to at least 40 minutes.

FAQ

Can babies under 6 months wear sunscreen?

Yes, you can apply sunscreen to babies younger than 6 months old, but you'll want to use it in minimal quantities. As mentioned previously, the AAP recommends that you only use sunscreen on small areas of their body, like your little one's face or the tops of their hands and feet. In general, keep babies under 6 months out of the sun and use protective lightweight clothing to cover their skin, including long sleeve shirts, pants and hats. Additionally, you want to avoid putting sunscreen on parts of her body that baby often puts in her mouth.

After 6 months of age, you can apply sunscreen to all exposed areas of your child's body. You'll still want to keep baby in the shade when possible, however, to avoid sunburn.

Is mineral sunscreen better for babies?

Mineral sunscreen, also known as physical sunscreen, is the preferred choice for baby sunscreen. Unlike chemical sunscreen, mineral sunscreens stay on the surface of the skin and aren't absorbed into the body, explains Marissa J. Perman, M.D., a pediatric dermatologist at the University of Philadelphia. They're also usually free from chemicals like oxybenzone and octinoxate.

Mineral sunscreen is especially effective on sensitive parts of the body , such as nose, cheeks, tops of the ears and shoulders, the AAP notes, because it acts as a better barrier against the sun.

Another plus, especially for parents, is that mineral sunscreen starts working immediately since it doesn't need to be absorbed by the skin. If you're using a chemical sunscreen, however, you'll want to apply it 15 to 30 minutes before going in the sun.

How to apply baby sunscreen

If baby is under 6 months, keep sunscreen use minimal. Apply a thin layer to small exposed areas like her face when shade and protective clothing are not available.

For babies over 6 months of age, you can apply sunscreen all over her body, making sure to cover any areas that are exposed to the sun.

As for reapplying baby's sunblock , you should do so every two hours that you're outside, plus immediately after getting wet or towel drying, according to the AAP.

American Academy of Dermatology, Infant Sun Protection: How Parents Can Keep Their Baby Safe , Accessed December 2022. American Academy of Dermatology, Sunscreen FAQs , September 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics, Sun Safety: Information for Parents About Sunburn & Sunscreen , Accessed December 2022. U.S. Food & Drug Administration, Should You Put Sunscreen on Infants? Not Usually , August 2021. U.S. Food & Drug Administration, Questions and Answers: FDA posts deemed final order and proposed order for over-the-counter sunscreen , December 2022. Bernard Cohen, M.D. , Dermatologist, Baltimore, Maryland. Marissa J. Perman, M.D. , Dermatologist, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Albert Yan, M.D. , Dermatologist, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Your Next Read

Sunscreen and Sun Protection for Babies: What Parents Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Should I Use Sunscreen When I'm Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Best Baby Toothpastes to Keep Little Teeth Clean Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

The 10 Best Baby Lotions, Creams, and Ointments for Sensitive Skin Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Most-Bought Prime Day Baby Deals: Sunscreen, Stroller Fans, and More Summer Essentials By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Why You're More Likely to Get Sunburned During Pregnancy (and How to Prevent It) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Supergoop's Splurge-Worthy Sunscreen is Essential for My Sensitive Skin Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Sunburn in Babies Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Winter Skin Care for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

How to Care for Newborn Skin Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window