The 10 Best Baby Snowsuits Parents Recommend Buying Before Temperatures Drop

A collage of the Best Baby Snowsuits featuring Primary, Carter's, Patagonia, and The North Face

Quick Summary

The best baby snowsuit is the Columbia Snuggly Bunny Bunting , according to What to Expect staff and community members. Experts say the most important factors when choosing a baby snowsuit are warmth, comfort, and water-resistant fabrics.

Wintertime means brisk stroller walks in fresh snow, ski trips, and other outdoor activities — but dressing baby for the weather can be less than delightful. After all, your little one can’t exactly tell you if they’re warm enough and, if not properly bundled, are prone to getting hypothermia or frostbite. If you live in a cold or snowy climate, a baby snowsuit is a must-have (as are baby hats and mittens !).

But picking out just one is no easy feat, especially since the market is flooded with options. Luckily, What to Expect staff and community members have plenty of baby snowsuit recommendations based on what kept their own little ones warm during previous winters.

How I Chose the Best Baby Snowsuits

To find the best baby snowsuits, I spoke to Daniel Ganjian, M.D. , a pediatrician at Providence Saint John's Health Center in Santa Monica, California, to learn what keeps babies safe and comfortable during chilly temperatures. Using Dr. Ganjian’s feedback, I created an initial list of over 20 baby snowsuits that were made of:

Lightweight fabrics, so as not to restrict baby’s movement

Waterproof materials to keep baby dry and warm

I then narrowed down the list using recommendations from What to Expect staff and community members, prioritizing baby snowsuits that parents praised for:

Growing with their child, thanks to features like adjustable straps, sleeves, and hems

Being easy to put on and take off

Low-maintenance care (nearly all of my picks can be tossed in the wash!)

The result: 10 parent-approved snowsuits — from lightweight fleece to heavy-duty down — that will keep your little one warm when the weather gets frightful.

Best Overall Baby Snowsuit

Columbia Snuggly Bunny Bunting

Ultra warm

Water-resistant

Available in a variety of colors and patterns

Plenty of size choices for the perfect fit

Some parents say it runs large (more room to grow)

Material: Polyester

Size range: 0-3 months to 18-24 months

Why We Love It

Available in a variety of colors and playful prints (from bright red and classic black to critter-patterned exteriors and plaid interiors), there’s a Columbia baby snowsuit for every child. No matter which option you choose, you’re guaranteed warmth via a soft microfleece hood, duck-down fill and foldover cuffs to protect little fingers and toes. The polyester exterior is water-resistant, ensuring your baby will stay dry when playing in the snow.

for every child. No matter which option you choose, you’re guaranteed warmth via a soft microfleece hood, duck-down fill and foldover cuffs to protect little fingers and toes. The polyester exterior is water-resistant, ensuring your baby will stay dry when playing in the snow.

"It's easy to get on, easy to clean (and quick to dry), and super soft on the inside," says Christine Mattheis, Group VP of Content & Brand Solutions at What to Expect. "[My daughter] Rose is 5, and I've stuck to Columbia brand for every snowsuit I've bought her just because I had a positive experience with the first one."

Plus, at around $80, it's on the more affordable side when it comes to baby snowsuits, which can get expensive.

Community Reviews

"For 18 months we used a Columbia one piece. So much easier. My kid who gets cold easily was always toasty in it."

"We used the Columbia Snuggly Bunny Bunting one piece last year and I LOVED how warm it was. We tried to reuse it this year but it's just a tad too small. She didn't have troubles walking around in it though. I would have bought a new bigger one for this year but my cousin gave us a hand me down 2 piece so we're just using that."

"I loved the Columbia snowsuit. Warm enough for playing outside in a Montreal winter and not super bulky so it’s easy to walk and move around in the snow."

Best Lightweight Baby Snowsuit

The North Face Baby ThermoBall One-Piece

Water-repellent

Lightweight

Built-in mittens

More expensive than other snowsuits

Limited color options

Material: Recycled nylon

Size range: 0-3 months to 18-24 months

Why We Love It

A high-performance pick that’ll hold up during cold and wet winter days, this North Face baby snowsuit uses ThermoBall technology to pack plenty of warmth into a sleek, lightweight product. Made from recycled synthetic down fill (which performs better in wet conditions compared to down feathers), it’s a great hypoallergenic option, especially for those sensitive to feathers. The suit has built-in fold-over mittens and booties, so you don’t have to spend extra money on these necessary winter accessories. Parents rave about the quality and warmth, so if you’re willing to splurge, this might be the baby snowsuit for you.

uses ThermoBall technology to pack plenty of warmth into a sleek, lightweight product. Made from recycled synthetic down fill (which performs better in wet conditions compared to down feathers), it’s a great hypoallergenic option, especially for those sensitive to feathers. The suit has built-in fold-over mittens and booties, so you don’t have to spend extra money on these necessary winter accessories. Parents rave about the quality and warmth, so if you’re willing to splurge, this might be the baby snowsuit for you.

Community Reviews

"We like The North Face Thermoball."

"For a snow suit I got the north face bear one piece suit and the north face Thermoball one piece, so I can layer the two."

"We bought her a snowsuit from the north face that is excellent for cold and wind."

Best Two-Piece Baby Snowsuit

Carter's Two-Piece Hooded Snowsuit Jacket and Bib Set

Machine washable

Affordable

Great for playing in the snow

Elastic cuffs on jacket and bib

Adjustable bib straps

No sizes for younger babies

Some parents say it's stiff

Material: Polyester

Size range: 12 months to 24 months

Why We Love It

A two-piece snowsuit provides plenty of bang for your buck, allowing you to use the coat even when baby isn’t being shuttled around in the snow. And this cozy set by Carter's is an exceptional value; similar styles will run you closer to $100. Despite the $58 price tag, the matching hooded jacket and insulated bib provide premium warmth and keep snow out thanks to elastic cuffs. Plus, the adjustable straps on the bib accommodate growth spurts and help nail the perfect fit, despite the fact that there are only three sizes to choose from (12M, 18M, and 24M).

Parents also appreciate that the polyester construction is durable and machine-washable, keeping baby snug, dry, and looking cute all winter long.

Community Reviews

"I have always bought the Carter’s snow suits or jacket and ski pants combo. And always at least 1 size bigger so they can wear it the following year. Never had any problems with them and they are warm and durable."

“It’s wind proof, water proof, machine washable all the things I love.”

"I like the Osh Kosh ones from Carters. They seem to be able to withstand wear and tear in the knees."

"I think a two-piece is always best especially for playing in the snow."

Best Baby Snowsuit for Growth Spurts

L.L. Bean Infants' Cold Buster Snowsuit

Wind- and water-resistant

Lasts a long time

Gaiters keep snow out

Limited color options

No sizes for younger babies

Material: Polyester, nylon taffeta lining

Size range: 6-12 months and 18-24 months

Why We Love It

One of the toughest parts about buying seasonal clothes for little ones is that they grow out of them quickly. But this L.L. Bean baby snowsuit has hidden “grow cuffs” that can lengthen the suit 1.5 inches to accommodate a growing baby (and hopefully make the snowsuit last for multiple seasons).

One of the toughest parts about buying seasonal clothes for little ones is that they grow out of them quickly. But this

has hidden “grow cuffs” that can lengthen the suit 1.5 inches to accommodate a growing baby (and hopefully make the snowsuit last for multiple seasons).

In fact, Sarah Darby, What to Expect’s Senior SEO Strategist, used a 2T for her 1-year-old at the time (he's now almost 3!). "It has been a great budget saver," she says. "My son wore it for an hour-long walk while it was snowing, and he was toasty warm when we got home! The hood also has a stretchy band that keeps it on his head." Two winters later, she plans on it becoming a hand-me-down for her youngest (with plenty of growing room to spare). “It is still in near-perfect condition even after two years of use!” Darby adds.

A full zip at the front makes this suit easy to get on and off (a major plus) and gaiters on the inside keep snow out. It’s also weather-resistant and non-restrictive enough for baby to play with ease.

Community Reviews

MamaLinds "We love the LL Bean Cold Buster Suit. My son had one for 2 seasons (I order big) and now my daughter has one."

LuvUs2Bits "I love the L.L. Bean one piece snow suit with grow cuffs that extend an extra 1.5in. Light weight and easy to move around in, but super warm and a breeze to put on and take off."

Best Down Baby Snowsuit

Patagonia Infant Hi-Loft Down Sweater Bunting

Water-repellent

Ultra warm

Dual front zippers for easy on and off

On the expensive side

Limited color options

Material: Down, nylon, polyester

Size range: Newborn to 18-24 months

Why We Love It

This heavy-duty Patagonia baby snowsuit doesn’t feel heavy, even though it’s packed with (recycled!) 700-down duck and goose fill. A soft, furry hood makes it a cozy pick for baby, and you can rest assured that your little one will be super warm. And those two down-the-side zips make it a little easier to get your baby dressed. Plus, every Patagonia product has a lifetime warranty, so you can always get it repaired, replaced or refunded — often for free. There's even an option to purchase one of these used to save even more money, too.

Community Reviews

char2628 "I live in Northern Canada in the Yukon Territory. I bought my baby a Patagonia snow suit that Isnt bulky at all and still warm, insulated and water/wind proof… warm enough for outings in the freezing cold."

Best Fleece Baby Snowsuit

L.L. Bean Infants' Hi-Pile Fleece Bunting

Lightweight

Soft

Good option for warmer climates

Not waterproof

Material: Polyester fleece

Size range: 0-3 months to 12-18 months

Why We Love It

Don’t live somewhere that gets super cold, but still need to keep baby warm? This L.L. Bean soft fleece baby bunting is your best bet. It has all of the top-notch features of a made-for-winter-storms snowsuit (rollover cuffs, one long zipper for simplified changes), but you won't have to worry about overdoing it on warmth. Plus, who can resist those bear ears? Keep in mind that this isn’t waterproof, but that’s unlikely to be an issue if your little one won’t be rolling around in the snow. Choose from four cuddly colors to find the look that’s right for your child.

Community Reviews

podang "We live in Maine. I like the L.L. Bean jackets, snow suits and boots. Plus they usually last 2 seasons."

Best Affordable Baby Snowsuit

Primary Baby Parka Snowsuit

Less expensive than many other snowsuits

Stylish silhouette

"I belong to" inner label

Fun colors

Water- and wind-resistant shell

All recycled polyester

Material: Polyester

Size range: 3 to 24 months

Why We Love It

Your baby may not fit into her snowsuit next season (or even next month), but this adorable snowsuit by Primary is totally worth it. This puffer parka style is warmer compared to its popular, lightweight alternative . Parents love that it comes with a hood, foldover mitts and feet, and a cozy fleece lining for head-to-toe comfort. The zipper at the front is full-length, which makes for easy changes, too. Keep in mind that some parents say it runs a little small, so don't be afraid to size up (and even if it is a little big at the start, that just means baby has more room to grow into it).

Primary offers its padded suit in a range of bright, fun colorways, including a Boysenberry purple and Evergreen green. Parents say the one-piece keeps infants and toddlers alike toasty, making it ideal for families with plenty of outdoor adventures planned this winter. But the best part? This style is often on sale, marking its under-$100 price tag down even further.

Boysenberry purple and Evergreen green. Parents say the one-piece keeps infants and toddlers alike toasty, making it ideal for families with plenty of outdoor adventures planned this winter. But the best part? This style is often on sale, marking its under-$100 price tag down even further.

Community Reviews

CanadianMama86 "They have the cutest padded snowsuits at H&M. …You can do layering with zipper onesies and a bodysuit."

Best Baby Pramsuit

Gap Baby Quilted Cozy Chambray One-Piece

Soft

Quilted fabric

Banded cuffs

Doesn’t restrict baby’s movement

Not waterproof

Material: Cotton

Size range: 0-3 months to 18-24 months

Why We Love It

A pramsuit is designed to keep baby warm and cozy while riding around in the stroller, even when the weather isn’t cooperating. This quilted denim option from Gap is made of soft chambray for a cuddly feel you and your little one will appreciate. It features a sherpa lining and elastic bands at the hands and ankles to seal in warmth. (That sherpa lining is throughout the pramsuit, too.) Parents also love long zipper makes it easy to do quick diaper changes on demand. Although the main priority is keeping your little one warm, it doesn’t hurt that this snowsuit is stylish, too. I mean, have you seen the bear ears on the hood? Bonus: It's 50% off right now at Gap!

Community Reviews

“We have a gap snowsuit for when it’s really cold and we are outside.”

“I’ve been happy with everything I’ve gotten from GAP.”

"My son will be 6 months old soon and I have a snowsuit that I for him at the baby Gap. I put that on him when we go for walks plus a a crocheted blanket over top he has never been cold yet."

Best Baby Snowsuit for Active Tots

Reima Gotland Waterproof Reimatec Snowsuit

Waterproof

Dirt-repellent

Breathable

Won’t restrict baby’s movements

Available in 11 fun colors

Expensive

Material: Polyester

Size range: 9-12 months to 3T

Why We Love It

The Reima Gotland snowsuit is built for romping around in the snow with sealed seams that make it a waterproof and windproof suit. It also features elastic cuffs and leg ends, along with an adjustable hood complete with a detachable faux fur trim. There’s even an insulated seat to keep your little one extra warm during longer periods outdoors, like a hike or ski trip.

Other highlights that make this worth a splurge: Zip pockets provide secure space to store extra essentials, while built-in and detachable foot loops prevent your child’s bottoms from riding up.

Community Reviews

Sashbel “Moving to Montreal. We bought a Reima snowsuit after being recommended it. Says it’s good for temps -10 to -30C so that seems good. Reviews are great.”

Sunshines2022 “I like Reima brand.”

Best All-in-One Baby Snowsuit

7AM Enfant Unisex Jumpsuit Benji

Water-repellent shell

Chic colorways

Built-in mittens and booties

two side zippers

Temperature rating of -4F/-20C

Prices vary by size

Material: 50% polyester, 41% cotton, 9% nylon

Size range: 3-6M, 6-12M

Why We Love It

If your baby can’t seem to keep their mittens in place, you might want to consider 7AM’s Enfant Benji Snowsuit , which solves the issue by attaching them to the cuff. It also includes built-in footies to keep your little one cozy without having to keep track of extra accessories.

This bunting-style snowsuit has a dual waterproof and windproof shell ( 1000MM water-repellent) to protect baby from the elements, as well as a plush lining that's as soft as a blanket. In other words, this style is perfect for new walkers looking to play outdoors in the snow.

Aside from the durable and impressive winter weather performance, the Benji features two zips down the front to make it simple to get baby in and out in a flash. There’s even a front pocket in case you need to have a binkie close by. Every detail has been carefully thought out, making it a wortwhile splurge that you'll be able to pass down like a family heirloom.

Community Reviews

rn220 “I have the 7am enfant one. It’s waterproof and full of fur. It’s a cocoon for your little guy. They stay really warm in it.”

A Doctor's Note on Baby Snowsuit Safety

Per the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), infants and children should not wear large coats or snowsuits while riding in their car seats . This means you will have to change your baby into their snowsuit once you reach your destination.

. This means you will have to change your baby into their snowsuit once you reach your destination.

Additionally, Dr. Ganjian suggests avoiding overly thick snowsuits that add extra weight and restrict your baby’s movements, especially if you expect your baby will fall asleep while wearing it. (Say, for example, if you take them for a walk in the winter.) “The latest safe sleep guidelines recommend children not be in weighted swaddles or blankets— a snowsuit would fall into this category,” Dr. Ganjian says.

Additionally, Dr. Ganjian suggests avoiding overly thick snowsuits that add extra weight and restrict your baby’s movements, especially if you expect your baby will fall asleep while wearing it. (Say, for example, if you take them for a walk in the winter.) “The latest safe sleep guidelines

— a snowsuit would fall into this category,” Dr. Ganjian says.

FAQs

When should baby start wearing a snowsuit?

Your baby should start wearing a snowsuit when they are first exposed to cold weather. The specific age may vary, depending on where you live. But if temperatures are near or below freezing, or there is snow or cold wind, a snowsuit is a good idea.

How should I dress my baby in the winter?

According to the AAP’s Winter Safety Tips , you should dress your child for cold weather like so:

Start with close-fitting layers on the bottom like tights, leggings or long-sleeved bodysuits.

Next, add pants and a warmer top, like a sweater or thermal-knit shirt, along with a jacket.

Finally, add a hat , mittens , socks, booties and, of course, a snowsuit.

When is the weather too cold to bring baby outside?

The AAP recommends avoiding wind chills below -15 degrees with your baby. Keep in mind, though, that if it feels cold to you, it may feel even colder to your baby. Little bodies can’t retain heat as well as adults, explains Dr. Ganjian, who adds it might be best to stay inside and be safe.

Why isn’t it safe for my baby to wear a snowsuit or winter coat in their car seat?

“The added bulk of a snowsuit can create a gap between the baby and the car seat harness,” Dr. Ganjian says. “This can lead to improper restraint in case of a crash, increasing the risk of injury.”

Snowsuits can also limit movement, which is important for baby to be comfortably and safely positioned in the car, he says. Dr. Ganjian recommends dressing in layers that are easy to peel on and off. “This allows for a snug fit with the car seat harness while providing adequate warmth,” he says.

WhatToExpect.com, How to Dress a Newborn Baby for the Weather , February 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How to Protect Babies and Toddlers in the Cold , October 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics, Winter Car Seat Safety Tips from the AAP , January 2023. Mayo Clinic, Hypothermia , March 2022. Daniel Ganjian, M.D., Pediatrician, Providence Saint John's Health Center in Santa Monica, CA.

Your Next Read

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The 10 Best Stroller Footmuffs To Keep Your Baby Warm on the Coldest Winter Walks Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The Best Winter Car Seat Safety Gear to Keep Baby Warm By Korin Miller, Contributing Writer

12 Best Maternity Coats When You Can No Longer Zip Your Jacket, According to a Mom of 2 Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How to Dress a Newborn Baby for the Weather Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Dress a Toddler for the Weather Fact Checked by Jill Malter

The Best Infant Life Jackets, According to Sailing Instructors and Boating Parents Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Our 10 Favorite Doctor-Approved Humidifiers to Help Your Baby During Sick Season Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

9 Best Swim Diapers to Keep Your Baby’s Poop Out of the Pool Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

How to Protect Babies and Toddlers in the Cold Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

How to Find the Best Stroller for Your Family: A Comprehensive Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Help Me, Heidi! How Should I Dress My Baby to Go to Sleep? By Heidi Murkoff

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window