10 Celebrities Who Have Named Their Baby Wolf

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Wolf Celeb Baby Names

The latest celebrity baby name trend honors a legendary pack animal: the wolf.

Leave it to celebs to keep the animal baby name trend going, but this time, you can count Bear out (that’s so Kate Winslet circa 2013). Now, the latest moniker to get celebs howling with excitement is Wolf.

Yes, that’s right. Stars ranging from Lauren Conrad to Eve Cooper recently named their babies in honor of one of our favorite pack animals.

Here are more celebrity parents who have blessed their babies with the name Wolf.

1. Zooey Deschanel

You can call her a trendsetter. The New Girl star named her son Charlie Wolf. The actress seems to be fond of baby animal names : She and her former husband Jacob Pechenik named their first baby Elsie Otter.

“Who doesn’t love an otter?” she joked when sharing more about her daughter’s unique name on the Today show.

2. Kylie Jenner and Travis Scott

The beauty mogul welcomed her second child, a baby boy, named Wolf Webster in February 2022. Jenner and her partner Travis Scott confirmed that their son’s middle name is Jacques, which is the rapper’s legal first name.

However, in March 2022, Jenner shared a baby name update with her fans on Instagram . "FYI our son's name isn't Wolf anymore. We just really didn't feel like it was him. Just wanted to share because I keep seeing Wolf everywhere," she wrote. While the mom of two was candid about the baby name regret , she hasn't shared her baby's new moniker just yet.

Maybe she'll still decide on a unique name. Jenner named her first baby, a girl, Stormi in 2018.

3. Eve Cooper

Talk about a name! The rapper and husband Maximillion Cooper welcomed their son Wilde Wolf Fife Alexander Somers Cooper in February 2022 (just one day before Kylie Jenner’s Wolf was born). “Words can’t describe this feeling,” she captioned her baby reveal photo on Instagram .

4. Lauren Conrad and William Tell

The Hills reality star welcomed her second child , a son named Charlie Wolf, in October 2019. "It sounds like I’m a follower," she said in an interview about giving her son the same name as Zooey Deschanel's little one. Later, Conrad set the record straight and chalked it up to pure "coincidence."

5. Jason Momoa and Lisa Bonet

The now-former partners Jason Momoa and Lisa Bonet named their son Nakoa-Wolf . "Nakoa" means warrior, the actress revealed in an interview . His full name means "warrior wolf," and he’s often labeled as his dad’s mini-me. Nakoa-Wolf may have a bright future in Hollywood just like his famous parents!

6. Valerie Bertinelli and Eddie Van Halen

Long before the baby name Wolf was a celebrity trend at all, this famous former couple welcomed son Wolfgang in 1991. Seems like they were the real pioneers here, no?

If you’re into the baby name trend, but want to have a unique take, take a scan at these related names for inspiration.

Other baby names that mean wolf

Adalwolf. German for "noble wolf," this baby name is perfect for a responsible and giving little boy.

Adolfina. Similar to the aforementioned boy's name, Adolfina is a girl's name of English origin that also means "noble wolf."

Daciana. The Romanian baby girl name means "wolf" and also "full of strength."

Faolan. This baby boy's name is Irish for "little wolf."

Lobo. Spanish for "wolf," this baby boy name would be fitting for a fiesty-but-caring child.

Lupe. This is a baby girl's name of Latin origin meaning "wolf" and is also a Spanish nickname.

Rudi. Perfect for a future star, the boy's name Rudi means "famous wolf" and is of Teutonic origin.

Love these wild baby name trends? Track your pregnancy, get expert tips, and find more name inspiration in the What to Expect app .

WhatToExpect.com, Celebrity Babies Born in 2022 , August 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Celebrity Moms and Dads , 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Baby Names , 2025. BabyCenter, Rudi , 2025. NameBerry, Faolan , 2025. SheKnows, Adalwolf , 2025.

Updates history

September 30, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,875 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

120 Astrological Baby Names Inspired by Your Baby's Zodiac Sign Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

14 Baby Names That Mean Peace, Strength, and Wisdom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Fierce and Fearless: 9 Baby Names for Girls With Superhero Energy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

50 Vintage Baby Names That Are Making a Comeback Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window