10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin

Best Remedies for Itchy Skin During Pregnancy

Quick Summary

To relieve itchy pregnancy skin, look for products that contain natural moisturizers, such as oats, shea butter, coconut oil, avocado oil or aloe. You should also avoid anything that containis steroids, retinol, salicylic acid and other harsh chemicals.

contain natural moisturizers, such as oats, shea butter, coconut oil, avocado oil or aloe. You should also avoid anything that containis steroids, retinol, salicylic acid and other harsh chemicals.

Of all the bothersome side effects that can happen during pregnancy, I was not expecting to deal with itchy skin . At best, my itchy pregnancy skin was annoying or distracting, at worst, it kept me awake all night long. It was an exercise in extreme patience as I tried — and often failed — to find relief from lotions, creams and other topical anti-itch treatments. (It didn’t help that some skincare products and even clothing can make this worse.) Thankfully, by the time I got pregnant for the second time, I had a solid anti-itch routine that kept my skin hydrated and moisturized from the start.

But to find the best treatment for dry, itchy skin during pregnancy , it helps to understand why it happens. Essentially, changes in hormone levels, your immune system and the environment can sap the skin of its natural oils, leading to dryness and compromising your skin’s natural barrier, aggravating your already-stretched skin and nerve endings.

How I Chose the Best Products for Itchy Pregnancy Skin

To determine the most effective products for relieving itchy skin during pregnancy, I recalled more than 50 different lotions, creams, oils, washes and even humidifiers. I then spoke to George Z. Han, M.D., Ph.D., a board-certified dermatologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York, and researched recommendation from the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) on effective ways to treat itchy pregnancy skin.

Based on this guidance, I eliminated any products containing steroids, retinol and salicylic acid, as these can potentially be harmful to pregnant women. I avoided products containing fragrances and harsh chemicals like sulfates and parabens, as these tend to aggravate skin rather than retain moisture. I then prioritized products that contain natural moisturizers, such as oats, shea butter, coconut oil, avocado oil or aloe, as well as ceramides , which are lipids that restore the skin’s barrier.

But even if a product checks all the ingredient boxes, it also has to work. So I turned to the What to Expect staff and community to learn what other moms recommend to deal with itchy pregnancy skin.

Ready to scratch the itch (figuratively, of course)? Here are a few soothing and moisturizing products that are safe to use during pregnancy.

Best Gentle Cleanser for Itchy Skin

CeraVe Hydrating Body Wash

Contains hyaluronic acid and ceramides

Accepted by National Eczema Association

Some dislike the smell

Size: 10 oz.

Why We Love It

Soaps can strip your skin of moisture, so they aren’t usually recommended for dry skin, but you still need something to cleanse your body when bathing. CeraVe Hydrating Body Wash contains three types of ceramides to protect and restore your skin’s moisture barrier while soothing itchiness. It’s made specifically for itchy, sensitive skin and is free from harsh chemicals like parabens and sulfates, so it’s safe for you and your growing baby. This body wash is thick, so some people do note that it can be tough to squeeze out of the bottle and recommend storing it upside down to make the creamy wash flow out more easily.

Soaps can strip your skin of moisture, so they aren’t usually recommended for dry skin, but you still need something to cleanse your body when bathing.

contains three types of ceramides to protect and restore your skin’s moisture barrier while soothing itchiness. It’s made specifically for itchy, sensitive skin and is free from harsh chemicals like parabens and sulfates, so it’s safe for you and your growing baby. This body wash is thick, so some people do note that it can be tough to squeeze out of the bottle and recommend storing it upside down to make the creamy wash flow out more easily.

Leah Rocketto, What to Expect’s Associate Commerce Director, didn’t find this to be a major deterrent. “Because it was thick, I was able to use less of it which was not only cost-effective, but better for my skin.” Leah switched to CeraVe early in her pregnancy and noticed relief within a few weeks. She also noticed an improvement in her keratosis pilaris , a condition that causes patches of tiny bumps to form on the skin. “Within a few months of using CeraVe’s body wash, I noticed my skin was smoother,” Leah says. “The bumps didn’t disappear completely, but that small reduction made me feel a little more confident, which isn’t always easy to feel during pregnancy.”

Leah Rocketto, What to Expect’s Associate Commerce Director, didn’t find this to be a major deterrent. “Because it was thick, I was able to use less of it which was not only cost-effective, but better for my skin.” Leah switched to CeraVe early in her pregnancy and noticed relief within a few weeks. She also noticed an improvement in her

, a condition that causes patches of tiny bumps to form on the skin. “Within a few months of using CeraVe’s body wash, I noticed my skin was smoother,” Leah says. “The bumps didn’t disappear completely, but that small reduction made me feel a little more confident, which isn’t always easy to feel during pregnancy.”

Sarah Darby, What to Expect’s Senior SEO Content Strategist, swears by CeraVe products for dry skin, both while pregnant and not pregnant, because the ingredients are gentle on her skin. “I also would use CeraVe on my belly in pregnancy,” she says. “While it didn't prevent stretch marks because I am super prone to them, it definitely provided relief from itching.”

Moms who love this body wash say it’s great for layering and follow up with CeraVe moisturizer post-shower, which contains many of the same soothing ingredients. Use this gentle cleanser if you want to kick-start your moisturizing routine and ease itchiness.

Community Reviews

heartsforever22 "I think our skin becomes more sensitive I had the same issue my back and chest was itchy I switched my body wash to cerave hydrating body wash and then started using cerave moisturizer it’s a round cream box both with no fragrance I see a huge difference not even half as itchy as I used to be! Maybe try switching what you use on your body see if that makes a difference."

Olivia8842 "I use Cerave hydrating body wash in and try to take shorter and less hot showers so I don’t dry out my skin."

Best All-Over Lotion for Itchy Skin

Eucerin Skin Calming Cream

Not greasy

includes oatmeal

Thick formula

Size: 14 oz.

Why We Love It

Eucerin is most often recommended by dermatologists, including Dr. Han, for soothing itchy skin during pregnancy. For an all-over lotion that will keep moisture locked in and alleviate dryness to prevent itchiness, Eucerin Skin-Calming Creamis a top choice. It’s fragrance-free and enriched with soothing oatmeal, so it feels and smells good. The cream absorbs quickly, so it won’t leave you feeling sticky or greasy. With skin that’s extra-dry or extremely itchy, moms in our WTE community agree with Dr. Han’s recommendation to apply this lotion liberally after showering and reapply as needed for the best results.

Eucerin is most often recommended by dermatologists, including Dr. Han, for soothing itchy skin during pregnancy. For an all-over lotion that will keep moisture locked in and alleviate dryness to prevent itchiness,

is a top choice. It’s fragrance-free and enriched with soothing oatmeal, so it feels and smells good. The cream absorbs quickly, so it won’t leave you feeling sticky or greasy. With skin that’s extra-dry or extremely itchy, moms in our WTE community agree with Dr. Han’s recommendation to apply this lotion liberally after showering and reapply as needed for the best results.

Some moms don’t love that this lotion comes in a tube instead of a pump because it makes application a bit tricky — I can attest that squeezing a tube with a lotion-covered hand isn’t the easiest thing ever. However, moms say the affordability, accessibility and effectiveness makes it worth the hassle.

Community Reviews

"I’ve had [eczema] on my arms and legs - I put Eucerin lotion on morning and night and that has really seemed to help! My doctor said pregnancy can make your skin more sensitive. I was scratching so much it was leaving bruise."

"Eucerin saves my skin. Immediately after my morning shower and again in the evenings. My skin gets sooo dry."

“I had horrible dry skin on my forearms ( such a weird place) that started about 2 weeks postpartum. The only thing that actually helped was Eucerin cream. It's thick and takes forever to absorb, but I feel like it actually helped my skin. I had tried every other moisturizer and cream I could think of that wouldn't add to the irritation. Once it improved, I just use regular lotion I did before and apply the Eucerin a couple nights a week at bedtime. Hope that helps!”

Best Heavy-Duty Moisturizer for Itchy Skin

Aquaphor Healing Ointment

Good for targeted dry spots

multi-purpose use

seals moisture in

Can be sticky until fully absorbed

Size: 7 oz.

Why We Love It

Free from fragrances, preservatives and dyes, Aquaphor is one of Dr. Han’s top suggestions for soothing itchy pregnancy skin. Aquaphor ointment contains a unique blend of petrolatum, mineral oil and glycerin, which work together to form a protective barrier over the skin to lock in moisture. This, in turn, reduces itching and promotes healing.

It’s especially great for expecting moms with eczema who may experience rough patches of irritation on the elbows, knees, or hands, during pregnancy. Though it can be pretty sticky right out of the tube, once the ointment is rubbed into the skin thoroughly, the moisturizing relief lasts quite a while. Leah, who kept jars of the ointment around her house and in her car, would apply it right before bed so the sticky formula wouldn’t get in the way of her daily tasks.

“My third trimester was timed to winter, when my skin is already prone to drying, itching and cracking,” she shared. “Aquaphor’s ointment was the only thing that not only relieved the pain, but helped heal the cuts caused by the weather.”

Aquaphor is also a great multi-purpose moisturizer to have on hand postpartum. In fact, I’ve used it myself for a variety of purposes, including as a lip balm for soothing chapped cheeks and healing diaper rash, and it’s absolutely fabulous.

Community Reviews

"Aquaphor has helped the dry patches on my belly. It was recommended to me after a surgery to help with irritation and now I use it all the time."

"Aquaphor is amazing and it’s made for irritated skin."

"I have PUPPS and Aquaphor is helping a lot!"

“I use aquaphor on my feet when they get really bad and it is such a relief. Obviously it’s too messy to put everywhere but maybe a few of the tougher spots could use it.”

Best Bath Treatment for Itchy Skin

Aveeno Soothing Bath Treatment

Includes oatmeal

multi-purpose use

Can make the bathtub slippery

Quantity: 8 single-use bath packets

Why We Love It

Oatmeal baths are often recommended for all sorts of itchy skin problems — eczema, insect bites, rashes, chickenpox, hives and pruritic urticarial papules and plaques(PUPPP) — to soothe skin and reduce both redness and inflammation. In fact, I’ve used Aveeno Soothing Bath Treatment to help ease the itch of my youngest son’s eczema flare-ups since he was a baby. The finely-milled oatmeal and gentle, fragrance-free formula provide temporary skin protection and relieve irritation and itching. This bath treatment comes in individual packets, so there’s no measuring required — just open it up, dump it in the tub, swirl it around, and you’re good to go.

(PUPPP) — to soothe skin and reduce both redness and inflammation. In fact, I’ve used

to help ease the itch of my youngest son’s eczema flare-ups since he was a baby. The finely-milled oatmeal and gentle, fragrance-free formula provide temporary skin protection and relieve irritation and itching. This bath treatment comes in individual packets, so there’s no measuring required — just open it up, dump it in the tub, swirl it around, and you’re good to go.

Many moms found relief from soaking in an Aveeno oatmeal bath. Unlike many others, it’s unscented so it might be one of the few ways to enjoy a bath while pregnant without overwhelming your sensitive nose — although note that it does still have a slight smell.

Just make sure that your bath water isn’t too hot, as that can lead to excess dryness. Also, use caution getting in and out of the bathtub, as the leftover powder can remain in the tub bottom and make it slippery. Instead of using this in the bathtub, some moms use it to create a thick paste that can sit on top of damp skin to provide itch relief during pregnancy.

Community Reviews

"Aveeno oatmeal bath. It worked for me in my first pregnancy. Also a mediated cooling Gold Bond lotion that came in a green bottle really helped take the edge off the itching so that I could sleep."

"Try avenno oatmeal itching packets they help you put them in bath and also vaseline helps me with itching."

"What really helped me was aveeno oatmeal baths!"

"I didn't take the [Aveeno] bath. I simply diluted a pack in water to create a paste. I put the paste in the fridge and applied it in the very itchy parts with a gauze. This won't remove the rash, but it will give you a lot of relief when you are desperate."

Best Coconut Oil for Itchy Skin

Garden of Life Organic Extra Virgin Coconut Oil

Multi-purpose use

organic

Doesn’t absorb as well as others

Size: 14 oz.

Why We Love It

The top suggestion by far for itchy pregnancy skin from moms in the What to Expect community is coconut oil. It’s easy to find, inexpensive, natural and really works. Plus, any mom must-have that multitasks can be a godsend. Coconut oil is one such product, and if you haven’t yet discovered its wonders, be prepared to buy a Costco-sized jar on your next grocery run. Make sure the coconut oil you pick up at the grocery store, like Garden of Life's coconut oil , is organic, which means it’s safe for you (and your little one), with nothing extra added that could irritate your skin.

The top suggestion by far for itchy pregnancy skin from moms in the What to Expect community is coconut oil. It’s easy to find, inexpensive, natural and really works. Plus, any mom must-have that multitasks can be a godsend. Coconut oil is one such product, and if you haven’t yet discovered its wonders, be prepared to buy a Costco-sized jar on your next grocery run. Make sure the coconut oil you pick up at the grocery store, like

, is organic, which means it’s safe for you (and your little one), with nothing extra added that could irritate your skin.

The cooking ingredient doubles as an anti-itch treatment during pregnancy, but many moms also use it as a nipple salve when breastfeeding and as a moisturizer or diaper rash treatment for babies. I used it as a go-to for cradle cap when my kids were babies, and I still keep it on hand as a moisturizer for the whole family.

Community Reviews

"Coconut oil! I have been using it since 4 weeks. No stretch marks at 38 weeks and it relieves the severe itchiness!"

"Straight virgin coconut oil is fabulous."

"Organic coconut oil! Worked so well for me."

"I had used coconut oil for my last 3 pregnancies and it helped me sooo much the only downside is that it can make you really oily."

Best Body Butter for Itchy Skin

Palmer’s Cocoa Butter Tummy Butter

Hypoallergenic

inexpensive

portable

Has to be warmed up in your hands first to apply evenly

Size: 4.4 oz.

Why We Love It

Palmer’s Cocoa Butter Tummy Butter is made with a blend of natural, gentle moisturizing ingredients, including vitamin E, shea butter and cocoa butter. All of these work to promote healing of the skin’s moisture barrier and reduce itching and inflammation. Plus, the simple ingredient list (and lack of fragrances, parabens and phthalates) makes it safe to use during pregnancy. This specially formulated ointment not only helps alleviate itch but is also meant to help prevent stretch marks — and many moms in our What to Expect community say it does just that. So, if you’re on the hunt for an anti-itch product that can help with stretch marks by keeping your belly lubricated and supple, this is a top pick.

is made with a blend of natural, gentle moisturizing ingredients, including vitamin E, shea butter and cocoa butter. All of these work to promote healing of the skin’s moisture barrier and reduce itching and inflammation. Plus, the simple ingredient list (and lack of fragrances, parabens and phthalates) makes it safe to use during pregnancy. This specially formulated ointment not only helps alleviate itch but is also meant to help prevent stretch marks — and many moms in our What to Expect community say it does just that. So, if you’re on the hunt for an anti-itch product that can help with stretch marks by keeping your belly lubricated and supple, this is a top pick.

Though it’s meant to target the belly area — which can be especially helpful for those with a particularly itchy tummy as your skin stretches — you can also apply it anywhere your skin itches. Moms in our community love how hydrating it is for both their bellies and the rest of their bodies, and many appreciate how well it works on sensitive skin.

Community Reviews

"Palmers cocoa butter!! I have super dry skin to begin with, and this is my go to. It’s kept my belly hydrated and as comfortable as possible."

"I’ve been using cocoa butter lotion to help. My skin is super sensitive to pretty much anything but this lotion works great for me…I use Palmer’s Cocoa Butter Formula with Vitamin E."

“Strongly Agree! I’m pretty sensitive in general but I love [Palmer’s]. Smells amazing too.

Best Cooling Lotion for Itchy Skin

Sarna Sensitive Anti-Itch Lotion

Provides immediate relief

accepted by National Eczema Association

Medicinal smell can be strong

Size: 7.5 ounces

Why We Love It

When your skin is itchy, cool sensations can help give you near-immediate relief. If your doctor gives you the go-ahead to try a cooling lotion with camphor or menthol, Sarna’s anti-itch lotion is one of the most often recommended picks from moms in our What to Expect Community because of how quickly it works to soothe itching. The menthol and camphor in Sarna’s anti-itch lotion are often used to soothe eczema, psoriasis and poison ivy irritations, but they can also help with an extra-intense case of PUPPP. Just check with your doctor or dermatologist first if your skin is on the sensitive side, as the cooling ingredients can irritate some people. And, keep in mind that the scent can be strong, which might trigger your sensitive nose — although some moms found the quick relief worth it!

Community Reviews

"Sarna was my go to when I was pregnant last time. Stinky, but helped!"

"My doctor recommended [Sarna]. It’s the best thing I’ve tried but for me my skin is also dry so I mix it with aveeno lotion then put on my body. I use it morning and before bed and sometimes once in between."

I had success [relieving itchy pregnancy skin] by showering with a stinky soap called Grandpa's Tar Soap and using Sarna lotion."

“I tell everyone who’ll listen about Sarna too! I had horrific hives my first pregnancy and this was the only thing that even touched it. It’s a staple in my house now.

Best Oil Treatment for Itchy Skin

Bio-Oil Skincare Oil

Can be mixed with lotion

reduces stretch marks

locks in moisture

Pricey

Size: Two 4.2 oz bottles

Why We Love It

Winner of a What to Expect Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award , Bio-Oil Skincare Oil is typically recommended by dermatologists to help heal scars and reduce the appearance of stretch marks, but expecting moms love it for soothing pregnancy itching, too, because of how well it hydrates their skin. It contains moisturizing vitamin E and is non-comedogenic, so it won’t block pores like some other body oils. It’s more expensive than the other products on this list, but a little truly goes a long way, and moms report that it works well mixed with lotion, cream, or body butter.

This is also a great choice for itchiness on the belly and breasts because it’s also intended to help prevent stretch marks. Out of the bottle, it pours more like a serum than an oil, so it can be easily rubbed into the skin without leaving you greasy or oily, as some moms in our community explain they do.

Community Reviews

"Bio oil has helped me with the itchiness."

"I am 7w5d and I was woken out of my sleep because I was so itchy. I’ve been using bio-oil to help."

"I mix ‘bio oil’ with my lotion and it does the trick!"

I just started using Bio Oil, & I'm loving it too. I like the way it smells & thankfully it's not an overpowering scent.

I’m loving this oil! Nice and lightweight and doesn’t make me feel oily.”

Best Calamine Lotion for Itchy Skin

Caladryl Skin Protectant Lotion

Inexpensive

easy to find

provides immediate relief

Appears pink on skin

Size: 6 oz.

Why We Love It

That pink lotion your mom used on you also helps soothe extra-itchy pregnancy skin. Caladryl lotion contains both calamine and analgesic to soothe itching and pain, but no harsh chemicals or any ingredients that might be harmful during pregnancy. You can also find it in a spray bottle or simply pour the lotion into an empty spray pump to make applying it on large areas easier.

That pink lotion your mom used on you also helps soothe extra-itchy pregnancy skin.

lotion contains both calamine and analgesic to soothe itching and pain, but no harsh chemicals or any ingredients that might be harmful during pregnancy. You can also find it in a spray bottle or simply pour the lotion into an empty spray pump to make applying it on large areas easier.

Some moms mention that calamine works best when used in tandem with a heavier cream or some sort of oil over the top to lock in moisture. It’s also great to apply on bug bites or other itchy spots to keep kids from scratching — I keep a bottle in my own medicine cabinet that our whole family uses.

Community Reviews

"Try calamine lotion or spray. I had cholestasis and the itchiness was horrible. Doctor recommended calamine lotion and it helped a bit with the itchiness."

I’ve been having this [itchiness] like crazy over the last couple weeks, especially behind my knees and on the backs of my thighs. Apparently it’s common - I’m hesitant to use hydrocortisone bc it crosses the skin barrier, but Caladryl really helps with the itching!

“Calamine lotion will help and is pregnancy safe. I had something similar pop up on my chest and calamine lotion was the only product that worked.

Best Humidifier for Itchy Skin

Crane Ultrasonic Cool-Mist Drop Shape Humidifier

Easy to fill and clean

Reaches up to 500 square feet

Pricey

Size: 9.75" D x 9.75" W x 14.25" H

Why We Love It

When topical treatments only go so far to soothe itchy pregnancy skin, a cool mist humidifier can work wonders to keep skin hydrated as they “keep the air from being too dry in your home,” Dr. Han explains. Not only will it boost your skin’s moisture level as you sleep, but it’ll come in handy later on if your baby has a stuffy nose, dry skin, or eczema. The Crane Ultrasonic Cool-Mist Drop Shape Humidifier is easy to fill and clean, so it’s perfect for having on hand when you need to add extra moisture to the air.

When topical treatments only go so far to soothe itchy pregnancy skin, a cool mist humidifier can work wonders to keep skin hydrated as they “keep the air from being too dry in your home,” Dr. Han explains. Not only will it boost your skin’s moisture level as you sleep, but it’ll come in handy later on if your baby has a stuffy nose, dry skin, or eczema. The

is easy to fill and clean, so it’s perfect for having on hand when you need to add extra moisture to the air.

I have had a Crane humidifier like this one for nearly a decade, and it’s still going strong through two kids and many, many late nights with congestion. It’s a bit bulky though, so you may have to clear off some space on your nightstand if you want to keep it right next to you while you sleep. If you’re looking for a more long-term option to avoid dry skin and keep itchiness at bay, moms in our community agree that a humidifier is worth the investment, as you’ll likely use it for years to come with your little one.

What to Look For In Itchy Skin Remedies

When shopping for products that can relieve itchy skin during pregnancy, consider the following:

Ingredients: Look for products with gentle, soothing ingredients like oats or other natural moisturizers, including shea butter, coconut oil, avocado oil or aloe. The ingredient list should be simple and easy to understand — simple products are often better for maintaining the skin barrier, says Dr. Han. Pick pH-balanced products that contain ceramides, which are lipids that restore the skin’s barrier , and are free from harsh chemicals like sulfates and parabens to best help retain moisture and not cause further aggravation.

Fragrance-free: Added fragrances can further irritate itchy pregnancy skin, so it's best to skip products with scents listed in the ingredient list. When it comes to picking products for itch relief, Dr. Han says, "the less fragrance, the better." Choose products labeled "fragrance-free" or "no added fragrance." Additionally, pregnancy can heighten the senses , and added fragrances could trigger an unpleasant reaction like nausea. You may also want to avoid essential oils, too, which can sometimes function as fragrances and irritate or cause allergic reactions.

Frequency of application: Keeping the skin moisturized is priority number one when dealing with itchy skin, whether you’re pregnant or not. It's important to note that this process may require applying various products in layers to tame the flame. From the soap or body wash you use while showering to the lotions, creams and oils you apply after bathing, each product can add another layer of moisturizing protection to soothe skin. You may need more than one application per day or need to experiment with different layering techniques until you find what works best for your itchy skin. Most of the products on this list can be used in tandem with each other, so you might want to try a few out, especially if you’re dealing with severe dry skin. And, keep in mind that the best time to apply moisturizer is right after taking a shower or bath when your skin is damp.

FAQ

What causes itchy skin during pregnancy?

Dry skin during pregnancy is one of the most common causes of itchiness, and can happen anywhere on the body. Additionally, changes in hormone levels, your immune system and the environment can sap the skin of its natural oils, leading to dryness. When your skin's natural barrier is compromised, nerve endings in the top of the skin become irritated and sensitive. Some beauty products and even clothing can make this worse.

As your pregnancy progresses, your belly may also start to itch because your expanding baby bump stretches your skin, which stretches nerve endings and triggering itchiness.

There are some conditions related to itchy skin during pregnancy that you might want to keep an eye on, as they might require additional treatment. For instance, an itchy belly accompanied by a rash may be pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP) or polymorphic eruption of pregnancy (PEP). These annoying but benign conditions appear in some expecting moms (usually starting around the third trimester, but sometimes sooner), are possibly linked to genetic causes, and disappear after childbirth.

Any skin conditions you have that would cause itchy skin before becoming pregnant may also flare up as your immune system responds to pregnancy and your hormones shift. "If you have eczema, sometimes it can worsen during pregnancy as well," Dr. Han says. Though your doctor is your best resource for treating medical skin conditions during pregnancy, over-the-counter products can temporarily relieve itching.

How can you treat itchy skin during pregnancy?

Many simple solutions can effectively soothe itchy skin during pregnancy at home. "The first thing we try to address are simple issues such as increasing your moisturizer use and gentle bathing techniques," Dr. Han says. Bathing with a gentle cleanser and applying a lotion daily often does the trick to keep skin moisturized and supple. If you find that your usual products aren’t doing the trick, you may need to switch things up to find what works best to soothe your itchy skin. Make sure your products are following the guidelines we set out earlier — such as being fragrance-free and contain soothing ingredients.

Keep showers or baths short ( five to 10 minutes, per AAD guidance ), and avoid using hot water. "I usually recommend using warm instead of hot water,” says Dr. Han. “The fats in your skin that serve to keep in the moisture have relatively low melting points. Once you step out of the shower, evaporative cooling can actually draw even more moisture from your skin." After bathing, gently pat the skin with a soft towel, and apply any moisturizers directly on damp skin.

You can layer heavier pH-balanced creams with naturally moisturizing ingredients and ceramides to lock in moisture and protect the skin's natural barrier. Talk to your doctor about using an anti-itch lotion with natural ingredients like calamine or menthol, which can produce a cooling effect to ease itchiness. For an itchy belly during pregnancy , a belly balm or vitamin E oil will also help moisturize your skin.

Other strategies you can try include using a humidifier in your bedroom at night to keep the air moist, which helps moisturize the skin. Wearing loose-fitting clothing can also alleviate pressure or reduce friction against your skin, which can intensify the irritation and lead to worsening itch. Many expecting moms also use ice packs or cool strips of cloth draped over the skin to temporarily relieve itchy pregnancy skin.

Never hesitate to contact your practitioner, too, if the itch persists, you notice a rash or you're otherwise concerned. "We should be able to help with this, so don't suffer through scratching your skin up and not getting enough rest," Dr. Han recommends.

Itching to ease the scratch? Here are a few top anti-itch products to use during pregnancy.

WhatToExpect.com, Dry Skin During Pregnancy , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Itchy Belly During Pregnancy , September 2022. American Academy of Dermatology, Dermatologists' Top Tips for Relieving Dry Skin , Accessed March 2023. American Academy of Dermatology, Dry Skin , Accessed March 2023. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Skin Conditions During Pregnancy , July 2022.

Your Next Read

How to Relieve Itchy Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Your Pregnant Belly Itches (and What Actually Helps) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Can Leave Your Skin Feeling Parched Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Best Products for Pregnancy Hemorrhoids Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Why Pregnancy Makes Your Skin Sensitive — and What Actually Helps Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Oily Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Your Eczema Is Flaring Up During Pregnancy (and No, It's Not Just Your Soap) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Those Tiny Itchy Bumps During Pregnancy? It Might Be Heat Rash Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Bumpy, Itchy Pregnancy Rash Nobody Warns You About (Until You Have It) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The 10 Best Baby Lotions, Creams, and Ointments for Sensitive Skin Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Why You're More Likely to Get Sunburned During Pregnancy (and How to Prevent It) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Skin Changes During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window