These thoughtful off-registry presents get the thumbs-up from gifting experts.

If you've got a baby shower coming up, you're probably brainstorming the perfect gift for the mom-to-be. While there's no shortage of must- and nice-to-haves — like a car seat , stroller , diaper bag , etc. — some of the most meaningful gifts are the ones that you can't simply tack onto a registry .

Because they're usually time-consuming to create, DIY baby shower gifts often hold a lot of meaning to the recipients, explains Christina Lovelace, an event planner and owner of Lovelace Design. They remind the parents-to-be of the person who made them, and they can become a family keepsake that gets passed along to future generations.

The opportunity to personalize a homemade gift is also priceless. "You can customize it far beyond what you can order from a registry," Lovelace adds. Here, party planners share some of the best handmade presents they've seen at baby showers.

Baby blanket

Perhaps one of the oldest DIY baby shower gifts in the book is a homemade baby blanket, also referred to as a receiving blanket. It's not only a meaningful gift, but it's sure to come in handy during the baby's first few months when swaddling is a go-to move.

All you have to do is source some flannel or another soft material, create two equal-sized portions, cut the fabric to the size of your choosing, pin for sewing and then stitch it up. (If you can quilt, knit or crochet, you could go that route instead!) Planner tip: Find out the color of the baby's nursery, and match the blanket to that shade.

Photo album

With so many pics living online or on a phone, a physical photo album can stand apart as a tangible reminder of favorite memories and the loved ones in them. For a thoughtful shower gift, put together a book with pictures of the baby's parents, grandparents and other family members, advises Joan Wyndrum, founder and owner of Blooms by the Box.

"I saw this given at a baby shower once, and the couple had tears in their eyes when they looked through it," she shares. "This gift is perfect for both Mom and Dad at a baby shower ."

Framed photos

As an alternative to making a photo album, put some precious snapshots into frames for the expectant parents. Make it personal by choosing ones inspired by the family's hobbies. "A frame could reflect her favorite team if Mom is a sports fan," says Cathleen O'Connell, co-founder of COJ Events . "If Dad is into the outdoors, a frame could reflect his passions to inspire them in the new baby."

diaper cake

Diaper cake

It might not sound tasty — and that's because this gift is not actually edible. A diaper cake is a tiered structure built entirely out of diapers and decorated with accents like ribbons to look like a cake. It's a perennially popular gift because it's both practical — newborns can go through 12 diapers in a single day! — and pretty enough to use as baby shower decor.

Bow holder

One thing new parents will likely have plenty of are small (and easy to misplace) baby accessories. To help keep all of those bows and pacifiers organized, a dedicated holder can come in handy.

All you need is a canvas or wooden board, some string and a staple gun to create a place to store those tiny doodads. "It usually has lots of colorful ribbon hanging from it, so you can attach anything that has a clip on it, such as binkies or bows," adds Lovelace.

diy baby mobile

Baby mobile

A baby mobile is far more than just another piece of decor for the nursery — it becomes a focal point for the baby during diaper changes or quiet time in the crib. It's one of the first items that infants start to notice, which piques their curiosity and their senses.

DIY mobiles are fun and easy to create for a baby gift. "Pinterest has millions of ideas for crafting simple and easy mobiles," O'Connell says. From animals to planets to flowers, you could go in any number of directions depending on the baby shower theme .

It is important to note that safely building and hanging the mobile matters, as long pieces of string can pose a strangulation hazard. What's more: It's best to steer clear of DIY baby projects containing small parts like buttons, which little ones can choke on.

Survival basket

The concept of "surviving" a baby’s first year might sound drastic, but ask other new moms and they'll likely attest to the fact that they got through the postpartum period in survival mode. Caring for a newborn is an entirely new way of living — and Mom has to do it on so little sleep.

That's why a survival basket can be one of the most useful DIY baby shower gifts. It should include common baby items needed during the first few months, like diapers, wipes, lotion, a thermometer, Motrin, etc.

Postpartum care kit

Make sure Mom is taken care of, too, with a postpartum recovery gift basket. This thoughtful present could include a large water bottle, fancy lotion, a plush robe, healthy snacks, a food delivery gift card and (if you're friendly enough with the mom-to-be) postpartum underwear , perineal spray, maxi pads and "padsicles" for cooling relief.

Sensory toy

Babies first learn to play with sensory toys , which engage the senses by making sounds, having various textures and promoting motor development. There are a plethora of options available for purchase, but you can DIY a sensory toy with the right know-how.

Find a baby-safe fabric material, cut it evenly and then securely join the four sides together. On the inside, you can place a bell or marble that makes noise when your baby shakes the toy.

Baby hat

No matter which season the baby is due, he'll likely wear a hat on the regular during those newborn days. Whether it's for glaring sun or freezing cold, a baby hat protects that precious noggin from the elements. If you know how to sew, knit or crochet, put those talents to use and craft your own personalized beanie.

Christina Lovelace, Event Planner and Owner, Lovelace Design . Cathleen O'Connell, Co-Founder, COJ Events . Joan Wyndrum, Founder and Owner, Blooms by the Box .