10 Dog-Themed Ideas for a Pawfect Puppy Party

dog birthday party decorations

These treats and tricks will ensure animal-loving kids have a ball on their birthday.

Throwing a fun birthday party for your child is no small feat, especially when you’re spending every weekend at similar parties. Whether you’re planning that milestone first birthday bash or throwing an intimate gathering for family, the first step is choosing a unique birthday party theme .

While there are tons of great options out there, the best thing to do is to focus on your child's interests. And if your family dog (or just a puppy walking down the street) makes your little one cry with glee, you're in luck because dogs make a terrific party theme.

Pick out a fun birthday cake, get some paw print decorations and you're ready to go. Here are some fun ideas for creating a pawsome party that guests (even grown-ups) will love.

Dog birthday party decorations

1. Cool color scheme

dog birthday party color scheme

A color scheme for this kind of party can be tricky, since most dogs are brown, black or white. Instead of taking inspiration from fur, think spots! The classic Dalmatian pattern is an easy way to bring some of that puppy energy to the party while also working in brighter colors. Combine black and white spots with peaches and pinks or a variety of blues to make a dog-themed party feel fresh.

2. Punny signage

dog birthday party sign

Nothing hammers home a great theme like fun signs! "Let’s Pawty" is the ultimutt (sorry) pun to kick off the day. Check out the "adopt a puppy" favor sign and the "dig in" dessert sign, too. They make for a paw-sitively cute welcome table.

3. Fetching photo backdrop

dog birthday party photo backdrop

Every party needs a cool photo opp for capturing memories in style, and this one is picture perfect. Blue, black, brown and beige oversized balloons (and a few blow-up bones!) transform simple boards into a dramatic backdrop. The sweet doggy banner in front is a great final touch.

4. Puppy plates

dog birthday party plates

This sophisticated tablescape is made up of simple shapes and patterns like scalloped dinner plates, gridded napkins and a kraft paper tablecloth (which is perfect for messy toddlers who may want to doodle some dogs in between bites). All you need are some puppy-faced dessert plates to drive the theme home and make it feel festive.

5. Dog house place cards

dog birthday party place cards

Sometimes place cards can feel a bit stuffy for children's parties, but not these! Each kid gets a mini paper dog house with a paper pet and their name written on a teeny-tiny bone. It serves as both a place marker and something to play with while they wait for pizza to be served.

Dog birthday party food

6. Custom pet cake

dog birthday party cake

A talented baker (like Alisha Henderson, whose work is featured here!) can paint your pup onto a cake, or you can order a photo cake featuring your family's four-legged member. Either way, putting the birthday kid's own dog on the dessert is the sweetest surprise.

7. Toy cake toppers

dog birthday party cake toppers

DIY or buy your own simple birthday cake , and then top it with tiny dog figures (in even tinier paper party hats!) to bring in the theme. Best of all, the figurines turn into little gifts or favors after you're done.

8. Dog bowl-shaped treats

dog birthday party kibble treats food ideas

These may look like mini bowls of kibble but they're actually human-grade treats! Icing-coated Oreos make up the bowls, and cocoa puffs double as dog food. Who wouldn’t get a kick out of that?

Dog birthday party favors

9. Adoptable pups

dog birthday party party favors

What does nearly every kid want to take home with them? A puppy! Luckily, these ones are made of fabric and require neither walks nor feeding. Fill a basket with a variety of adoptable stuffed dogs so that each partygoer can pick out a new pet. Cardboard dog houses complete this adorable favor and give kids something to play with during lulls in the party.

10. Doggone cute cookies

dog birthday party cookie favors

Every kid looks forward to the goodie bags at a birthday party. Why not send them home with some edible treats as well? This batch features dogs, birthday candles and the birthday boy's name and age. You can also display them on the dessert table before gifting them to guests.

WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Birthday Party Dos and Don'ts , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a First Birthday Party , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes , January 2022.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Throw a T-Rex-iffic Dinosaur Birthday Party That'll Go Down in History Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Space Birthday Party Ideas That Are Out of This World Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Host a 'Wild One' Birthday That's a Roaring Good Time Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Celebrate 'Mr. Onederful' With a Dapper First Birthday Bash Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

12 Dog Pregnancy Announcements for Human Parents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

15 of Your Biggest Toddler Birthday Party Questions — Answered Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window