10 Diwali Activities to Get Your Kids in on This Fun-Filled Celebration

diwali activities for kids, author akruti babaria and family dressed for diwali celebrations

Whether you're new to this holiday or grew up celebrating it, there are a lot of great ways to get the whole family excited about Diwali.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Every year, more than one billion people worldwide celebrate Diwali, the festival of lights that marks the victory of good over evil, light over darkness and knowledge over ignorance. Hindus, Sikhs, Jains and Buddhists all celebrate this autumn holiday, which falls on November 1, 2024, per the lunar calendar. It's a time when families and friends pray together, eat yummy food, exchange sweets, decorate their homes and express gratitude.

There are many customs of Diwali that are fun and special to celebrate with kids. As an immigrant mom from India living in the U.S., it's especially important to me that my 2- and 7-year-olds learn about our family traditions. That said, it's often a lot harder to find a toddler-friendly craft kit for Diwali than, say, Halloween. The lack of authentic, kid-centered activities actually led me to start my own business, Kulture Khanza , which provides educational toys, puzzles, craft kits and other resources for cultural holidays.

My small business taught me a lot about how kids can learn about celebrations like Diwali and participate in the traditions. Here are 10 things you can do with your little ones this year that will both teach them something new and get them excited about this special holiday:

1. Create chalk art rangoli

chalk art rangoli

Rangoli is a traditional Indian floor art that's often made with colored sand, flowers or rice. You can create your own rangoli in your driveway, on the sidewalk or in the park using kid-friendly washable chalk . Some popular shapes for rangoli include flowers, lotuses and paisleys. Draw an example to get your children started, and then let them see where their imagination takes them.

2. Fingerpaint rangoli

fingerpaint rangoli

Kids, especially toddlers, love getting messy. Print out a free rangoli template and let them go at it with washable finger paints (for easier clean-up). This sensory activity will help little ones learn about Diwali through arts and crafts .

3. Put together a rangoli puzzle

diwali rangoli puzzle

If bad weather is keeping you inside (or the idea of giving your little one sand, rice, paint or chalk just sounds messy), try making a rangoli in puzzle form. This 32-inch circular floor puzzle is perfect for kids 3 and up and features 48 large, easy-to-handle pieces.

4. Craft a Diwali garland

diwali garland kids craft

Just like many other holidays, decorating the house is a big part of Diwali celebrations. Typically, families hang garlands on doorways as a sign of welcome and to invite positive energy. Try crafting this cute garland from Love Laugh Mirch with your kids. It showcases clay lamps called diyas, a symbol of Diwali that emphasizes the victory of light over darkness.

5. Read a book on Diwali

It's always a great idea to read aloud to your children , so let Diwali inspire your next library visit. For preschoolers, check out My Diwali Light by Raakhee Mirchani. This picture book tells the story of an Indian-American girl celebrating with family and friends. For babies and toddlers, try Diwali (Celebrate The World) by Hannah Eliot. It's a beautiful board book that explains the five days of Diwali with vibrant illustrations.

6. Snack on a fruit diya

fruit diya kids diwali activity

Encourage your picky eater to pick up some fruit by incorporating it into a Diwali-themed activity. Prepare some sliced cantaloupe — to represent a diya lamp — and strawberries (to stand in as the flame). You can also try using carrots, radishes, oranges, melons and mangoes if you'd like to serve up more produce options. Then encourage your kids to play with their food (and maybe take some bites).

7. Make a playdough diya

playdough diya kids diwali activity

If you've already got playdough on hand, bring it out for this fun sensory activity. Create a three-dimensional diya by sculpting a bowl-shaped lamp and a small flame to go inside. You can even encourage preschoolers to add little gems on the lamp as decoration. Then display it as part of your Diwali home décor.

8. Dance to a Bollywood playlist

Little ones are always on the move. Use a Bollywood dance playlist to get them grooving and moving (and working on those gross motor skills ). Pass out colorful scarves if you have them to amp up the excitement for this dance party.

9. Drink mango lassi together

mango lassi recipe

Even the pickiest of eaters will love sipping on a mango lassi — one of the most popular drinks at Indian restaurants. It's easy to make these sweet mango smoothies at home. (Try this simple recipe by Zheelicious .) Omit cardamom if your kids aren't fans of the fragrant spice.

10. Watch 'Mira, Royal Detective'

If you're ready for some quiet time, queue up an educational show for your tot. Mira, Royal Detective is a Disney Plus series about a girl named Mira who solves mysteries in a small Indian town. There's a Diwali-themed episode (The Great Diwali Mystery / The Case of the Curious Creature), but you don't need a subscription to show your kids the fun Diwali song . This YouTube video will have you and your kids dancing along while listening about some key elements of the festival.

Your Next Read

15 Thanksgiving Crafts to Inspire Gratitude in Your Kids Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

40 Hilarious Halloween Jokes That Will Tickle Your Toddler's Funny Bone Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Crafts for Toddlers Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

50 Hilarious Fall Jokes That Will Crack Up Your Kids Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Making Bathtime Fun for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Ways to Discipline Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Sensory Play Activities for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Toddler Dinner Ideas Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

20 Advent Calendars for Preschoolers That Are Bound to Sell Out Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

15 of Your Biggest Toddler Birthday Party Questions — Answered Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Establish a Bedtime Routine for Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window