Our 10 Favorite Doctor-Approved Humidifiers to Help Your Baby During Sick Season

best baby humidifiers

Quick Summary

The best baby humidifier is the Crane Drop Ultrasonic Cool Mist Humidifier , according to doctors and the What to Expect community. When choosing a humidifier for your nursery, experts say it's most important to consider area coverage (in terms of square footage), how easy it is to clean, and whether it has an automatic shut-off feature.

A humidifier may not top your baby registry , but it can be a real comfort during dry winter months — especially when sniffles strike. As a mom of four, I’ve learned to keep mine close by whenever my little ones are under the weather. It’s amazing how much easier everyone sleeps (and breathes!) with a little extra humidity in the air.

The best baby humidifiers quietly add moisture to help ease congestion and keep sensitive skin from drying out, sans noisy gurgles or steamy surprises. “Ideally, a baby’s room should have 30 to 50% humidity,” says Dyan Hes, M.D ., a pediatrician at Northwell Lenox Hill Hospital. If the air feels desert-dry, a humidifier can help bring it back to that comfy sweet spot.

Of course, there are plenty of factors to consider before buying a humidifier. You'll want to think about the type, ease of cleaning, and coverage area, for starters. And if it happens to look good in baby’s space, too, even better! Here’s how I picked the best baby humidifiers — with expert insight and parent feedback from What to Expect's community leading the way.

How I Chose the Best Baby Humidifiers

To make sure these picks were both safe and practical, I not only spoke with Dr. Hes, but several other pediatricians and sleep experts as well, including:

Emily Wisniewski, M.D. , a pediatrician with Mercy Family Care Physicians in Baltimore, Maryland

Lauren Levine, M.D. , a pediatrician affiliated with NewYork-Presbyterian/Columbia University Irving Medical Center and NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital

Ellen M. Schumann, M.D. , a clerkship director at the Medical College of Wisconsin

Luis E. Ortiz, M.D. , a physician in the Sleep Center at Johns Hopkins All Children’s Hospital

Melanie Sue Collins, M.D. , medical director of the Division of Pediatric Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine at Connecticut Children's Medical Center

Punita Ponda, M.D. , a New York-based Northwell Health physician who specializes in allergy and immunology and pediatrics

Based on their guidance, in addition to feedback from parents in the What to Expect community, I ensured all of our selections met the following criteria:

Cool mist : The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends using a cool mist humidifier over a warm mist one, as the latter could lead to accidental burns if knocked over. These are preferred by the AAP because warm mist humidifiers can pose a burn risk to baby. Cool mist humidifiers may also help to tamp down on microbial growth, says Dr. Wisniewski. “We get worried if there is warmth—this can be an environment that allows mold and other infectious bugs to grow,” she explains.

Easy to clean : “It is important to clean and dry the tank and any parts that come in contact with water," says Dr. Levine. "Some tanks are designed to make this easier, others make it nearly impossible." Dr. Hes recommends changing the water and wiping the unit down daily, giving it a “good scrubbing with a brush” every week. (You can use vinegar and a toothbrush to get into any small crevices.) “This will ensure you clean out any mold or bacteria hiding in the humidifier,” Dr. Hes says.

Automatic shut-off : “Since you usually run a humidifier at night while your baby is sleeping, you also should look for a machine with an automatic shut-off so that if the tank runs out of water it will turn off,” says Dr. Levine.

Appropriate coverage : Too small and there will be no benefit; too big and you risk mold growth. Look at the model's recommended square footage when shopping to ensure it's compatible with the room you're planning to keep it in.

Directional flow : While not always necessary, having the option to point the mist where you want it to go is always a perk, says Dr. Schumann.

Best Overall Baby Humidifier

Crane Drop Ultrasonic Cool Mist Humidifier

Quiet

emits almost no light

easy to clean

rotatable mist lid

auto shut-off feature

Water tank could be larger

Coverage : 500 square feet

Tank capacity : 1 gallon

Dimensions : 8.6 x 8.6 x 13.4 inches

Settings : Auto shut-off, timer, variable output control

Why We Love It

The Crane Drop is overwhelmingly recommended by the millions of moms and dads in the What to Expect community, and it's easy to see why. First, it's whisper quiet and hardly emits any light (just a tiny green one when it's on), which makes it a super baby-friendly pick. The gallon-sized water tank lasts up to 24 hours, easily detaches and fits under a standard sink when it's time for a refill. What's more, the humidifier automatically turns off when the water runs out, making it a low-maintenance pick.

is overwhelmingly recommended by the millions of moms and dads in the What to Expect community, and it's easy to see why. First, it's whisper quiet and hardly emits any light (just a tiny green one when it's on), which makes it a super baby-friendly pick. The gallon-sized water tank lasts up to 24 hours, easily detaches and fits under a standard sink when it's time for a refill. What's more, the humidifier automatically turns off when the water runs out, making it a low-maintenance pick.

Parents also praise how easy it is to clean. Plus, it's made with an anti-microbial material which the company says reduces mold and bacteria growth by up to 99.96 percent. You don't need to worry about filters, as the humidifier is filter-free (although the company does offer an optional demineralization filter for those with excessive minerals in their water). There's also plenty of options to control how much mist comes out. Finally, its 360-degree lid means you can easily direct the mist in whatever direction you prefer.

Community Reviews

"Ive had it a few months for my daughter and it works great. Lasts through the night in her room on low setting."

"Crane 100%. My son had rapid airway disease as a baby (asthma) and we went through 3. We bought a cute one first that just didn’t do it. Second was the Vick’s - TERRIBLE! ... And went to Crane and haven’t had an issue since. Bought a pink Crane for the daughter that I’m pregnant with right now too:)"

"I second the Crane humidifiers. They are super cute, highly rated, quiet, and don't put off any light. We have one for each of our kids, and they're great."

"I like my crane. Very easy to disinfect"

"I have two of the crane drop ultrasonic cool mist humidifiers and I really like them!"

"We have this crane humidifier and it’s been fantastic! SUPER easy to clean and I’ve never seen mold on it for the 2.5 years we’ve had it."

Best Versatile Humidifier for Baby Cold and Congestion

Vicks 3-in-1 SleepyTime Humidifier

No filters needed

Runs up to 30 hours

whisper-quiet

easy-to-clean wide tanks

Water should be dumped each day

Coverage: 250 Square Feet

Tank capacity: 0.6 gallons

Dimensions: 8.15 x 8.6 x 8.23 inches

Settings: Auto shut-off, night light, diffuser

Why We Love It

The Vicks 3-in-1 SleepyTime Humidifieris a multitasking nursery essential. Along with delivering a steady stream of cool mist to keep the air comfortably hydrated for little ones struggling with dry skin and chapped lips, it doubles as a night light (cycle between seven soothing shades) and a diffuser. But here's the real kicker: It's compatible with the brand's best-selling VaporPads to really help ease coughing or congestion during sick season.

Its compact size makes it ideal for smaller spaces, and parents love the simple, no-filter design (less upkeep!), along with the whisper-quiet operation. The tank holds 0.6 gallons and can run for up to 24 hours on a low setting before automatically shutting off when empty. Plus, setup and cleaning are refreshingly straightforward. All you have to do is lift the top to wipe down the interior every few days to prevent buildup.

With adjustable light colors and mist settings that let you control the desired moisture level, this humidifier brings both comfort and calm to bedtime, particularly for little ones who are under the weather. No wonder it won a Sleep Award !

Community Reviews

Mama2Boys2123 "I like the Vicks because it’s cool mist and you can add the Vicks vapor things too it. When my youngest is congested it’s so nice to have that running. I’d probably get another one if this one breaks. I do wish there was something a little smaller but the size keeps me from having to fill it too often."

Best Baby Humidifier with a Night Light

Fridababy BreatheFrida 3-in-1 Humidifier

Quiet

sleek

multiple functions

Filter free

Hard to clean (some owners warn of mold growth)

Coverage : 320 square feet

Tank capacity : 0.5 gallons

Dimensions : 7.7 x 7.9 x 7.9 inches

Settings : Auto shut-off, night light

Why We Love It

This beloved baby brand has another product to add to your ever-growing collection: a quiet, easy-to-operate humidifier with a sleek profile. It emits an adjustable soft, cool mist that’ll help baby get through any battle with congestion, and it also functions as a diffuser. But here's the best feature: The small profile humidifier also emits a soft glow, doubling as a night light with a range of colors (blue, cyan, and green) at the ready.

with a sleek profile. It emits an adjustable soft, cool mist that’ll help baby get through any battle with congestion, and it also functions as a diffuser. But here's the best feature: The small profile humidifier also emits a soft glow, doubling as a night light with a range of colors (blue, cyan, and green) at the ready.

It's available in three different sizes, including as small as .5 gallons that covers up to 320 square feet, meaning you can easily place it on a small shelf if space is at a premium. Otherwise, you can choose between a .6 and 1.6 gallon tanks. Still, even if you do decide to go with a smaller size, many reviewers note that it doesn't require frequent refilling.

Community Reviews

I’ve gone through a lot of humidifiers on Amazon and decided to give this one a try for my nightstand. It is quiet which I like a lot and for a smaller jug surprisingly last a while. ... Most importantly I like that it is easy to clean and NO filters to replace!

"I bought one last year when my 1 year old had a stuffy nose and have been using it ever since. Plan on buying one for our newborn just in case as well"

"We’ve been using the frida baby one since last year and we love it! Super easy to use and clean"

"I was gifted the baby Frida humidifier 2.5 years ago. The opening is small but I clean it with vinegar as instructed and I haven’t had any issues with mold or anything."

Best Mid-Price Baby Humidifier

Levoit Dual 150 Ultrasonic Cool Mist Humidifier

Inexpensive

Easy to clean

Sleek design

Small capacity

Coverage : 290 square feet

Tank capacity : 0.79 gallon

Dimensions : 7.2 x 8.11 x 11.57 inches

Settings : Auto shut-off, output control dial

Why We Love It

Despite being a big name in the humidifier and home care space, Levoit has several efficient humidifiers at lower price points. The Levoit Dual 150 Ultrasonic Cool Mist Humidifier , for example, offers 25 hours of moisture with its 0.79 gallon tank. But this machine gets rave reviews for how easy it is to fill up and use. The humidifier has a special top-fill design — just move the tank cover, fill the tank, and put it back in place. The humidifier is nearly silent, and can be adjusted with the help of a dial. It also offers helpful features like a 360-degree nozzle to direct mist around baby’s room and an auto shut-off.

Despite being a big name in the humidifier and home care space, Levoit has several efficient humidifiers at lower price points. The

, for example, offers 25 hours of moisture with its 0.79 gallon tank. But this machine gets rave reviews for how easy it is to fill up and use. The humidifier has a special top-fill design — just move the tank cover, fill the tank, and put it back in place. The humidifier is nearly silent, and can be adjusted with the help of a dial. It also offers helpful features like a 360-degree nozzle to direct mist around baby’s room and an auto shut-off.

Community Reviews

DD9843 “We got one from the brand Levoit. They have a few at different price points. It’s been great so far and you can get your hand in to actually wash it which is what I was looking for.”

Best Splurge-Worthy Baby Humidifier

Venta Original LW25 Airwasher Humidifier

Filter-free

easy to clean

expansive range

More expensive than other humidifiers

industrial aesthetic

Coverage : 430 square feet

Tank capacity : 2 gallons

Dimensions : 11.8 x 11.8 x 13 inches

Settings : Auto shut-off, variable output control

Why We Love It

If you’re willing to splurge, the Venta is an efficient, filter-free evaporative humidifier. With a 2-gallon tank and the capacity to humidify up to 430 square feet, it requires less upkeep than other models, too, and automatically shuts itself off. It measures about 12 inches long and 12 inches wide. Unlike some options, this humidifier can be used with tap water, making it easy to get up and running.

If there’s any downside, it’s the aesthetic. After spending so much time perfecting baby’s nursery, it may feel a little disappointing to add such a clunky machine to the mix — but if efficacy is any solace, you’ll get over it soon enough.

Community Reviews

I had a Venta Humidifier before and it lasted for well over 10 years. I love the convenience and ease of this product. It is easy to open to clean and easy to refill. I can easily carry it to another level of the house if I want to move it. I run it 24 hours a day and never had a problem.

We bought this a month ago and it is great. After having multiple other humidifiers that were cheaper, this one is well worth the price - easy to use, quiet, does a wonderful job and doesn’t make a mess!

"When my first was born my brother gifted us a Venta air washer which humidifies slightly and purifies. They are a bit spendy but the German engineering is great. We still use it 5 years later and when wildfires in our area get bad, it’s a lifesaver."

"It's super pricy but I've heard rave reviews about the Venta Airwasher, which is a combo air purifier and humidifier."

Best Designed Baby Humidifier

Miro NR08M Humidifier

Easy to clean

Beautiful design

Large range

A bit large

Some may not use the LED light features

Coverage : 600 square feet

Tank capacity : 1 gallon

Settings : Color cycling, output control, smart compatible

Why We Love It

This sleek, modern-looking Miro humidifier will be a stylish addition to a nursery and works in rooms up to 600 square feet. This model is the brand's most advanced to date, featuring touch-panel controls and soothing LED lights (which can be customized or turned off). You can add more water to the 1-gallon tank without turning it off and open it in one motion. Parents love that it’s powerful but also whisper-quiet, and it also scores points for being easy to clean. Tech-savvy parents will love that it's compatible with Alexa and Google home (with the additional purchase of a MIROT Connectivity chip).

Community Reviews

CBabyMomma9 "I ordered Miro brand from Amazon. It’s able to be taken apart and washed by hand or put in the dishwasher to be cleaned. Every humidifier we’ve used before always ends up moldy and hard to clean, at least if not using purified water constantly (not sure that would actually change anything though) so figured this was our best option!"

Best Smart Baby Humidifier

Levoit OasisMist 450S Smart Humidifier

Smart features

App and voice control

Top fill design

Some say the cord is too short

Coverage : 430 square feet

Tank capacity : 1 gallon

Dimensions : 10.8 x 6 x 11.97 inches

Settings : Smart control, variable output, auto mode

Why We Love It

Many humidifiers require you to pop in and out of baby’s room to turn them on and off. The Levoit OasisMist 450S Smart Humidifier , however, can be operated with your phone or home smart device. Create a timer, keep tabs on the humidity level and schedule the machine to go on and off, all from an app. It also boasts intelligent features like a top fill design that’s easy to use and a sleep mode that turns off all lights and lowers the sound while your little one is sleeping. A built-in handle makes it easy to remove the reservoir for refills as needed.

Many humidifiers require you to pop in and out of baby’s room to turn them on and off. The Levoit OasisMist 450S Smart Humidifier

, however, can be operated with your phone or home smart device. Create a timer, keep tabs on the humidity level and schedule the machine to go on and off, all from an app. It also boasts intelligent features like a top fill design that’s easy to use and a sleep mode that turns off all lights and lowers the sound while your little one is sleeping. A built-in handle makes it easy to remove the reservoir for refills as needed.

Community Reviews

auntie7xmommy2x "It’s very high quality. You can operate it with Alexa or your phone, it goes completely dark so no lights on if you don’t want them, has a night light, big enough to fill the room and last all night if not longer."

Best Baby Humidifier and Sound Machine in One

Crane 4-in-1 Top Fill Humidifier with Sound Machine & Night Light

Built-in nightlight

Can play three different relaxing sounds

Quiet operation

Sleek look

Controls may be hard to see in dim light

Coverage : 500 square feet

Tank capacity : 1 gallons

Dimensions : 9 x 9 x 13 inches

Settings : Adjustable output, night light, sound machine

Why We Love It

Whether space is at a premium or you just don’t want a slew of devices in baby’s room, the Crane 4-in-1 Top Fill Humidifier with Sound Machine & Night Light does the work of several machines in one. As the name implies, this humidifier has a built-in night light that changes colors. It also offers a sound machine with three white noise options, so you can soothe baby to sleep. The humidifier can run for up to 24 hours before needing a refill, and looks sleek sitting out. Fans say it’s easy to refill and clean, too.

with Sound Machine & Night Light does the work of several machines in one. As the name implies, this humidifier has a built-in night light that changes colors. It also offers a sound machine with three white noise options, so you can soothe baby to sleep. The humidifier can run for up to 24 hours before needing a refill, and looks sleek sitting out. Fans say it’s easy to refill and clean, too.

Community Reviews

samyakob "After dealing with so many humidifiers over the years, I love our Crane humidifier. We’ve had the same machines for a few years now and I just follow the manufacturer’s recommendations with the diluted vinegar rinse every week and it really hasn’t needed a deep clean. Every so often we have to wipe down the basin, but even that has been relatively low maintenance."

Easiest to Clean Baby Humidifier

Canopy 4-in-1 Dishwasher Safe and Mold Inhibiting Humidifier

Parts can go in the dishwasher

Designed to resist mold

Nightlight and white noise machine

Smaller tank capacity

Coverage : 500 square feet

Tank capacity : 0.66 gallons

Dimensions : 8 x 7 x 10 inches

Settings : Auto, low, medium, and high, night light, sound machine

Why We Love It

One of the biggest drawbacks of having a humidifier for baby is the cleaning it requires, and some machines are tougher to wipe down than others. This Canopy humidifier has parts that can be tossed in the dishwasher, making it easier to clean than most. But the humidifier is more than just easy to clean: It’s also resistant to mold growth. Enjoy additional features like a white noise machine and night light, along with an antimicrobial filter that traps dust and other gunk. This machine can also run for up to 36 hours before needing a refill.

Community Reviews

Ashdarcan "We have the large one in our room, small one in my 2 year olds room and getting another for this baby’s nursery. Love that they don’t mold or get the pink goo that normal humidifiers get."

Brr0619 "We’ve had one for about a year and a half. I love how easy it is to change the filter and to clean it. The one we had before was awful to clean. We just use tap water and check the filter every few days to see if it needs to be replaced."

Best Humidifier for Bigger Bedrooms

Dreo Humidifier HM524

Quiet

easy-to-read display

excellent range

Three mist levels

Large footprint

Descaling cartridge sold separately

Coverage : 500 square feet

Tank capacity : 1.6 gallons

Dimensions : 5.91 x 11.42 x 12.4 inches

Settings : Variable output, night light, 0-12 hour timer

Why We Love It

If you’re looking for a humidifier that can handle larger rooms without stretching your budget, Dreo’s large-capacity humidifier is a standout pick. Sleek, quiet, and easy to use, it offers serious coverage and performance — up to 500 square feet — while still ringing in at under $60.

At nearly a foot tall, this is one of the biggest humidifiers on our list. It delivers an ultrafine, cool mist up to 40 inches high for even, room-wide hydration. The 1.6-gallon tank can run continuously for up to 60 hours in sleep mode, meaning fewer refills and more uninterrupted comfort. Despite its size, this humidifier operates at a near-silent 28 dB, making it ideal for nurseries.

Bonus: the top-fill design makes refilling and cleaning effortless, while the built-in humidity sensor automatically adjusts output. One WTE parent notes they love the modular design, making it easy to break down and clean. For extra peace of mind, the brand also separately sells a cartridge for descaling. The LED touch display lets you choose between three mist settings, set a timer (0–12 hours), or adjust the 15-degree nozzle for targeted misting. You can even add essential oils to the aroma tray for a calming touch or turn on the gentle night light to create a cozy bedtime glow.

Community Reviews

"I got a dreo one when LO got sick. I like it since it tells me the current humidity level in the room. so I have it set to turn on automatically."

"I think it’s worth it for when LO is sick. We have the Dreo (I think Amazon has it for less than $50 USD) and love it. It’s pretty easy to clean (we deep clean every week and change the water daily). I would recommend it."

"I’m not really sure but have had this problem with every previous humidifier where you can’t clean every nook and cranny. Bought the Dreo brand and you can disassemble every part to make sure it’s properly cleaned. Same with their fans."

What to Look for In a Baby Humidifier

There are a few factors to look for to make sure a baby humidifier will meet your needs.

Size : Each humidifier can only hold so much water. That’s why it’s important to look at the size of your baby’s room and the humidifier’s water tank capacity to make sure it will be able to distribute moisture throughout the night. Every product is different, but most 0.5 gallon tanks can push out moisture for 24 hours, while smaller and larger tanks will be able to go for longer.

Adjustments and settings: While they’re not a requirement, features like LCD screens, smart technology, scheduled run times and automatic on-off settings can make operation of your baby humidifier a little easier. You may also want to consider ultrasonic vs. evaporative humidifiers. “Ultrasonic humidifiers are quiet and create a very fine mist,” says Dr. Hes. “An evaporative humidifier pushes the water through a wick and removes particles in the water this way.”

Cleaning : Each humidifier has its own cleaning needs, making it important to read the manufacturer’s instructions carefully. Ultrasonic humidifiers can also turn bacteria and mold into a mist, making it important to follow the manufacturer’s instructions for cleaning, Hes says. The wick and filter must also be changed regularly in an evaporative humidifier “because they get very dirty,” Hes says. Dr. Wisniewski stresses the importance of being on top of cleanings. “From a safety perspective, you don’t want to have any sort of mold growth which would then be humidified through the air,” she says. “This can be dangerous because your child would be breathing it in. It is important to following the cleaning instructions on the box.”

FAQs

Should I use a humidifier for my baby?

The short answer is that it depends. But they can be helpful in certain climates and situations — the AAP suggests using a humidifier for baby if she has a cold , for example.

“Benefits for using a humidifier in the nursery include protecting your child's skin from drying out and decreasing nasal congestionby helping loosen mucus — especially helpful if he or she is having a cold,” says Dr. Ortiz. “This can be a good thing, as there are limited over-the-counter remedies for children in this age group.”

Humidifiers could also help keep skin moist if your child has eczema , and could help keep nosebleeds at bay, says Dr. Schumann.

But you don’t necessarily need to use a humidifier for this, says Dr. Collins. “We have recommended passive humidification by placing aluminum lasagna pans filled with several inches of water in a place where the child cannot access them,” she says. “Then, changing the water and washing the pans in a dishwasher daily. Think about it, you can clean an open pan much easier than a closed humidifier.”

When deciding whether your child's room needs a dehumidifier, you need to make sure that it doesn't make the room too humid or too dry.

"Children, especially young children, if the air is too dry, will produce mucus," says Dr. Ponda. "You can't have it too warm, where it's too humid or too dry. So in a nursery, it's okay to have a dehumidifier, but you want to make sure it can regulate the humidity and it's not something that sucks humidity out of the air only."

Where is the best place to put a humidifier in baby's room?

The point of a humidifier might be to increase the humidity of a room, but you don't want a jet of mist hitting your child's face.

“As a general rule, you want to place it in an area where the mist can disperse easily through the air, but not accumulate moisture on surfaces such as the crib or ceiling,” explains Dr. Ortiz. After all, accumulation of moisture can encourage mold growth, which could make your little one sick.

You also want to make sure that the humidifier (and its cord!) are completely out of reach from your baby, says Dr. Levine. “You also do not want to place it on an elevated surface where your baby might pull it down on themselves.”

Keep in mind the size of the nursery, too. “If you put it in a room that is much smaller than it is meant for, you will end up with condensation on surfaces, which can be a breeding ground for microorganisms,” says Dr. Levine. On the other hand, if the humidifier is placed in a room that’s too big, it won't properly do its job.

How and how often should you clean baby’s humidifier?

"One thing that you have to worry about with use of humidifiers is the risk for increased exposure to bacteria and molds, as well as particulate matter and chemicals from cleaning the humidifier," says Dr. Ortiz. "These problems can be avoided by using distilled water, a humidifier with a filter and regular cleaning of the humidifier per the manufacturer's recommendations."

Keep in mind that some models require cleaning as often as every one to three days. Carefully read the instructions on your humidifier so you know how often yours should be cleaned.

WhatToExpect.com, Colds in Babies: Causes, Symptoms, Tips and Remedies , November 2020. American Academy of Pediatrics, Caring for Your Child's Cold or Flu , April 2019. Mayo Clinic, Warm-Mist Versus Cool-Mist Humidifier: Which Is Better for a Cold? , July 2021. Mayo Clinic, Humidifers: Ease Skin, Breathing Symptoms , June 2021. Interview with Dyan Hes, M.D ., a pediatrician at Northwell Lenox Hill Hospital Interview with Emily Wisniewski, M.D. , a pediatrician with Mercy Family Care Physicians in Baltimore, Maryland Interview with Lauren Levine, M.D. , a pediatrician affiliated with NewYork-Presbyterian/Columbia University Irving Medical Center and NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital Interview with Ellen M. Schumann , M.D., a clerkship director at the Medical College of Wisconsin Interview with Luis E. Ortiz, M.D. , a physician in the Sleep Center at Johns Hopkins All Children’s Hospital Interview with Melanie Sue Collins , M.D., medical director of the Division of Pediatric Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine at Connecticut Children's Medical Center Interview with Punita Ponda, M.D. , a New York-based Northwell Health physician who specializes in allergy and immunology and pediatrics

Your Next Read

The 7 Best Baby Nasal Aspirators for Stuffy Little Noses Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Build A Cold and Flu Survival Kit To Get Your Baby Through Sick Season Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

7 Pacifiers Small Enough to Soothe a Preemie Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

5 Best Formula Dispensers That You Can Safely Stash in Your Diaper Bag Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

The 9 Best Baby Floor Seats, According to Parents and Experts Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

Can White Noise Help Your Baby Sleep Better? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Stuffy Nose in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Medicine Cabinet Essentials Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Colds in Babies: Causes, Symptoms, Tips and Remedies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window