10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday

half birthday celebration

From parties to photo shoots, these parents show how they make the milestone shine.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Your little one’s half-birthday is a great excuse to add another celebration to the calendar (not that you really need a reason to love on that cutie!). Planning for a half-birthday party can also be a nice way to break up an already festive month, if your baby’s birthday falls during a busy time of year.

“We already have two December birthdays and Chanukah… we simply can’t give enough time and money all at once," says What to Expect Community member @gardengirl4 . "We decided from the beginning to have a ‘birthday’ party on our son's half-birthday.”

Interested in doing the same? Creating new traditions for your family, like half-birthday parties, can help your children feel a sense of belonging, stability, and significance in the family, explains Francyne Zeltser, Psy.D ., a psychologist who practices in New York City. And starting this tradition when your baby is 6 months old is just plain fun!

Here are a few party ideas and adorable half-birthday themes to help you plan your own celebration.

1. Cut a whole cake in half

whole cake in half

Vanessa Villa hosted an intimate gathering with her husband and her daughter’s grandparents. She nabbed a few items from Amazon, like a baby crown, and also bought a cake she cut in half. “I celebrated every month, so when her half-birthday came, I knew I wanted to make it a little different and exciting both for her and us,” she says. “Hitting 6 months felt special, halfway to her first birthday! Documenting everything was super important to me so we could look back and enjoy those memories.”

2. Host a tiny picnic in the park

park 1/2 birthday

Sophie Taylor and her four kids were homebound with a cold all week, but wanted to celebrate her youngest’s 6-month milestone. They kept it simple and sweet with a picnic blanket, party hats, and balloons.

“I made party hats with my kids using supplies from Michaels,” Taylor says. “We bought pom poms, patterned cardstock, elastic ribbon, and double-sided tape. I bought a rattle with a round handle to tie balloons to for my baby to play with. He loved it, and so did my older kids. They love any opportunity for a celebration.”

3. Honor your MVP

basketball 1/2 birthday

“We’re a basketball family, so I went with the best theme!” Cari Guzman says about the half-birthday party she planned for her son Franco. “My family are Knicks fans and his dad’s a Lakers fan, and he loves LeBron James. To pull it off, she found basketball and “halfway to one” decorations on Amazon, and surrounded Franco’s high chair with black and orange balloons.

4. Take a moment to say, “Holy cow — our baby’s 6 months”

holy cowl 1/2 birthday

Farm animals and infants…name a more iconic duo. This sign by Katrina Cummins of With Love Design Co. ( @withlovedesignco.etx ) was a must for this cow-themed half-birthday celebration.

5. Make “halfway around the sun” cookies

cookie 1/2 birthday

WTE Community member @chutchison615 shared that she owns a cookie business that’s been on hold since her baby arrived, but she carved out some time (8 hours, to be exact!) to whip up these cookies. “My little guy’s name is Sonny, so we invited the grandparents over for a ‘halfway around the sun’ themed lunch,” she shared . If you want to do the same, but are less crafty in the kitchen (like me), you could order them from a local bakery or keep it simple with this sun-shaped cookie cutter set .

6. Snap photos with a half-dozen donuts

donuts 1/2 birthday

You can never go wrong with a party, but @MamaToTwo1824’s donut photoshoot proves that a few photos are all you need to capture this special time for you and your family. She grabbed a half-dozen mini powdered donuts and set them next to her smiling 6-month-old. The best part, besides this adorable laughing baby? You can indulge in the donuts after!

7. Take your baby out to the ballgame

ballgame 1/2 birthday

Here’s a home run for baseball fans: “My husband loves baseball, so we made a 'halfway to first' banner for pictures,” @Della35 posted in her WTE birth group, who shared photos taken at a local baseball field. There’s a similar banner available on Etsy, and you can complete the look with a baseball T-shirt, bat, ball and mitt.

8. Introduce baby to watermelon

watermelon 1/2 birthday

Perhaps the most popular half-birthday accessory? A watermelon cake. Around 6 months, babies will start trying their first foods. One favorite is watermelon, which is why several parents in the WTE Community have made watermelon cakes for their babies’ half-birthday. @babyj123’s 6-month-old gave a rave review after trying it: “I cut up a watermelon and he tore it up,” she wrote.

9. Gather for baby’s first DJ set

dj set half birthday

@Tatiana10505’s strawberry-themed half-birthday party included 30 family members and an important gift: the Fisher-Price DJ table. “My baby also had her first DJ set at 6 months in our living room. It’s over the top, but I literally waited so long for my baby girl,” she said. “Nothing is enough if you ask me! And my husband supports my shenanigans.”

10. Go all out with a “halftime” show

halftime show 1/2 birthday

Celebrating during football season? Take a page out of this @pumpkinsmom2223's playbook, who confessed, “I tend to be what my husband calls ‘extra’ lol,” and shared a callout to her fellow “extra people” in a post. Case in point: She hosted a football-themed halftime party, complete with signage and green and white balloons for her 6-month-old.

How to plan a half-birthday celebration for your child

Ready to add baby’s half-birthday to your family calendar? The options are endless! Here are some tips for planning your own gathering:

Consider the season. “A half-birthday offers the chance to celebrate in a completely different time of year than a child’s actual birthday , which can make it feel extra special,” Dr. Zeltser suggests. “For example, a child with a January birthday could enjoy a July half-birthday swim day, a picnic, or a boat ride, all activities that aren’t always possible in winter.”

Choose something simple. A party isn’t a requirement; all you have to do is choose something special to your family, without feeling pressure to do something wild and expensive, says. Dr. Zeltser. “The most meaningful traditions are often the simplest, and those that can be repeated easily." Maybe it’s always eating breakfast for dinner, taking a walk together, or going to your favorite park for a picnic.

Don’t overthink it. Even if it’s a last-minute plan, just do it. “I grabbed a few cute accessories from Amazon, we invited the grandparents over, and sang happy birthday,” shares mom Vanessa Villa. “Simple but so memorable.”

What matters most about any half-birthday celebration is that the traditions are intentional and enjoyable, Dr. Zeltser says. “They’re opportunities to pause, connect, and celebrate the everyday moments that make childhood and family life so special.”

Francyne Zeltser, Psy.D ., psychologist, New York City.

Your Next Read

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From 'Half-Baked' Desserts to 'Half-Bloomed' Bellies: Inside the Middle-of-Pregnancy Photo Trend Taking Off Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 of Your Biggest Toddler Birthday Party Questions — Answered Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

30 Gender Reveal Ideas for Celebrating Your Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Traditional Baby Naming Ceremonies Are Getting a Modern Twist — Here's How to Plan Your Own Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw a Fall-Themed Baby Shower for Your Little Pumpkin Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window