Giggles are guaranteed with any of these adorable ideas.

Pregnancy is a whirlwind of changes, and some pretty funny ones at that. There are cravings that defy logic yet they become the norm, like pickles dipped in peanut butter. At a certain point, you may glance downward only to find your toes have disappeared from view. And let's not forget the endless supply of pregnancy-related puns that will have you giggling nonstop.

But amidst all the belly laughs, there's one thing for sure: pregnancy is an adventure filled with joy and surprises, and these clever pregnancy announcements capture the hilarious essence of the journey perfectly! From custom newspaper headlines to creative letterboard sayings, all of these are sure to bring a little levity and fun to your social media announcement (and we won't be surprised if you get a few of those laughter emojis in your comments).

Eating chocolate for two

eating for two

You’re growing a human, and you deserve all of the chocolate. The “Eating chocolate for two” shirt is a sweet focal point to share your exciting news.

Can we have the definition, please?

what's a big brother pregnancy annoucement

These soon-to-be big sisters have no idea what’s coming … to celebrate their baby brother’s upcoming arrival, the chalkboard donning "Wait, what's a big brother" and blue balloons double as a funny announcement and gender reveal .

Extra, extra, read all about it

newspaper pregnancy annoucement

Breaking news: You’re pregnant! Tell the world with a custom newspaper — and ideally, one with a funny headline, like “Oh snap, we're pregnant!”

Michael Scott and Dwight Schrute-approved announcement

the office pregnancy annoucement

If you’re a fan of The Office, wear one (or both!) of these shirts in your funny pregnancy announcement. Fact: The twist on Dwight Shrute’s favorite saying and spin on Michael Scott’s iconic line, “I declare bankruptcy!” to “I declare pregnancy!” is simply too good.

Pet parent must-have

WTEWYE pregnancy annoucement

We love how this creator came up with a pet-friendly version of the What to Expect When You’re Expecting book cover for their big announcement. Not sure this pet kitty knows what's coming, though!

LOL-worthy letterboard

last one letterboard

People might be surprised to hear another baby is on the way — including you. This cheeky letterboard donning the text, "Remember when we said we were done having kids? This is the last one!" will show that you’re laughing right along with everyone else.

Preparing for sleepless nights

sleeping in

It’s no secret that babies interrupt your normal sleep pattern, and this letterboard has the sarcastic tone you’ll need to share your “excitement” for fewer Zzzs. I mean, what's not to laugh at with an announcement like "We were just tired of sleeping in . And doing whatever we want all the time."

Punny pregnancy announcement

ice ice baby

What’s better than a pregnancy pun? The “Ice Ice” and arrow to your belly on this comfy tee will immediately signal the celebratory comments.

Photo opp outfit

read the fine print annoucement

Simultaneously subtle and funny, this sweatshirts asks your loved ones to read the fine print … which says you’re expecting . As a bonus, it’s super cozy and perfect to wear during and after pregnancy.

Onesies for twinsies

I am the last one onesies

Are you getting two for the price of one? The playful onesies on this digital pregnancy announcement are designed for twin parents with a good sense of humor about all of the diapers in their future. The first onesie says "I'm the last one," while the second onesie says "Just kidding, I am." Too cute.