Up the cute factor with a cutie-themed party — or opt for boho vibes while fêting your future babe. These unique gender reveal ideas will get the party planning started.

"It's a …" You may have waited a trimester or more to say those words. Gender reveal parties allow parents to gather with their loved ones and unveil the sex of their baby .

There are so many ways to decorate for your event, and it all starts with your gender reveal theme. Think about the time of year, your favorite things and other adorable nods to your bundle of joy. From there, you can envision the ultimate gender reveal party, complete with the photo-ready decor and delicious food .

With all of this in mind, let's dig into some unique gender reveal themes. Inspired by real events hosted by parents just like you, these are the most colorful, cute and special decor decisions for a gender reveal party .

Star gender reveal

moon and stars gender reveal theme

Turn one of the most beloved lullabies of all time into your gender reveal theme. Pile on the pastels and star decor for a "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star" setup. A sign featuring the lyric "How we wonder what you are?" will make the dreamy theme clear. Get bonus points for serving star-shaped cookies, wispy clouds of cotton candy and a moon-shaped gender reveal cake .

Boho gender reveal

boho gender reveal

A combination of chic and darling, the boho aesthetic is another elegant gender reveal theme. You can copy this style by combining a neutral color palette with a key botanical element that nearly all boho events come with: pampas grass. This outdoor, low-to-the-ground table arrangement is perfect for an intimate summer fête.

Bee gender reveal

bee gender reveal

You truly can't go wrong with a solid pun: What will baby bee? This bee-themed party skips blue and pink in favor of a yellow, brown, white and black color palette. You can adorn your space with bumblebee cut-outs, honeycomb shapes and much more to convey this gender reveal theme.

Picnic gender reveal

picnic gender reveal

For a casual, gorgeous gender reveal, invite your friends and family for a garden party-style celebration. A delicate pastel color palette, baby's breath flowers and a vintage-inspired tablescape will bring the romance and whimsy.

Harry Potter gender reveal

harry potter gender reveal

It goes without saying that your baby is not a Muggle — but is your little one a witch or wizard? Every Harry Potter fan will appreciate this magical theme. Decoration ideas can include chocolate truffles transformed into snitches, striped scarves and the Wizarding World's very own Hedwig the owl.

Clementine gender reveal

cutie clementine gender reveal

Perhaps you're currently craving clementines … or maybe you just love the color. Either way, taglining your celebration with "A Little Cutie Is On the Way" is pretty darn cute. Feature citrusy signature drinks (like "Momosas" and lemonade), lots of fresh fruit and orange balloons.

Tropical gender reveal

tropical gender reveal

Whether you live on an island or simply dream of babymooning on one, you can transform any spot into a tropical paradise. This brightly colored palette with birds of paradise, blue palm leaves and anthuriums comes courtesy of Oahu-based floral company Cocolani Gardens and Gentry Events . To top it all off, the company Designed With Aloha made the show-stopping marquee.

Beach gender reveal theme

beach gender reveal

While blue and pink certainly pair well together, there's just something about a neutral color palette. This one uses taupes and creams to create a beachy vibe. And if you're stumped on what to write on the invitations, borrow this line: "He or she, we can’t wait to sea."

Pumpkin gender reveal

halloween gender reveal

Bring on the hay, gourds and plaids for a fall- or Halloween-themed gender reveal. You can dress it up with a wooden sign announcing, "Our little pumpkin is on the way." Round out the party agenda with autumnal activities like carving pumpking, bobbing for apples or hosting a costume contest.

Football gender reveal

football gender reveal

Let's be real: Your baby's due date is basically your Super Bowl. Prep for the first quarter with a gender reveal theme sports fans will love. You can time your party to your team's next game, or simply set everything up as a fun off-season tailgate. Menu items could include veggie cups, chips, burgers and some baby-themed cookies like the ones shown here.

FAQ

What are good themes for a gender reveal?

Some fun themes for a gender reveal include:

Bees: What will baby bee?

Beach: He or she, we can’t wait to sea

Pumpkins: Our little pumpkin is on the way

Stars: Twinkle, twinkle, little star, how we wonder what you are?

Do you decorate for a gender reveal party?

Yes, you can decorate for a gender reveal with classic blue and pink balloons, streamers and more — or you can choose a unique theme and plan the decor around that.

What are some alternative colors for a gender reveal?

You don't have to use baby blue and pastel pink for a gender reveal. Seasonal colors — like orange and red for a fall party — or neutral hues such as beige and cream can also set the scene for your celebration.

Who should plan a gender reveal party?

Typically, the expecting parent(s) will plan a gender reveal party, but you can always ask for hosting help from friends and family.