Trick or treat, you’re growing two little feet!

Costumes, candy, creativity…there’s a lot to love about Halloween. And this year, you may be adding one more “treat” to the celebration: sharing news that you’re pregnant. You can find a costume that highlights your bump or get extra creative during your next pumpkin carving session.

Then grab your camera! Halloween pregnancy announcements can be spooky, sweet or a little bit of both. Share your announcement with your family and friends directly or post it to social media with a pun about becoming a “mummy.” Below, see our favorite ideas to announce the details about your new little pumpkin.

Black and white pumpkins

black and white pumpkins

The perfect combination of subtle and sweet, this Halloween pregnancy announcement features a “Coming soon” onesie, sonogram and neutral black and white pumpkins. It’s chic and festive all at the same time.

Mummy-to-be

mummy annoucement

You’re about to become a mummy! Pair one of the best holiday puns with an elaborate costume to share your happy news in a super cute, slightly spooky and ultra-creative way.

New boo

a new little boo

It’s finally time to tell everyone about your new little boo. This onesie from Dot + Dash , a U.K.-based custom children’s clothing brand, says it all, so there’s no need for a caption.

Carving creativity

big bro pumpkin

Take your pumpkin carving skills up a notch and share the “gourd” news. Here, two pumpkins share details about a mom’s son becoming a “big bro” and how there’s a little pumpkin growing in her belly.

Pumpkin with a paci

pumpkin with paci

Another pumpkin-related pick? A jack-o-lantern with a pacifier, sonogram and candles are all you need for a glowing Halloween pregnancy announcement.

Little Piglet arriving

little piglet arriving

You can dress up like Winnie the Pooh if you have a little piglet on the way. This quote from author A. A. Milne will cue the Awws: “If I’m thinking correctly, a new baby is probably, undoubtedly, the grandest gift that could ever be.” Sweeter than honey!

More than a costume

big brother

While some kids are focused on their costumes this year, the future big bro or sis in your life is gearing up for their most exciting role yet. Tell everyone with this clever sign by Little Lieu & Co .

Spooky and sweet skeletons

sweet and spooky skeletons

Get the whole family involved in a Halloween pregnancy announcement photoshoot. With everyone dressed as skeletons, you can really show off that baby skeleton painted onto Mom’s belly.

Adding a boo to the crew

adding a boo to the crew

This digital Halloween pregnancy announcement does all of the work for you. The result? A festive black and white flat-lay featuring pumpkins, bats and a letterboard with the cutest rhyme: “We are adding a little boo to our crew!”

Trick or treat

preg annoucement tshirts

Imagine showing up to your next family gathering wearing these T-shirts – your partner wearing a shirt that reads “It’s not a trick” and yours following with the message “We’re expecting a little treat.” It might require a double-take, but they’ll eventually get the message about your “little treat!”