Break a safe sweat, Mama! This express prenatal strength class tones your entire body in just 10 minutes.

There's a reason why the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends moms-to-be exercise for at least 30 minutes a day, most days of the week: Breaking a (safe) sweat has major benefits for both you and baby. In fact, working out during pregnancy has been linked to increased mood, more energy, even faster postpartum recovery for moms-to-be.

While more low-key exercises like walking and prenatal yoga are great choices, particularly if you're suffering from fatigue or nausea, you don't have to stick to gentle workouts when you're expecting. More challenging routines, such as body-weight strength exercises, are also okay — providing your doctor gives you the green light and you make pregnancy-safe modifications when necessary.

In this video, Obé Fitness certified instructor Kat Ellis demonstrates a 10-minute express strength class that's safe for moms-to-be. To do this workout at home, you'll need a mat, a resistance loop and a light set of weights (Ellis recommends between 3 and 5 pounds, but feel free to go lighter depending on how you're feeling).

"This 10-minute routine focuses on increasing your muscular endurance," Ellis says. "With the use of light dumbbells and body weight, each movement focuses on improving your core stability and posture — by the end, you'll walk away feeling stronger and more confident."

Below, a few of the moves you can expect in this video:

Crab Walk: With a resistance loop wrapped around your calves, take two steps to the left, then two steps back to the right. Pressing your knees against the band as you step helps activate the hips and glutes.

Monster Walk: With the loop still around your calves, step forward and backward instead of side to side.

Squat: This classic move tones your legs and glutes. After you bring the loop up towards your thighs, sit back into a squat position. Ellis shows us how to take this move one step further by pushing your knees in and out — your legs will feel the burn!

Squat With Dumbbell Press: Holding a light set of weights, you'll do another squat, this time reaching your dumbbells forward then bringing them in. Remember to breathe in and out.

Reverse Fly: With one leg forward and slightly bent, and the other leg a few steps behind, you'll lift your dumbbells up and down in a "fly" position. This move strengthens your arms and upper back.

Hip Lifts: While lying on your side, you'll lift up your hips and down to gently tone your obliques.

Want more prenatal fitness videos? Head to obefitness.com , an online library of more than 2,500 workout videos and 14 live classes daily. Use the code WTE30 for 30 percent off your first month.