Common Childhood Poisons

accidental childhood poisoning, toddler with medicine in hands

What's the best way to prevent your child from swallowing something dangerous? Poison-proofing your home. Here are the steps you can take to protect your child.

No matter how carefully you've baby- and toddler-proofed your home, your child might still find a way to get her hands on a poisonous product — and then put it in her mouth. After all, accidents do happen.

Roughly 66,000 kids under 5 go to the ER each year because they've swallowed or touched something poisonous, according to the Consumer Product Safety Commission. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionAnnual Report on Pediatric Poisoning Fatalities and InjuriesSee All Sources [1] Most of these childhood poisonings involve common household items like makeup, plants and hand sanitizer — items you wouldn't necessarily think to stash in hard-to-find places.

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionAnnual Report on Pediatric Poisoning Fatalities and InjuriesSee All Sources

No one wants their toddler to end up in the ER. But little kids are curious, and no parent can be 100 percent vigilant. That's why it's important to know the most common household hazards, the signs of poisoning in children and the steps to take to prevent your tot from ingesting something harmful in the first place.

Most common causes of poisoning in kids

Many of these items will cause an upset stomach, diarrhea or vomiting, but some of them can be downright dangerous or even fatal. Trusted SourcePoison ControlTop 10 and Top 10 for KidsSee All Sources [2] Here are the items that poison the greatest number of children under 6, plus specific examples you should pay close attention to:

Trusted SourcePoison ControlTop 10 and Top 10 for KidsSee All Sources

1. Makeup and personal care products

Take special care with the items you might leave out on the bathroom counter or bedroom dresser, including:

Hand sanitizer, mouthwash, perfumes and cologne that contain alcohol Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursHousehold Safety: Preventing PoisoningSee All Sources [3]

Hair dyes, hair sprays, nail polish and nail polish remover

Makeup that contains ingredients like mercury, cadmium, lead and arsenic Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsFace Paint and Makeup: Choose Carefully to Avoid Toxic IngredientsSee All Sources [4]

2. Cleaning products

Some of the most common culprits in the cleaning category include:

Laundry packets or pods

Products with bleach

3. Medications, both prescription and over-the-counter

Since pills can resemble candy, medicine can hold a lot of appeal to toddlers. Common medications reported to Poison Control include:

Pain relievers like ibuprofen

Blood pressure medications

Antidepressants

ADHD meds

4. Vitamins, supplements and herbal products

Yes, even vitamins can hurt your little one in excess amounts. Watch out for:

Vitamins A, C and D, which can be toxic in large doses

Iron-fortified vitamins (including prenatal supplements )

Melatonin (in large amounts) Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicMelatonin Overdoses in ChildrenSee All Sources [5]

5. Foreign objects

Besides posing a choking hazard , these items can also create other health problems if ingested:

Toys and toy parts

Silica gels

Coins

Button batteries

6. Topical creams

Lotions and prescription creams like the following also need to get stashed away:

Diaper rash products (in very large amounts)

Steroid creams (in large amounts)

Antibiotic creams (in large amounts)

7. Tobacco products

It goes without saying but tobacco products — including vapes — don't belong near your child.

E-cigarettes

Liquid nicotine refills Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsPoison Prevention and Treatment Tips for ParentsSee All Sources [6]

8. Antihistamines

Coming in eighth place is allergy medications such as:

Benadryl

Nytol

9. Pesticides

These hide not only the garage but also in your kitchen and bathroom. Some common ones include:

Weed killers

Bug sprays

Flea and tick preventatives for pets

Lice medications

10. Plants

Take care when choosing your floral decor, especially during the holidays. Some poisonous plants include:

Mistletoe

Holly

Lilies

Poinsettias

Signs of poisoning in babies and kids

Besides finding an open container or bottle, look for these signs if you suspect your child has swallowed something dangerous:

Burns or redness around the mouth and lips (a sign your child drank something caustic)

Breath that smells like chemicals

Burns, stains and smells on your child, her clothes or elsewhere in the house

Vomiting , difficulty breathing, sleepiness, confusion or other strange behavior

Heavy drooling Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursFirst Aid: PoisoningSee All Sources [7]

Seizures

Unconsciousness

What to do if you think your child swallowed poison

Your next steps depend on your child's status:

If your child is awake and stable

Don't give ipecac syrup or try to make her throw up. Doctors say this can do more harm to your little one. Instead, call Poison Control at 800-222-1222 (in the United States) or visit the Poison Control website.

Tell the person who answers as much information as you know: what you think your child swallowed, when and how much. (It helps if you have the bottle that contains the poisonous substance.) Then follow instructions on what to do.

If the poison control expert tells you to go to the ER and you have the substance container, then take that with you to show the ER doctor exactly what your child ingested.

If your child is listless, having seizures or having difficulty breathing

Call 911 or get emergency medical care right away.

How to prevent poisoning

It's virtually impossible to guard against every danger, but the more steps you take to poison-proof your home, the safer you can keep your family.

Save the poison-control number (800-222-1222) in your phone, and post it in the kitchen, bedroom and bathroom. Also post your child's age and weight, as well as any health conditions, in the kitchen in case a babysitter needs to report that information to the poison control center when you're gone.

Don't throw medications away in open trash containers. Your toddler or mobile baby might get to them. Follow the disposal instructions on the medication's label, but make sure it's disposed of in a closed container that your child can't get into.

Never call medicine or supplements "candy," since this could entice your toddler to try to eat more of it. Even your tot's vitamins can be harmful if taken in large doses.

Keep prescriptions private. Avoid taking medications in front of your little one, since little kids often try to imitate what you do.

Store potential dangers in childproofed cabinets . These include all medications, cleaning and laundry supplies, alcoholic beverages and cosmetics. A one-a-day pill dispenser or bottle of cough syrup can look like candy or a toy to a young child.

Administer medicine carefully. To avoid an accidental medication overdose , always get dosing instructions from your practitioner in milliliters (mL). Use a dosing syringe — not a dosing cup or spoon, and never a kitchen spoon. Turn on the lights if it's nighttime, and read the dosage information carefully first. Ask your pediatrician if you're at all unclear on how to give your child the medicine.

Ask for child-resistant safety caps. That goes for for prescription medications for everyone in your family. Search out child-proof packaging for over-the-counter medicines and other hazardous products — like cleaning supplies — too. Keep all medications in their original child-resistant containers, and always replace the safety caps after you've taken the medicine.

Buy only nontoxic art supplies, including face paint.

Remind visitors (who may not consider the risks of childhood poisoning) to keep medications in places your little one won't find them (not in an open purse or on the coffee table).

Childproof your garage and utility room. Store all dangerous substances like gasoline, antifreeze, fertilizer, pesticides, paint and windshield-washing fluid in locked cabinets. And as with medicine, keep these dangerous substances in their original containers.

Get to know your houseplants. Know what kinds of plants you have and whether or not they could be poisonous. If you do have a dangerous plant, keep it far from your child's reach or consider getting rid of it.

Beware of lead poisoning. If your house was built before 1978, get the paint on the interior and exterior tested for lead. Also, stay up to date on toy recalls due to lead paint . You can get email notifications from the Consumer Product Safety Commission .

Put remote controls, key fobs and cards that play music out of reach. They have small button-sized batteries that pose a choking and poisoning risk.

Supervise your child as much as you can — especially when you're away from home — to avoid accidental childhood poisoning.

Taking these steps may not prevent every single accident, but you'll have done your best to prevent accidental poisoning. Another important strategy: Teach your child limits and how to keep away from danger.