Ready to share you're expecting a new little turkey? Here are some adorable ideas full of gratitude, excitement and turkey puns, of course.

Thanksgiving is a holiday that welcomes feelings of gratitude for family and friends, and this year, there’s one more thing to be thankful for: that little dinner roll you’re growing. If you’re gearing up to tell loved ones about your pregnancy during the big Thanksgiving feast, you can lean into all the baking puns and stuffing jokes. There’s no better way to welcome the start of the holiday season than with a Thanksgiving pregnancy announcement to honor the tiny turkey cooking in your belly.

Whether you’re looking for something punny, sweet as pie or super sentimental, here are a few of our fall-forward favorites:

Holiday-centric cookies

holiday cookies

Nothing is sweeter than sharing the news that you’re expecting. These festive pumpkin and onesie-shaped cookies read "Extra Thankful This Year" and are perfect to bring to the holiday table. They can even double as the ultimate announcement when you’re ready to post on social media!

An updated Thanksgiving menu

Thanksgiving pregnancy announcement

There’s more than turkey cooking this year, so why not share that with a sign like this one that is Thanksgiving-inspired checklist reading, "What is Cooking for Thanksgiving This Year? Turkey, Pie and BABY." The punny marquee is all family and friends need to see to understand that there’s a little bun in the oven.

Thankful for a little sibling

thankful sibling

If you have a soon-to-be big bro or sis in the family, spread the word with an adorable update detailing your kiddo’s upcoming “promotion.” You can create a checklist sign like this one that reads "This year, I'm thankful for friends and family, toys and becoming a BIG SISTER ," or include this message in your social media caption.

Fall festive announcement

fall festive annoucement

The fall season brings a coziness that calls for warm colors and blankets. With fall leaves, a pumpkin, sonogram and “New to the Crew” onesie, there’s a lot to love about this flat-lay setup that includes a flannel fall blanket atop a bed of pine straw — we couldn't have created a better fall-inspired backdrop ourselves!

Sweater weather celebration

sweater weather annoucement

You have even more to be thankful for this holiday season, and it’s time to share why. The decorative pumpkins, leaves and blanket tie everything together with this Thanksgiving pregnancy announcement. We’re also obsessed with the adorable pumpkin baby beanie.

Turkey in the oven onesie

turkey in the oven

Little does everyone know that there’s a tiny turkey cooking, too! With this onesie , you can let everyone know that you’re parents-to-be — and when the “timer” will go off.

Eating for two

eating for two

Your lil’ slice is coming soon, and now you’re eating pumpkin pie for two. This T-shirt that reads "Pumpkin pie for two please!" gets extra points for style and comfort, and it provides the perfect photo opp on Thanksgiving Day.

Extra gratitude ‘gram

extra gratitude

If you’re not feeling creative this season, you can purchase a digital Thanksgiving pregnancy announcement on Etsy. This one that reads "One More Person to Be Thankful For This Year" features all of your favorite fall colors and a letterboard expressing your profound gratitude.

Stuffed turkey sweatshirt

stuffed turkey sweatshirt

Have a little fun with your Thanksgiving pregnancy announcement when you wear this “stuffed turkey” sweatshirt at the big meal. The two little feet will subtly signal your big news , too.

Thankful for two

thankful for two

To make a subtle statement, wear this “thankful for two” sweatshirt as family and friends gather for cookies and pie to celebrate your sweet news.