10 Things I Wish Someone Had Told Me About the Third Trimester of Pregnancy

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

10 things I wish someone had told me in the third trimester of pregnancy

A letter from one mom to moms-to-be about the joys and challenges of the final months of expecting a baby.

Congrats! You’ve made it to the third trimester. That means you’ve survived the borderline-debilitating fatigue and morning sickness of the first trimester and the not-exactly-fun glucose screening of the second trimester. Now you’re in the home stretch.

Full disclosure, some days will be better than others as you countdown to meeting your newborn. While it’s not all sunshine and roses 24-7, here are a few things to (try to) keep in mind.

Key Takeaways:

You’re so close! The last trimester can seem endless and uncomfortable, but you’re nearly at the end (hang in there).

Your body is busy. There’s lots going on as your due date nears, including forgetfulness, Braxton-Hicks contractions, and heartburn — all of which are very normal.

Schedule some “me time.” It’s wise to set aside a few moments for yourself during the third trimester (maybe a warm bath, some fun reading, or a cozy nap).

1. You’ve got this

Before we get down to the details, I’d like to start by saying you’ve got this. Seriously. You may begin to wonder if there ever was a time when you were not pregnant — and if there ever will be a time when you won’t be pregnant. But there was — and there will be. And that future is going to be here sooner than you think. Pat yourself on the back because you have already been through so much and you’ve made it every step of the way. All the moments — joyful and challenging — will be worth it for what you will gain.

2. Enjoy it

I know , it sounds like an oxymoron. How can you enjoy feeling bloated and like you have to pee every seven minutes? But it’s the last few months you’ll have without a child (or two or three children, if this isn’t your first rodeo). Of course, there are a million and one delightful things about having kids, but your life is forever changed (in a good way) once you become a mother. Try to honor these final months of "me time" when your baby is still on the inside — and get as much sleep as you can!

3. You may get heartburn

Thanks to the hormonal changes that cause the muscle at the top of your stomach to relax, heartburn is fairly common in pregnancy in general. For many women, though, it really kicks in around the third trimester when the uterus has taken over the abdominal cavity. Delightful? Not exactly. But while heartburn can be a big pain in the, well, throat, you can relax knowing that it will go away after you give birth.

You’re almost there! Join our supportive Community via the What to Expect app for more advice and expert tips as your big day approaches.

4. Nesting kicks in

For many (but not all) women, the nesting instinct goes into overdrive toward the end of pregnancy. What does this mean? Oh, you know, you just may find yourself organizing and reorganizing the baby's closet 900 times or regrouting your already-clean bathroom in the middle of the night: You’re preparing your “nest” for your baby.

“Once I was out of bed, I definitely was ready to clean everything in sight," says What to Expect Community parent R3dhead. "I started with the dirty dishes and quickly moved on to pulling all of the clothes out of the dirty clothes hamper.”

5. You may often feel like you’re going into labor

Despite the fact that your doctor or midwife described ad nauseam the signs of labor to look out for, you may still find yourself wondering if you’re in labor from time to time. The cause? Braxton Hicks . Braxton Hicks can start in the second trimester and happen regularly in the third. During Braxton Hicks, your uterus tightens up and releases irregularly. Basically, it’s your body preparing for when it’s really go-time.

6. You might have super crazy dreams

Pregnancy dreams can get pretty kooky and that goes double during your third trimester when hormones and disrupted sleep are at an all-time high. Rest easy — or as easy as you can — knowing that there’s nothing weird about your, well, super weird dreams .

7. “Pregnancy brain” is a thing

Lack of sleep and stress in the third trimester make for the perfect “pregnancy brain” cocktail. In other words, you may feel super forgetful during this trimester. Rest assured that forgetfulness will ease up after your baby is born. The key here is not to get too anxious when something slips your mind. You’re growing a baby, remember? That’s enough work for anyone!

8. Your back might feel really achy

In addition to your growing belly causing your spine to arch a bit, the pregnancy hormone relaxin loosens your joints, making for an uncomfy back at the end of your pregnancy. While it’s definitely not great, it’s a perfect excuse to take a load off — and maybe get a prenatal massage — whenever you can.

9. You might pee your pants a little

Thanks to all that extra weight on your pelvic floor, losing control of your bladder here and there — particularly when you sneeze — isn’t uncommon in the third trimester. The solution? Panty liners, and make sure to keep up your Kegel exercises .

10. Nerves are totally normal

Here’s the honest truth: It would be weird not to be nervous at the end of your pregnancy. Not only are you about to undergo a major life upheaval, but your hormones are out of whack and you’re woefully lacking in the sleep department! Of course you’re nervous. Trust that everything will work out and you will be okay, though. In fact, you’ll be better than okay. You’re going to be a parent. And nothing — not even 12 straight hours of sleep — is better than that.

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

What to Expect When You’re Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, “Pregnancy Brain” or Forgetfulness During Pregnancy , August 2022. WhatToExpect.com, 16 Signs of Labor — Here’s What to Expect When It’s Go-Time , July 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Heartburn During Pregnancy , October 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Why You Might Feel Bloated When You’re Pregnant — and What You Can Do About It , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Controlling Your Bladder During Pregnancy (Urinary Incontinence) , September 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Your Vivid Pregnancy Dreams Are Totally Normal. Here’s What They Mean , January 2025.

Updates history

November 11, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

The Ultimate Third Trimester Checklist: Everything to Do Before Your Baby’s Birthday Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Warning Signs You Shouldn't Ignore in the Third Trimester Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

How the Second Trimester Brings Relief, New Milestones, and Big-Time Baby Growth Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Exercise in the Third Trimester Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The 11-Step First Trimester Checklist That’ll Keep You Sane While Growing a Human Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

You Made It Through Birth — Now Comes the Beautiful, Bumpy Postpartum Ride (Aka The '4th Trimester') Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Listen Up, Second-Time Moms: 9 Ways Your Second Pregnancy May Surprise You Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Why You're So Fatigued in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The 3 Stages of Labor: What Happens and When Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Pregnancy Sex Through the Trimesters Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

15 Moms on What Labor Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window