Twincoming! There are two babies on the way.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Discovering not one but two heartbeats can be a whirlwind of emotions for parents-to-be — excitement and a touch of overwhelm all rolled into one. And when the news of twins hits your loved ones, brace yourselves for double the surprise!

From adorning two tiny onesies with a heartfelt message, to crafting a clever pun that’ll have everyone smiling, there are lots of ways to spring the surprise on your loved ones. If two times the diapers and two times the fun are in your future, here are some super cute ideas for sharing your news.

1. Custom *twin*sie

spradlin twins

We propose that all twin-related onesies be called twinsies.This one from @taylor.spradlin celebrates the highly anticipated arrival of their twin babies, who are coming soon.

2. Double trouble

double trouble

@curlytwinmomma leaned into the surprise element of having twins with these matching “double trouble” outfits and a funny letterboard message. “We’re just as shocked as you” is relatable, understandable and quite adorable.

3. Dr. Seuss-approved

dr suess announcement

Inspired by the cartoon twins in The Cat in the Hat, these onesies are perfect for telling everyone that the cat’s out of the bag! Complete with sonograms for both babies, this twin pregnancy announcement from @sidandtwins has it all.

4. Two-for-one fun

two for one announcement

These coordinating onesies are LOL-worthy and sure to make your loved ones smile. Pair them with a sonogram and letterboard to complete the flat-lay for your social media post .

5. For twin dads-to-be

twin dad pregnancy announcement

Get into those twin puns ASAP by snagging this shirt for Dad that says "Make it a double - Twin Dad." Although this adventure is sure to involve a different kind of "double," the T-shirt comes in several colors and sizes S to XXL.

6. For twin moms-to-be

twin moms announcement

You are booked, busy, and mentally preparing for two. This on-trend shirt that says "I can't, I'm busy growing twins" is all you need to make the big reveal.

7. Twice as sweet

twice as nice announcement

Digital announcements make it easier than ever to create a pregnancy announcement. This one is fit for foodies, since it shows a sonogram and slice of cake with the message, “twice as sweet.”

8. Creative and custom

custom announcement

These two onesies work together to create the ultimate twin pregnancy announcement: One says "Guess what? And the other says "Guess what else?" So funny! When you order, make sure to personalize it with the month and year of your babies’ arrival .

9. Keeping a secret

keeping a secret announcement

One other option? A twin spin on the classic pregnancy announcement phrase, “We’ve been keeping a little secret." These onesies are double the fun.

10. Two tiny miracles

two tiny miracles

In honor of her IVF journey, @badleyboys_twins posted a flat-lay with two onesies displaying a message: “Sometimes you wish so hard for a miracle … That you’re blessed with TWO!!” This is beyond special!

What Our Community Is Talking About

Twin delivery

How many weeks did you start to notice a bump?

When did your twins arrive?

There are 17,727 active discussions happening now in our Multiples and Twins community group.