10 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a prune.

You’re now in month 3 of your pregnancy, and your baby has officially graduated from an embryo to a fetus. You may just be starting to show at 10 weeks pregnant (though if there are no signs of a bump yet, that’s normal too), and you might also notice visible veins and increased vaginal discharge .

Your Baby at Week 10

At a Glance

Baby's first teeth

While baby-to-be’s pearly whites won’t appear until she's about 6 months old, teeny tooth buds are now developing under the gums.

Tummy time

This week, the stomach is producing digestive juices and the kidneys are making larger quantities of urine.

Building bones

Bones and cartilage are forming this week, knees and ankles are starting to take shape, and tiny elbows are already working!

10 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 10 weeks pregnant, you're in month 3 of your pregnancy. Only 6 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 10 weeks?

Your baby's growth is fast and furious when you are 10 weeks pregnant. She's nearly 1½ inches long and the size of a prune, but not nearly as shriveled — even with all the time spent in water.

The start of the fetal period

Congratulations! Your baby has officially graduated this week from embryo to fetus.

Baby's bones form

Your baby is really taking a human shape now. Bones and cartilage are forming and small indentations on the legs are developing into knees and ankles. The arms, complete with elbows, can flex already — how's that for magical?

Still, don't run to the store for a baseball bat just yet. Though your baby's arms are taking shape and getting stronger, each one is still teeny-tiny.

Baby's first teeth

The tooth bud fairy is making an appearance this week, heralding the arrival of your baby's little choppers , which are forming under the gums. But those pearly whites won't break through the gums until your baby is close to 6 months old .

Other systems are a go too. Your baby's stomach is producing digestive juices, the kidneys are producing larger quantities of urine, and if it's a boy, your little one is already producing testosterone.

Your Body at Week 10

Symptoms may persist

You may still be noticing some of those fun pregnancy symptoms sticking around. All clogged up? For many moms-to-be, those pesky pregnancy hormones cause the smooth muscles of the large bowel to fall down on the job — they get sluggish and you get constipated.

Fiber in the form of whole grains, fruits, and veggies can help, as can drinking lots of water and exercising regularly.

Still coping with nausea and vomiting? Your doctor may suggest one or more of these morning sickness remedies .

Your 10 weeks pregnant belly

If you haven't already looked in the mirror lately and examined your newly pregnant body and your 10-weeks-pregnant belly, take a deep breath, take off your clothes, and go for it.

First thing you're likely to notice at 10 weeks pregnant is a slightly rounder lower abdomen.

In other words, at 10 weeks pregnant, you may be just starting to show. That’s because your ever-growing uterus is now somewhat larger than a grapefruit. But don't worry if you can't quite see your bump at 10 weeks yet — you will soon enough.

Remember that pretty much anything is normal when it comes to your baby bump. Some women show earlier and others show later depending on their height, weight, and build. If it’s your first pregnancy, you may show a bit later than if it’s your second (or third!) pregnancy. Talk to your doctor if you’re concerned, but don’t worry. Pretty much anything goes!

Visible veins

Second thing you might notice are all those blue lines that have suddenly appeared on your skin, crisscrossing your breasts and abdomen.

These visible veins can appear on both light and dark complexions. What you're seeing is the expanded network of veins that's carrying the increased blood supply needed to nourish your growing fetus.

As your pregnancy progresses, you'll also notice that the veins in your hands and feet seem larger and more prominent too. During pregnancy, the average woman's blood volume increases by a little under 50%, and the veins have to keep up so they can go with the flow.

So consider those blue lines on your body to be a pregnancy badge of honor: Wear them with pride and with the comforting knowledge that they'll disappear for good once your baby's born and you're no longer breastfeeding (if you do).

Curing constipation

Constipation is an all-too-common first trimester pregnancy symptom. What can you do about it? First, steer clear of foods that'll clog up the works like refined white breads, rice, and pasta. Second, fixate on fiber: Choose whole grains, like fiber-rich cereals, and fresh fruit, like kiwis — a fine, furry friend to those who are constipated.

Dried fruit is a great option too. Beyond that geriatric favorite, prunes, try all your favorite fruits dried — apricots, peaches, pears, apples, blueberries, cherries … you name it! Or, choose raw or lightly cooked vegetables, nuts, and seeds.

Third, wash that fiber down — and through your system — with plenty of fluids, particularly water and juice. If you close your eyes, V8 tastes just like champagne! Well, sort of.

And finally, remember that getting moving can keep things moving — another good reason to put exercise on the agenda.

If the situation doesn't improve in a couple of days, swallow your pride, and call your practitioner, who may have a few special tricks up that white-coated sleeve. Don't use any over-the-counter remedies without consulting your doctor first.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 10

Fatigue

You probably still feel as if your get-up-and-go has gotten up and gone, but don’t worry — in about a month you’ll be feeling less tired. In the meantime, don’t be super mom-to-be. Ask for help, get some rest, and work in some exercise when you can. Yes, it seems counterintuitive to go out for a walk when you want to crawl into bed, but you’ll feel peppier afterward — and you’ll sleep better too.

Nausea and vomiting

What’s the worst thing you can do if you’re feeling queasy? Skip a meal. Missing a meal just makes those queasy feelings more intense. But if eating anything is really turning your stomach, try acupressure bands. And sucking on ginger candy — or drinking real ginger ale — will help too.

Bloating and gas

As your hormones continue to relax all your muscles, the muscles in your gastrointestinal tract are relaxing too. That means more indigestion and more intestinal gas. Your best bet is to stay away from foods that produce the most gas. You may find it helpful to keep a record of what you eat to see whether there’s a connection between certain foods and gas. Then you can avoid those triggers — or at least warn your partner!

Occasional headaches

What accounts for these new pregnancy headaches? Blame hormones — they’re a convenient scapegoat! — but other triggers include fatigue, hunger, and stress. Your doctor will probably okay acetaminophen, but not ibuprofen, or may recommend acupuncture. It’s also worthwhile to try other ways to soothe your savage head: Lie down in a dark room, put a cold compress on your face or neck, and take fresh-air breaks.

Round ligament pain

Like so many pregnancy symptoms, round ligament pain — which is just a fancy name for those growing pains in that burgeoning belly of yours — is probably something you never expected. What’s causing them? The ligaments on the right and left side of your lower belly are stretching out and getting thinner. As your belly gets heavier, the weight pulls on the ligaments, causing sharp or dull pain — especially when you walk or turn to the side. The best thing to do? Get off your feet and get comfy.

Food cravings and aversions

Between those queasy feelings and food aversions, you may have kept your weight gain down. And that’s okay — your baby’s nutritional needs are miniscule at this point. But even so, you don’t want to go crazy on cravings. It’s okay to indulge once in a while or eat a bite-sized piece of chocolate instead of a brownie, but if your cravings are getting out of hand, try some distractions: Call a friend, read a book, head to the gym, or go for a walk.

Heartburn and indigestion

A good way to prevent heartburn? Don’t eat while you’re lying down — or don’t lie down right after eating a big meal, even though the bed beckons you! And use pillows to prop up your head about 6 inches when you sleep. That should keep those gastric juices down.

Increased vaginal discharge

You’ve got more blood flowing to the pelvic area (good for your sex life) thanks to the pregnancy hormone estrogen, as well as more mucus. The result is a thin, milky-white discharge that you may be seeing now. It’s harmless, so don’t bother with special wipes or washes — these could change the delicate balance of your genital tract and lead to irritation. Stay dry by wearing panty liners.

Faintness or dizziness

Your body is still getting used to all that blood pumping through it, so it’s no wonder you feel dizzy occasionally. Try to change positions slowly and be sure to sit or lie down as soon as you feel light-headed so you don’t fall. If you start to see stars, lowering your head could help you feel less faint. And to decrease future dizzy spells, carry healthy snacks around for a quick blood-sugar boost and stay hydrated.

Visible veins

That increased blood supply is also responsible for the road map of veins crisscrossing their way across your belly and breasts. Those veins are doing the important work of taking nutrients and blood to your baby. So there’s nothing you can do but wait. They will disappear though!

Tips for You This Week

Take the ride in stride

Crying uncontrollably one minute, laughing hysterically the next? These emotional highs and lows are par for the pregnancy course.

Mood swings are mostly felt during the first trimester, with a second trimester break. But be forewarned: They often return for the last few months of pregnancy.

Avoid triggering smells

Thanks to a much more sensitive sense of smell , you may find once-appetizing aromas suddenly offensive — and offensive ones downright sickening.

, you may find once-appetizing aromas suddenly offensive — and offensive ones downright sickening.

So stay away from any smells that trigger nausea as much as possible — whether it’s the sausage and eggs your partner likes to make on the weekends or the cologne or perfume that used to make you head over heels but now makes you head for the toilet.

Steer clear of foods that you can’t stand the sight of too. Raw chicken, for example, is a common culprit.

Get the COVID-19 vaccine

When you’re pregnant, you’re at an increased risk of complications from COVID-19, so it’s smart to get the COVID-19 vaccine (now offered as a single-dose shot that covers different dominant strains of the virus during the current season like the flu shot).

(now offered as a single-dose shot that covers different dominant strains of the virus during the current season like the flu shot).

The vaccine is available to all adults, including pregnant women. Not only has it been shown to be safe during pregnancy, but it may also help protect your newborn from COVID-19 during the first few months of life, before your baby is able to get a COVID shot . Research has found that the antibodies from pregnant and breastfeeding women can be passed on in utero and through breast milk.

The vaccine is available to all adults, including pregnant women. Not only has it been shown to be safe during pregnancy, but it may also help protect your newborn from COVID-19 during the first few months of life, before your

Talk to your doctor or midwife if you have any questions.

Add mangoes to your plate

All fruits are good for you, but mangoes are particularly great for the pregnant set. They contain more vitamins A and C bite-for-delicious-bite than a salad.

This tropical favorite, also packed with potassium, is especially versatile — a perfect complement to sweet and savory dishes. Blend mango into smoothies or soups, chop it up in salsas or relishes, or simply scoop and enjoy.

Chew sugarless gum

If you’ve been suffering from morning sickness, you may also have noticed another unusual symptom: excess saliva . While annoying, all that extra saliva actually helps protect your mouth, teeth, and throat from the corrosive effects of stomach acid.

. While annoying, all that extra saliva actually helps protect your mouth, teeth, and throat from the corrosive effects of stomach acid.

Excess saliva typically goes away after the first trimester (not long now!), but in the meantime, you can find relief by chewing sugarless gum, sucking on ice, or eating or drinking something sour, like lemon slices.

Know that fatigue is normal

Are your two favorite pastimes sitting and lying down? Pregnancy fatigue is normal. That's because you're running a baby-making factory that's in business 24/7, causing your pregnant body to work harder at rest than your non-pregnant body did on the run.

Are your two favorite pastimes sitting and lying down?

is normal. That's because you're running a baby-making factory that's in business 24/7, causing your pregnant body to work harder at rest than your non-pregnant body did on the run.

And for the next few weeks, a baby's not the only thing in production — so is the placenta, the magnificently complex mission control that will serve as your baby's life support system until delivery. The result? You feel tired and overworked, even when you’re not doing a darn thing.

Your energy should return once the placenta's up and running and your system adjusts as best as it can to the hormonal changes of pregnancy — probably early in the second trimester.

In the meantime, keep your blood-sugar levels up with frequent snacks of complex carbs and protein, like cheese and crackers, or nuts and dried fruit.

And try a little exercise, which can actually give you an energy boost. Most of all — listen to your body. When it calls for a break, take one.

Exercise for morning sickness?

Should you or shouldn't you work out in the first trimester , especially when you're grappling with morning sickness ? That all depends on how a workout makes you feel .

If the queasies still have you down, try stepping outside for a brisk walk . Chances are, you'll feel better after about 15 minutes — both from the fresh air and the exercise.

. Chances are, you'll feel better after about 15 minutes — both from the fresh air and the exercise.

Other workouts are fine too if they sit well with your stomach. Just make sure you have a tummy-approved snack (nothing that's likely to come back up during warm-ups) before and after you workout, and don't forget to stay hydrated.