The 11 Best Diaper Rash Creams That Soothe Baby’s Symptoms STAT

Best Diaper Rash Creams featuring Tubby Todd, The Honest Company, Burt's Bees, and Mustela

The first time I spotted red, raised bumps on my baby’s bottom, I panicked and grabbed the first cream I could get my hands on at the drugstore. Now, four kids later, I’ve learned that the best diaper rash creams shine in different scenarios — whether you’re dealing with a sudden flare-up, a severe case, or preventing irritation from even occurring in the first place.

Diaper rash is one of those rites of passage most parents don’t exactly look forward to. It’s a common skin irritation typically caused by a mix of moisture, friction, and irritants due to enzymes in poop and pee. Other times, the ingredients in your diaper or bath products can be the culprit. And for whatever reason, some babies are just more rash-prone than others due to their sensitive skin (my youngest falls in this camp!).

Needless to say, I’ve built up quite the arsenal of rash treatments. I’ve found that the best diaper rash creams are amazingly effective at soothing skin almost instantly . My go-to — and What to Expect’s overall pick — is Triple Paste’s 3X Max Ointment . It once cleared up my daughter’s raw, intense rash overnight. But there are plenty of other standouts I’ve turned to over the years, such as affordable alternatives or those with a lighter consistency, because every baby is different. Remember: What works for my family may not work as well for yours.

That's why I went ahead and compared the top formulas with input from pediatricians and insider tips from fellow moms in the What to Expect community. Rest assured that all of the recommendations below come backed by those of us who have also grappled with the stress and intimidation of stubborn diaper rash.

How We Chose the Best Diaper Rash Creams

I first referenced guidelines from leading experts, including the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the American Academy of Dermatology Association (AAD).

I then consulted three pediatricians: Gina Posner , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician practicing at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board; Anjuli S. Gans , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia; and Julia Reading , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician at Providence Medical Institute in San Pedro, California, to get additional insights into diaper rash creams.

As a mom of four myself, I leaned heavily on my own experience with diaper rash creams. I've tested nearly all of the most popular diaper rash creams on the market, taking careful note of how long they took to be effective, how easy they were to apply, and whether they caused any additional irritation. In line with my findings and expert feedback and guidance, I made sure that all of the products on this list:

I also spoke to four moms on the What to Expect team who have four children between them and have tried several of the products on the list. Because every family’s experience is unique, I double-checked my findings against what parents in the What to Expect Community shared were the most effective and why. These brands received positive reviews for:

Best Overall Diaper Rash Cream

Triple Paste 3X Max Diaper Rash Ointment

Thick consistency

Powerful and fast-acting formula

Accepted by the National Eczema Association

A little goes a long way

Expensive

Size: 6 ounces

Type: Ointment

Active Ingredient: 40% non-nano zinc oxide

Why We Love It

Triple Paste is thick, protective, and fast-acting. My daughter’s rash once cleared up overnight with the brand's 3X Max ointment , and countless parents in the What to Expect Community praise it for doing the same. It’s also Dr. Posner’s top pick : “Triple Paste is my go-to,” she says. “It seems to be protective and tends to heal diaper rash.”

Triple Paste is thick, protective, and fast-acting. My daughter’s rash once cleared up overnight with the brand's 3X Max ointment , and countless parents in the What to Expect Community praise it for doing the same. It’s also

“Triple Paste is my go-to,” she says. “It seems to be protective and tends to heal diaper rash.”

The active ingredient in this cream is 40 % non-nano zinc oxide. Other ingredients include oat extract and beeswax to moisturize and soothe irritated skin. This is a very thick ointment, which parents say helps it form a protective barrier on the skin. It’s fragrance-free and doesn’t contain parabens, dyes, preservatives, phthalates, alcohol, or talc.

% non-nano zinc oxide. Other ingredients include oat extract and beeswax to moisturize and soothe irritated skin. This is a very thick ointment, which parents say helps it form a protective barrier on the skin. It’s fragrance-free and doesn’t contain parabens, dyes, preservatives, phthalates, alcohol, or talc.

At nearly $17 , Triple Paste isn’t the cheapest diaper rash cream featured here. But a little does go a logn way, and it’s a complete game-changer when your little one is uncomfortable. If you’re looking for something a little less intense, you can opt to purchase larger tubs of the original formula , which includes 12.8% zinc oxide, and is available in 16-ounce tubs for $30.

, Triple Paste isn’t the cheapest diaper rash cream featured here.

But a little does go a logn way, and it’s a complete game-changer when your little one is uncomfortable. If you’re looking for something a little less intense, you can opt to purchase larger tubs of the original formula , which includes 12.8% zinc oxide, and is available in 16-ounce tubs for $30.

Tested by Olivia DeLong , mom of one and What to Expect’s Senior Health Editor (whose nurse sent her home from the hospital with Triple Paste):

“It was thick, so it felt like it was really working to heal and prevent rashes, but not too thick to manage. Honestly, it seemed to work instantaneously.”

Community Reviews

“I have tried so many things over the years (both nannying and with my own babies). Triple Paste is my absolute favorite. It’s $$$, but so worth it.”

“Triple Paste is the absolute best, hands down. I’ve turned so many people into it after they complained others didn’t work, especially for chronic rash. It clears it up SO fast. I’ve tried them all, trust me!”

“We got a horrible rash trying all the others, but Triple Paste is the only one that worked, the only one I use now!”

Best Everyday Diaper Rash Cream

Aquaphor Baby Healing Ointment

Excellent at preventing diaper rash before it develops

Good for everyday use

Glides on easily

Doesn’t contain zinc oxide

Size: 14 ounces

Type: Ointment

Active Ingredient: 41% petrolatum

Why We Love It

There are a few different types of Aquaphor geared towards infants , but parents in the What to Expect community overwhelmingly swear by “plain” Aquaphor to prevent diaper rash. Made with 41% petrolatum along with mineral oil and lanolin, this is a great product for parents to use on the daily to keep baby’s bottom moisturized and soft.

Parents particularly love the texture of Aquaphor, which glides easily onto skin despite being very thick. It creates a heavy, protective barrier that effectively prevents chafing and helps ensure diaper rash doesn’t develop in the first place. It also works well to clear up mild- to- moderate diaper rash, although for severe cases, you’ll likely want to look for a product that has zinc oxide.

Like Vaseline, Aquaphor is incredibly versatile, and works equally well as a lip balm or ointment to soothe other skin irritations. At $1.14 per ounce, this is also one of the best value diaper rash creams on our list, and reviewers say a large tub will last a long time. (What to Expect's Executive Editor, Melissa Bycofsky, highly recommends buying the Aquaphor healing ointment stick to keep in your diaper bag for easy, on-the-go diaper changes, too.)

Like Vaseline, Aquaphor is incredibly versatile, and works equally well as a lip balm or ointment to soothe other skin irritations. At $1.14 per ounce, this is also one of the best value diaper rash creams on our list, and reviewers say a large tub will last a long time. (What to Expect's Executive Editor, Melissa Bycofsky, highly recommends buying the

Just note that Aquaphor contains lanolin, which some parents prefer to avoid as your little one might be allergic to it. If this or any other cream causes your baby to develop sores or redness, stop using it and reach out to your pediatrician.

Tested by Sarah Darby , mom of two and What to Expect’s Associate Director of SEO Content Strategy:

“Aquaphor was definitely easy to apply and it healed a really severe, bleeding diaper rash that [my son] got after an allergic reaction to formula. Despite its ability to heal extreme rashes, the ointment was super gentle on my son’s sensitive skin.”

Tested by Melissa Bycofsky , mom of one and What to Expect’s Executive Editor:

"I first tried Aquaphor’s ointment because it was a brand I already trusted, then I continued using it when I realized it was great at preventing diaper rash and OK to use on my son’s tush, too.”

Community Reviews

“We swear by Aquaphor! We’ve always used it daily as a preventative. The only time we had any diaper rash was when our son ate a little too many strawberries one day. Aquaphor cleared that up also.”

“Aquaphor! Been using it since day one and baby has never had a rash.”

“I’ve used pretty much every cream out there because I was an infant teacher for three years. Every child is different and every butt cream is for different things. I personally use Aquaphor on my sons to heal. In the summer I’ll use Triple Paste to help prevent it because we live in Texas and things can get swampy for them. … For us, Aquaphor is the way to go and it’s just the plain one.”

Best Affordable Diaper Rash Cream for Moderate Cases

Destin Daily Defense

Hypoallergenic

affordable and available in lots of sizes

Lighter consistency (like a creamy lotion)

Doesn’t have the highest concentration of zinc oxide

Size: 16 ounces

Type: Cream

Active Ingredient: 13% zinc oxide

Why We Love It

At just $.93 per ounce, Destin Daily Defense is the most affordable diaper rash cream on our list. But you definitely won’t be sacrificing quality here: Destin is a classic brand known for its ability to effectively clear up rash symptoms.

This healing diaper rash cream is gentle enough to be used daily as a preventative treatment, and will provide ample protection for mild to moderate cases of diaper rash. While some versions of this product do contain fragrance, Daily Defense is notably fragrance-free with a 13% zinc oxide formulation. It’s also paraben-, phthalate- and dye-free, earning positive reviews from parents of babies with sensitive skin. I’ve personally found Destin can be helpful for tamping down on mild diaper rash, but stubborn rashes need a more zinc oxide-heavy formula.

Texture-wise, this is a cream. Although it’s thick enough to form a protective barrier, the formula does feel more like a lotion compared to the ointments and pastes on this list. It comes in a 16-ounce tub, so it'll likely last for quite a while, too. But don’t worry: If this cream secures a spot as your favorite, it comes in more portable sizes for your diaper bag, including a 4-ounce tube .

Texture-wise, this is a cream. Although it’s thick enough to form a protective barrier, the formula does feel more like a lotion compared to the ointments and pastes on this list. It comes in a 16-ounce tub, so it'll likely last for quite a while, too. But don’t worry: If this cream secures a spot as your favorite, it comes in more portable sizes for your diaper bag, including a

Community Reviews

“[I use] Destin blue label for dirty diapers for my now 2-year-old and she rarely gets a rash.”

“I use Desitin and only when I start seeing a rash. It clears up right away.”

“Definitely keep the diaper off as much as possible! We also use Desitin... it’s medicated and absolutely works wonders!”

“We now use Destin with every diaper change and haven’t had any signs of new rash for the past 2 months.”

Best Affordable Diaper Rash Cream for Severe Cases

Burt's Bees Baby Diaper Rash Ointment, Maximum Strength

Strong zinc oxide-based formula

Contains almond oil to pamper baby’s skin

Naturally-derived scent

Tricky to squeeze out

Size: 6 ounces

Type: Ointment

Active Ingredient: 40% zinc oxide

Why We Love It

According to my Amazon purchase history, I’ve bought the Burt’s Bees Baby Diaper Rash Ointment seven (!) times so far this year. I stash it everywhere: in my diaper bag, purses, and multiple changing stations. To say it has become an incredibly helpful tool for my family would be an understatement.

This formula is made with 40% zinc oxide, creating a thick, effective barrier on tender skin. The addition of almond oil also helps moisturize and soothe areas of irritation. While I turn to Triple Paste 3X Max for the worst of diaper rashes, Burt’s Bees is a budget-friendly go-to for everything else. It's 100% derived from natural sources, so there is a delicate scent as a result of the shea butter, lavender oil, and jajoba seed oil combination.

Of course, it's also free of parabens and phthalates, and isn’t tested on animals. My only complaint is that when you get to the bottom of the container, it's hard to squeeze out the remaining contents. That being said, this is pretty typical of thick rash creams that come in tubes. (I’ve found that snipping off the top of the bottle and storing it in a baggy can help!)

Of course, it's also free of parabens and phthalates, and isn’t tested on animals. My only complaint is that when you get to the bottom of the container, it's hard to squeeze out the remaining contents.

That being said, this is pretty typical of thick rash creams that come in tubes. (I’ve found that snipping off the top of the bottle and storing it in a baggy can help!)

Community Reviews

wmc616 “I like the Burt’s bees diaper cream - it has worked well and quickly for my son.”

lauraholly “I always used Burt's bees, it's almost all natural.”

Best Diaper Rash Cream for Sensitive Skin and Eczema Relief

CeraVe Diaper Rash Cream

Incredibly healing

works well for a variety of skin irritations

Accepted by the National Eczema Association

Does not contain zinc oxide

Size: 3 ounces

Type: Ointment

Active Ingredient: 46.5% petrolatum

Why We Love It

For an effective diaper rash product that won’t irritate the most sensitive skin types, look no further than CeraVe Diaper Rash Cream . The brand is trusted for their full line of eczema-safe skin care, and this diaper rash cream — which is recognized by the National Eczema Association — is no exception.

In addition to 46.5 percent petrolatum, it has hydrating ingredients like hyaluronic acid and vitamin E. It’s free of fragrance, parabens, sulfates, lanolin, phthalates, dyes and gluten. In other words, it’s very unlikely to react at all badly with your little one’s skin.

The clear ointment is wonderfully moisturizing and healing, parents say, and some compare the consistency to Aquaphor. Also like Aquaphor, it can be used to address any number of skin issues for the whole family (cracked or dry skin, skin irritation, chapped lips). Reviewers say the texture of this CeraVe ointment is particularly good — instead of sitting on top of skin, it melts down and absorbs nicely.

Just keep in mind that this ointment does not contain zinc oxide. The petrolatum and hydrating ingredients make it a good option for regular use to keep baby’s bottom moisturized and healthy, and I’ve found it’s effective against mild diaper rash. But for moderate to severe diaper rash, a zinc oxide formula might work faster.

Community Reviews

“CeraVe Baby Healing Ointment — I won’t use anything else! LO’s meconium diapers left him with a terrible diaper rash. This was our secret weapon to combat it.”

“This is my go-to for prevention and healing! I’ve never used anything else.”

“I second the cerave baby healing ointment! Works so well!”

Best Multi-Purpose Healing Ointment and Diaper Rash Cream

Vaseline Original Petroleum Jelly

It’s effective

affordable

accessible

and has countless uses

May not treat an active rash as quickly as some other products on this list

Size: Varies

Type: Ointment

Active Ingredient: 100% white petrolatum

Why We Love It

Affordable, widely available, and made with a single ingredient, Vaseline is about as easy to keep stocked as it gets. Parents love that it creates a reliable moisture barrier, helping to heal mild diaper rash.

Many parents in the What to Expect Community also praise Vaseline as an excellent preventative. Regular use can keep baby’s skin protected against moisture, which may reduce how often they develop diaper rash at all. For more stubborn or worsening rashes, though, a zinc oxide-based diaper rash cream may be a better fit — and if baby’s rash isn’t improving, it’s always best to check in with your pediatrician to rule out a fungal infection.

Regular use can keep baby’s skin protected against moisture, which may reduce how often they develop diaper rash at all.

But part of what makes Vaseline so great is the fact that it isn't a true diaper rash cream at all. It's a multipurpose, translucent jelly that can help families with chapped cheeks and lips come winter, or simply add a layer of moisture to dry patches of skin. It's an all-in-one skin soother that lasts for what feels like forever.

Tested by Kathleen Felton , mom of one and former What to Expect Editor, who originally contributed to this article:

"Although I’ve tried countless diaper rash creams and ointments, Vaseline has been the most consistent product we’ve used, in part because of its versatility. From chapped lips and noses to minor skin irritations, Vaseline truly does have an infinite number of household uses. Plus, I love that it’s affordable and easy to get your hands on at pretty much all major retailers."

Community Reviews

“Vaseline. It’s the only thing we ever used on my first son and I can happily say he never had diaper rash.”

“Vaseline was the best for daily routine for us.”

“Vaseline for baby, works wonders.”

“We ran out of diaper cream one time and used Vaseline as that's the next best thing we had; redness was gone by the next diaper change compared to the typical couple times with diaper cream.”

Best Fast-Acting Diaper Rash Cream

Boudreaux's Butt Paste for Sensitive Skin Diaper Rash Cream

Contains two expert-approved active ingredients

Accepted by the National Eczema Association

Good for sensitive skin

Texture is thicker than other products

Size: 4 ounces

Type: Paste

Active Ingredient: 16% zinc oxide

Why We Love It

If you need a fast-acting diaper rash cream for quick relief, Boudreaux's Butt Paste has somewhat of a cult following in the What to Expect community. They swear by its ability to swiftly resolve the most stubborn cases of diaper rash. Although the original Boudreaux's formula contains fragrance, the brand’s sensitive skin cream is fragrance-free.

The ingredient list is extremely short, containing just five ingredients, including zinc oxide and petrolatum. It’s free of dyes, parabens, preservatives, and talc, and has also been recognized by the National Eczema Association . It also feels cool to the touch, providing an extra layer of relief.

One thing parents aren’t quite in agreement about is the texture of this product. It’s a thick paste, which some reviewers dislike, saying they find it tricky to spread. Others, however, say if you warm the formula up in your hands a little first it becomes creamier and applies more easily. And many parents like how thick it is, saying the paste stays put on baby’s skin (in other words, it doesn’t rub off on the diaper) and that the thickness helps prevent chafing.

Ultimately, this probably comes down to preference — if you’re partial to a very smooth, creamy formula, you might skip this one.

Tested by Leah Rocketto , soon-to-be mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Shopping Director:

“My daughter had quite a few diaper rashes in her first year, and Boudreaux's Butt Paste quickly became our go-to treatment. We tried a few creams, but this was the only one to significantly reduce redness in the first 24 hours. I liked that it was thick, because it provided more of a barrier between her butt and the diaper. The downside to that the cream is a pain to wash off. After my daughter’s first few rashes, I invested in a diaper cream applicator to make things less messy in the future.”

Community Reviews

“We use Boudreaux’s Butt Paste as well, we’ve tried a few others that I got at the [baby] shower, but Boudreaux’s seems to be the best at preventing and during a rash.”

“[We use] Aquaphor as a skin protectant at every diaper change, especially when baby is really little. For rashes, we use Bordeaux’s Butt Paste ....[it] soothes immediately.”

“We use Boudreaux's Butt Paste Diaper Rash Cream. It works within like a single diaper change.”

“Switched to Bordeaux’s today and I can already see a difference.”

Best Organic Diaper Rash Cream With Natural Ingredients

Earth Mama Organics Diaper Balm

Certified organic ingredients. Jar container is easy to scoop and apply

Gentle and soothing formula

Does not contain zinc oxide

Pricier than other natural alternatives

Size: 2 ounces

Type: Balm

Active Ingredient: Beeswax, shea butter, olive oil

Why We Love It

While a diaper rash cream doesn’t have to be organic to be safe or effective, many parents love the peace of mind that comes with a certified option. Earth Mama Organics Diaper Balm has built a loyal following thanks to its gentle, plant-based ingredients and USDA Organic certification.

The effectiveness of this balm depends on a blend of beeswax, olive oil, and shea butter to nourish skin and create a light protective barrier that locks in moisture. Because it doesn’t contain zinc oxide, it may not be the best fit for moderate to severe rashes. But for everyday protection or help with mild diaper irritation, it’s a go-to favorite among parents who prefer natural care.

The versatility is another big perk. Beyond diaper duty, parents often use it on chapped cheeks and dry patches, and even in baby's skin folds. The balm has a pleasant herbal scent and spreads easily — just warm a little up between your fingers first.

ust warm a little up between your fingers first.

Community Reviews

MackJack7 “Earth mama diaper balm is the absolute best!”

Best Fragrance-Free Diaper Rash Cream

The Honest Company Diaper Rash Cream

Hypoallergenic and fragrance-free

Easy to dispense

Recongized by the National Eczema Association

May not be enough zinc oxide for stubborn rashes

Size: 2.5 ounces

Type: Cream

Active Ingredient: 14% zinc oxide

Why We Love It

As you know, nearly all of the rash creams on this list are fragrance-free, although some do have a natural scent. I’ve found that The Honest Company's diaper rash cream doesn’t smell like anything at all, making it a good choice for scent-sensitive families . This cream is hypoallergenic, meaning it won’t irritate baby’s skin or make rashes worse. It’s also accepted by the National Eczema Association to support skin health.

As you know, nearly all of the rash creams on this list are fragrance-free, although some do have a natural scent. I’ve found that The Honest Company's diaper rash cream doesn’t smell like anything at all, making it a good choice for scent-sensitive families

It relies on 14% zinc oxide, making it a good choice for milder cases of diaper rash or rash prevention. However, I’ve found it still helps create a solid barrier to protect against moisture. The upside of less zinc: It’s simple to dispense and glides on easily. It also washes off your hands afterward better than the more zinc-heavy formulas on our list.

The Honest Company uses a special “phyto-blend” that includes sunflower seed oil and sunflower wax to help support baby’s skin and ease irritation. The cream is free of silicone, parabens, lanolin, mineral oil, and synthetic fragrances, too (but you already knew that!).

Community Reviews

AshleyLpz “A friend recommended the blue Honest diaper rash cream and it’s worked wonders!”

Best Spray Diaper Rash Cream

Mustela Baby Diaper Rash Sprayable Cream

Hands-free application

No need to rub it in

Less messy

Not thick

Size: 3 oz.

Type: Spray

Active Ingredient: 14.9 percent zinc oxide

Why We Love It

The biggest downsides of diaper rash creams, in my humble opinion? You usually have to scoop, smear, and spread with your hands (or a wipe) to properly distribute the stuff. Even diaper rash cream applicators have to be cleaned well after each use. If you're tired of constantly scrubbing or rinsing, Mustela's Diaper Rash Spray eliminates the need for all of that. Just spritz, and you’re done.

This easy-to-use spray contains 14.9% zinc oxide, making it a solid choice for treating and preventing mild to moderate cases of diaper rash. The fine mist coats evenly, so you don't have to worry about rubbing it in. Plus, the formula is free from parabens, phthalates, and fragrances — AKA a win for sensitive baby skin!

Alongside zinc oxide, the spray features Mustela’s signature ingredient: avocado perseose. It's a plant-based extract designed to help strengthen baby’s natural skin barrier. Many parents reach for it at the first sign of redness, since it creates a quick, protective layer without the mess. However, I'll say it before and I'll say it again, for more stubborn or severe rashes, you'll want to reach for a thicker, 40% zinc oxide cream. But if you need something that's a bit more travel-friendly than a tub or are looking for a swift solution when dealing with a wiggly little one when out and about, Mustela will be a lifesaver (it has been for me!).

Community Reviews

HaleighFA “Normally, I alternate between Aquaphor ointment and Mustela spray diaper rash cream.”

emkissi "I like the butt paste or the Mustela diaper rash spray. I only wipe her if she’s had a poop diaper and just leave the cream on and reapply to areas that are sore."

Best Splurge-Worthy Diaper Rash Cream

Tubby Todd Sweet Cheeks Diaper Paste

Available in multiple sizes

Gentle ingredients

Adorable packaging

Expensive

Size: 4 or 7.9 ounces Type: Paste Key Ingredients: 14% non-nano zinc oxide

Why We Love It

Gentle, organic ingredients meet zinc oxide protection to treat your little one’s cheeks (yes, those cheeks) to some serious TLC. Tubby Todd’s Diaper Paste is a smooth, fragrance-free formula that blends organic ingredients like sunflower, coconut, and jojoba oils to soothe skin.

sunflower, coconut, and jojoba oils to soothe skin.

It squirts out in a pasty consistency, creating a breathable barrier that locks out wetness, but is still lightweight enough for daily use. Not only is it free of all the typical, irritable suspects (synthetic fragrances, parabens, steroids), but it's also free of gluten and dairy, too.

It squirts out in a pasty consistency, creating a breathable barrier that locks out wetness, but is still lightweight enough for daily use.

Unlike some thicker diaper rash creams, parents say the Sweet Cheeks glides on easily, especially if you splurge on the silicone spatula. Use it at every change as a preventative top layer that's equally as good at preventing chafing. Bonus: You can save 10% and get free shipping if you sign up for a subscription, but note that this luxe option is also widely available at other retailers like Amazon.

Pro Tip: Pair this with Tubby Todd's best-selling All-Over Ointment — a rich, do-it-all balm that helps soothe dry skin and offers ultimate eczema relief.

Community Reviews

"Tubby todd sweet cheeks diaper paste. She had a rash that did not seem to go away till my cousin recommended tubby Todd and it worked wonders. Tubby Todd also have an all over ointment that worked great for her eczema patches."

"We use tubby Todd for EVERYTHING"

"I use the tubby Todd sweet cheeks cream for diaper rash. It’s very different but very effective! Love it. The diaper cream is a barrier for moisture. The AOO adds moisture. I would use the diaper cream, then AOO for eczema"

A Doctor’s Note on Diaper Rash Creams

Diaper rash can be caused by different things, but the two main culprits are irritants and fungi. “Barrier creams — especially those containing zinc oxide and/or petrolatum — are the first-line treatment for routine diaper rash caused by moisture, friction, and irritants,” Gans says. “These creams act as physical shields, protecting the skin while it heals and preventing worsening of inflammation.”

Size: Diaper rash creams range in size from small tubes to large tubs. Although some products may initially appear more expensive, it’s helpful to check the price per ounce (often listed in a smaller font on a retailer website) in addition to the listing price.

Type: Skin care products that target diaper rash are most commonly creams, ointments, or pastes. Ointments and creams are great for soothing and protecting, and pastes usually contain zinc, an ingredient that’s a little better for soothing but can also help prevent diaper rash from occurring in the first place.

Ingredients: The AAP and the AAD, along with the doctors I spoke with, recommend choosing a diaper rash cream that contains zinc oxide, beeswax, and/or petrolatum as the active ingredient. If the rash is mild, a petroleum-based product may be sufficient. But if your baby has a moderate to severe rash, zinc oxide-based products will provide a bit more protection from further irritation. It may also help to experiment and try different creams to see which works best for your baby’s bum and type of diaper rash.

When to use antifungal (yeast) vs barrier creams for irritation types

But when diaper rash sticks around for several days, it’s possible that baby has developed a fungal or yeast infection, Gans says. These are the biggest signs of a yeast-related rash:

Bright red, beefy plaques in the diaper area

Satellite lesions, which are small red or darker skin-colored bumps or pustules just outside the main rash

Involvement of the skin folds, which are typically spared in non-yeast rashes

Skin that looks shiny and bright red or darker skin-colored in these areas. “Yeast likes areas with high moisture,” Gans explains.

If you suspect baby has a yeast-related rash, a topical antifungal medication like nystatin may be needed. “Once the antifungal is applied, a barrier cream can be layered on top to protect the skin further,” she says. “Treatment typically continues until the rash resolves and for up to two weeks.” If the rash gets worse or doesn’t improve within seven to 10 days, Gans says it’s time to follow up with your pediatrician.

Frequently Asked Questions

What is the best cream for diaper rash?

First, consider the type of rash your baby has. If the rash is mild, a petroleum-based product may be sufficient. But if your baby has a moderate to severe rash, zinc oxide-based products will provide a bit more protection from further irritation. It may also help to experiment and try different creams to see which works best for your baby’s bum and type of diaper rash.

If the product you’re using doesn’t seem to be helping, make an appointment with your pediatrician. Some babies, especially those who are taking antibiotics, can develop a fungal infection in the diaper rash area that may require different treatment.

What heals diaper rash the fastest?

Although every baby is different, zinc oxide-based products tend to heal diaper rash the fastest.

In addition, the following strategies can help manage diaper rash:

Keep baby’s skin dry. Moisture is your enemy, so make sure to dry your baby's skin well at every diaper change (before applying cream).

Change your baby often. Because moisture from dirty diapers can cause skin to chafe, frequently changing your baby’s diaper can help prevent rash.

Clean baby’s skin during diaper changes. The AAP recommends a wipe that is free of alcohol and fragrance, or cleansing baby’s skin with water and gentle cleanser. Allow baby’s skin to air-dry before coating it with cream.

Can you use diaper rash cream on newborns?

Most diaper rash creams are officially recommended for babies 6 months and older. If, however, your newborn has a diaper rash and preventative strategies aren’t helping, Dr. Posner says applying diaper rash cream on the area is likely fine. Always check with your pediatrician to be safe.

What's good for severe diaper rash?

Thicker creams and pastes are best for soothing existing or severe rashes. I personally turn to formulas that have 40% zinc oxide.

When should you call the doctor about your baby’s diaper rash?

Sometimes diaper rash doesn’t respond to home treatment. The AAD recommends reaching out to your child’s doctor if her rash doesn’t go away or worsens, or if your little one develops any signs of infection. That can include a fever, pus draining from the rash, blisters or if your baby is especially difficult to console.

“If the skin is super red, cracking, fluffing off or the cream’s not working, definitely talk to your pediatrician,” says Dr. Posner.

Luckily, though, home treatments can resolve diaper rash most of the time. Read on for our top picks for the best diaper rash creams.

Where should you apply diaper rash cream?

You can apply diaper rash cream liberally on your baby’s bottom — in fact, the AAP says that there’s generally no such thing as too much diaper cream. (The exception is if you’re prescribed an antifungal cream for your baby’s diaper rash. In that case, you should apply it according to the pharmacist’s instructions.)

“A lot of parents don’t put enough diaper rash cream on,” says Dr. Posner. “You really need a thick layer, like icing on a cupcake.”

Unless it’s soiled, it’s also not necessary to wipe diaper cream off at every change. You can just wait and remove it at the end of the day, the AAD says. But make sure the area has dried a little before putting a new diaper on your baby. (Remember: moisture breeds bacteria.) After wiping, you can fan the area or wait a minute or two before closing the diaper and getting your baby dressed.

WhatToExpect.com, Diaper Rash in Babies , March 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, Common Diaper Rashes & Treatments , January 2020. American Academy of Dermatology Association, How to Treat Diaper Rash , 2023. Mayo Clinic, Diaper Rash , 2021. Michele Green, M.D. , Dermatologist, New York, NY. Gina Posner , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician practicing at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board.

Your Next Read

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Diaper Rash in Babies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 10 Best Baby Lotions, Creams, and Ointments for Sensitive Skin Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Common Types of Skin Rashes in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

How to Change a Baby’s Diaper Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Best Nipple Creams to Help You Find Relief While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The 9 Best Cradle Cap Shampoos and Treatments to Keep Baby’s Scalp Soft and Healthy Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

6 Stretch Mark Creams Moms-to-Be Can’t Stop Buying (and Derms Approve, Too) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Infant Eczema (Atopic Dermatitis and Contact Dermatitis) Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Heat Rash (Miliaria) in Babies Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Dry Skin in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

How to Care for Newborn Skin Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Baby Medicine Cabinet Essentials Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Dry Skin in Babies Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window