And yes, puppies count as older kids.

For seasoned parents, pregnancy might not be your first rodeo. But bringing baby number two (or three…or four!) into the mix is still a big deal. Your little one is about to gain a new sibling, and that’s going to shake up the family dynamics in exciting ways. It's the perfect moment to capture the joy with family maternity photos , and don’t forget to include those sweet, eager big siblings !

Whether you’re drawn to the serene simplicity of natural settings or the timeless elegance of a studio, there are countless ways to create beautiful family photos. With the help of a skilled local photographer, all that’s left for your clan to do is smile and say, “Cheese!”

Sunkissed sweetness

sunkissed photo shoot

Three will soon become four in this family photoshoot, which was perfectly complemented by the beaming sun in the background. The coordinating ruffled necklines of the mom- and sister-to-be’s outfits are precious — and those three smiles are just priceless.

Golden hour goals

Golden hour goals

There’s a reason why golden hour is such a popular time to schedule a photoshoot. These gorgeous family photos are your sign to head outdoors just before sunset.

Sandy and smiley

sandy and smiley photo shoot

Whether you live by the beach or have a tropical family vacation coming up, there’s no better time (or place!) to book your next session. These beachside snaps from Hawaii show the joy and excitement of this growing family of four (and soon to be five!).

Fall festivities

fall festivities announcement

Holding hands is the ultimate family photoshoot pose, and all eyes are on mom’s bump-hugging red gown. This mom-to-be’s one regret? That she didn’t take maternity photos when she was expecting her other two babies.

Flower power

flower power pregnancy shoot

Springtime and smiles…is there anything better? This family of three (and counting!) also matched their outfits to the gorgeous floral setting.

Portrait perfection

portrait perfection photo shoot

A studio, a bump-revealing tulle gown, and the biggest smiles were the ingredients for these dreamy maternity photos. For even more sweetness, mom @itsaprilmarie paired it with the caption, “Here we grow again!”.

California dreamin’

california dreaming photo shoot

Photographer @beautifulbphoto worked with the lighting and candid expressions to capture the beauty of this growing family and the landscapes of Salinas, California. The shot focuses on the adorable and proud brother-to-be, plus the neutral colors in the family’s outfits coordinate perfectly with their surroundings.

Bump and blooms

bumps and blooms photo shoot

There’s so much whimsy and love packed into this family photo, featuring a mom holding her bump with one hand and her daughter’s hand with the other. Plus, their white cotton dresses are pure mommy and me magic.

Sunset celebrations

sunset celebrations photo shoot

Embrace the last moments of summer with a sandy shoot like this one by Vancouver-based photographer @marielmacleanphotography . The focus on mom’s smile is also beyond Aww-worthy.

Everything in bloom

everything in bloom photo shoot

Everything’s coming up roses — or in this case, lavender — for this family. To remember this momentous occasion, they spent their time in a flower field for their family photoshoot.

Puppies and parents-to-be

puppies and parents to be photo shoot

If you have pups, this isn’t technically your first time as parents! To celebrate their upcoming arrival , these expecting parents shared their shoot with their family’s proud — and furry — older siblings.

Hand in hand

hand in hand photo shoot

This adorable couple holding hands shows just how excited they are for their new chapter together. There’s so much to love about this family with one more on the way.