These ways to share your big news are inspired by Halloween, Thanksgiving and the crunch of fallen leaves.

Ah, autumn — the season of crisp air, cozy sweaters and heartwarming celebrations. And what better occasion to announce your pregnancy than amid the vibrant colors and festive spirit of fall? Whether you're considering a Halloween-themed reveal or simply want to express gratitude for your little one on the way, the possibilities are endless this time of year. Think pumpkin patches, spooky ghosts, delicious pies and the breathtaking beauty of fall foliage — all perfect ingredients for an adorable announcement .

If you're eager to embark on your journey of crafting the perfect fall-themed pregnancy announcement, here are some of our favorite ideas. Get ready to fall head over heels in love with this magical season of life!

1. One more joining the patch

Pumpkins are universally accepted fall icons, and taking pregnancy announcement photos at your local pumpkin patch like this couple did would be just too cute. Make sure to give your partner a pumpkin “bump,” too!

2. Fall essentials

Bonfires, snuggles and baby cuddles…does a more perfect trio exist? We think not, so what better phrase to put on a letter board than that? This letter board, complete with a sonogram and fall-themed candles and florals surrounding it is a great option, especially for those of us who are shy around the camera.

3. Pie in the oven

Forget the bun — there’s a pie in this oven! This Thanksgiving twist on the classic “bun in the oven” announcement is super sweet. The letterboard reads "we are baking more than a pumpkin pie this Thanksgiving," which is sure to have everyone head over heels come Thanksgiving day.

4. Heartfelt news

The key to your heart? The little pumpkin growing in your belly! Another pumpkin patch idea: Create a heart with your and your partner’s hands to frame your latest sonogram. Add a pumpkin behind for an extra festive twist.

5. Little boo loading

Celebrate the news with an adorable onesie that says "little boo" and a matching letter board to share your due date. After all, your little boo is coming soon!

6. Falling for baby No. 2

Is your little one about to become a big sister or brother? Hand them the sonogram and snap a photo of the beaming sibling-to-be during your family photo shoot. We love all of the autumnal colors and fallen leaves featured in this one by @maceyjoyphoto.

7. Extra grateful

Finding out that your family is growing will bring on all of the gratitude, especially around Thanksgiving. To honor this feeling and recreate this particular announcement, all you need is a letter board, pumpkins and a onesie that says "locally grown." It doesn't get much more fall-spirited than that!

8. For the football fans

draft pick annoucement

Fall is also football season. If you and your partner love sports and are eager to create a more original announcement, consider using this digital pregnancy announcement template from Etsy. The letterboard dons "Get ready to fall in love with our little draft pick. Taking the field [DUE DATE," while the customizable onesie (or shall we say jersey?) says "Team [YOUR LAST NAME]." For a football lover, this one couldn't be more perfect.

9. Autumnal flat-lay:

fall in love annoucement

With cream, orange and brown hues, pumpkins and a pun about “falling in love,” this is the ultimate fall pregnancy announcement design. You can customize your own digital version on Etsy or make your own with a letterboard and onesie, complete with baby’s due date and last name.

10. DIY surprise

pumpkin annoucement

Videos of family members learning about their loved ones’ pregnancies will never get old, and this pregnancy announcement is sure to make your news video-worthy. Order this little box with a felt pumpkin and personalized card that reads "We are adding a little pumpkin to our patch" for your siblings, parents or grandparents, and make sure to record their reactions.

11. Sweet sweatshirt

sweatshirt annoucement

Another in-person reveal idea? Rock this sweatshirt that says "growing a little pumpkin" to your next Halloween party or Thanksgiving gathering. It's an easy – and perhaps, surprising – way to share that you're expecting .

Updates history

Olivia updated 5/28/24 - major overhaul of entire article