Laughing, Crying, Cleaning the Window Sills? 11 Pregnancy Emotions You May Have When You're Expecting

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnant woman taking a selfie while touching her stomach, stages pregnant women go through

Feel like you're on a wild, emotional roller coaster ride? Here are some common pregnancy emotions expecting moms go through.

Everyone says it, and it’s true: Pregnancy emotions are a wild roller coaster ride if there ever was one. One minute you’re on top of the world, a gestating goddess incarnate. Next, you simultaneously feel like crying and yelling at every single person you see.

Does it seem like every day you’re experiencing new feelings you didn't even know existed? You’re not alone. Here are 11 pregnancy emotions you may go through. Hey, at least you get a baby in the end!

Key Takeaways

All the feels = completely normal. You can thank those pregnancy hormones for the tears you can’t control one minute and the white-hot anger you feel the next.

Each trimester is different. Expect to feel bone tired early on, revved up during the middle of pregnancy — and then pretty uncomfortable toward the end.

We’re all in this together. All pregnant moms ride this same emotional wave, so don’t be shy about sharing your feelings with family and friends.

Yay, I'm pregnant! "Yee haw, I'm having a baby!" you may think after seeing that blessed double line on your pregnancy test . At that moment, you’re still basically feeling like yourself (aka morning sickness hasn’t kicked in yet), so it’s likely your head is quickly filled with visions of your baby and the type of pregnant woman you’re going to be. “I'm totally going to be one of those glowing pregnant women who takes artsy maternity photos in a field of flowers,” you may think. Yeah, okay.

Yikes, I'm really pregnant! Quickly following the excitement of a positive pregnancy test may be the worry and fear that can accompany a positive pregnancy test. “A baby?!” you may think as you envision yourself rocking and burping a small crying human at 4 a.m. Your heart is suddenly pounding and your mouth feels dry. Um, yay?

No joke, I literally might be dying (googles "has anyone ever died from morning sickness?"). Your plans of being a super healthy, all-natural earth mama may be dashed in the first trimester if and when morning sickness hits. Didn’t think it was possible to sustain on Saltines, ginger ale, and peppermints for 12 weeks? Surprise!

I'm so tired, I want to go back to sleep three minutes after opening my eyes in the morning. Oh, the pregnancy exhaustion ! How are you supposed to live this way? Go to work? Hold a conversation? How have pregnant women of the past gone on walking around and doing normal things when they’re this sleepy? How?! What to Expect Community parent eag11 is 5 weeks along and already needs a break. “I am so exhausted, and I want to do nothing more than just lounge on the couch and take a nap”, she says. Want more support and tips as you navigate the emotional roller coaster of pregnancy? Download the What to Expect app for real talk and expert advice every step of the way.

This (sniff) Kia commercial (sniff) is so touching (sob!). Making the pregnancy fatigue and nausea all the more fun is the fact that mood swings have made you super emotional at the same time. There comes a point in pregnancy when you can barely turn on the TV because everything — literally everything — makes you want to cry your little pregnant eyes out. Thanks a bunch, hormones.

Have I always wanted to lash out at everyone this much? Who knew you could feel so sentimental and ragey all at once? Why do the sight of your husband's dirty clothes on the floor and the snippy woman in the grocery store aisle make you seethe this way? Pregnancy emotions. They're a beautiful thing (not!).

What is this? Is my energy actually returning? It's a miracle! I'm actually feeling peppy again! Most women report experiencing less fatigue and more spunk at some point in the second trimester . See ya, crackers and afternoon naps on the couch. Pass the burgers and my day planner!

I finally get what people mean when they say "glowing." My hair! My skin! My nails! I’m a freaking baby-creating goddess! While you may have been feeling more “feeble chic” during the first trimester, the second trimester is when you may really come alive. Long, silky hair ; radiant, Instagram-filtered-looking skin; healthy, pretty nails. All that along with an adorable baby bump, renewed energy, and all-around positive thoughts. It’s happening. And it’s glorious.

Annnnd now I’m uncomfortable again. Where did my pregnancy glow go? Sometime in the third trimester (often in that last month or two), things can get really uncomfy again. Your tummy has gotten pretty darn big, for one thing. Also? Your organs feel squished , you're frequently short of breath doing simple things like walking up the stairs, and you have to pee roughly 2,654 a day. Baby, you coming out soon?

If alphabetizing my spice rack and washing all my couch cushion covers fall into the category of “nesting,” then yeah, I’m nesting. Organizing (and reorganizing and re-reorganizing) is insanely satisfying while you're waiting for your baby's arrival. As is cleaning everything in sight. Hooray for nesting !

Welp, this is it! No looking back now. Towards the end of your pregnancy, you just surrender. Surrender to the whole array of pregnancy emotions coming your way. Surrender to the idea that the discomfort you’re feeling isn’t permanent. Surrender to the fact that your life is about to be forever changed (for the better). Once you do let go, it’s a beautiful thing. Why didn’t you do this all along?

Updates history

December 8, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

21 Moms Share the Most Ridiculous Reasons They Cried When They Were Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Why Pregnancy Mood Swings Happen and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Want a Good Laugh? Moms Share 17 Hilarious (and Slightly Cringey) Pregnancy Moments Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Can’t Stop Cleaning and Organizing? The Nesting Instinct Is Real — Here’s What It Means (and When It Starts) Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Moms Are Sharing Their Craziest Pregnancy Symptoms, and Some of Them Are Truly Wild Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Anxiety During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

I'm Struggling With Separation Anxiety During My Pregnancy. It Turns Out I'm Not the Only One Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Stress During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shari Lusskin, M.D.

15 Moms on What Labor Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hope, Heartbreak … Then Joy: The Emotional Moments IVF Moms Will Never Forget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window