11 Questions Your OB/GYN Wishes You’d Ask When You Get Pregnant

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

A woman talking to her doctor

From safe meds to labor prep, get the answers you need to feel more confident, informed, and ready for what’s ahead.

Pregnancy comes with plenty of questions — and your prenatal visits are the perfect time to ask them. From what's normal and what's not to labor, delivery, and everything in between, these questions can help you make the most of every appointment.

Key Takeaways

Ask for recommendations on nutrition, exercise, and weight gain to get personalized advice.

Talk to your doctor about pregnancy safe-medications and products , including any OTC meds you use, prescriptions, and beauty products.

Start talking about labor and delivery early, so you know what to expect.

What pregnancy symptoms are normal, and what's an emergency?

The answer to this question can vary, depending on how far along you are.

First trimester

In the first trimester, some nausea, occasional vomiting, fatigue and breast tenderness are common. A small amount of vaginal spotting can also be normal.

That said, red-flag symptoms you should watch out for include:

An inability to keep any food or liquids down

Heavy vaginal bleeding or cramping

Severe abdominal pain

If you experience any of those symptoms, call your doctor immediately.

Second trimester

Once you've moved onto the second trimester, you may begin to have some typical pelvic pressure or lower abdominal stretching.

However, if you suddenly experience severe pelvic pressure or pain, vaginal bleeding or increased vaginal discharge, call your practitioner.

Third trimester

Finally, in the third trimester, it's very common to have occasional uterine contractions and pelvic pressure. Plus that first-trimester fatigue may reappear once more.

"I have felt awful, similar to first trimester symptoms: nausea, heartburn, diarrhea, crampy, utterly exhausted, headache and intense back pain," shares What to Expect Community member MRD1925. "I can only hope this means labor is near because I’m over it."

And as you near your due date, you'll want to watch out for signs of labor , which includes contractions, your water breaking or a "bloody show" (the loss of your mucus plug , which is often a good indicator that labor is imminent).

Your practitioner should prep you on what to do if you think you're going into labor (they'll probably advise you to call when contractions are five minutes apart, for example), but you should always call your doc if:

You're experiencing severe pain.

Your water breaks, especially if the fluid looks greenish or brown. This can be a sign that stool, also known as meconium , is present in the amniotic sac, and it can be dangerous for your baby to ingest.

You're experiencing sudden swelling, blurred vision or a severe headache, all of which can be signs of preeclampsia (a sudden onset of high blood pressure).

What should I eat and avoid eating?

A pregnancy diet full of nutritious, whole foods — think lots of vegetables, fruit, and lean protein — is ideal. Your doctor will also likely recommend a prenatal vitamin to ensure you're getting enough calcium, folic acid, and other nutrients.

As for what to steer clear of? Avoid: Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHealthy Eating During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHealthy Eating During PregnancySee All Sources

Raw fish

Soft cheeses

Unpasteurized milk or juice

Fish that are high in mercury (like swordfish)

Pregnancy nutrition can sometimes feel like a pop quiz you didn't study for. Download the What to Expect app for help taking the guesswork out of what's on your plate — with week-by-week guidance, food safety information, and expert-approved tips to help you nourish both yourself and your growing little one.

What exercise is okay during pregnancy?

Staying active during pregnancy keeps both you and your baby healthy and helps ease pregnancy symptoms from water retention to anxiety . What's more, many fitness activities are safe during pregnancy, including walking , swimming , yoga , and strength training .

If you were a regular at any particular class before you got pregnant, it's likely okay to continue attending it, though you should make sure to check with your doctor first.

In general, you'll need to be a little extra careful. Here's what to avoid :

Exercises where you're more likely to fall (your sense of balance is a bit off when you're expecting)

Strenuous ab exercises

Prolonged periods of time flat on your back, especially in the second half of pregnancy

Exercises that make you more prone to dehydration and overheating (like Bikram yoga, aka hot yoga)

How much weight should I gain?

Your pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI), which is calculated based on your weight and height, usually determines how much weight you should gain during pregnancy. Your doctor should give you a range to gain by trimester and will check at each appointment that you're on track, but here's the standard breakdown of weight gain by BMI:

A BMI of less than 18.5: 28 to 40 pounds

A BMI between 18.5 and 24.9: 25 to 35 pounds

A BMI between 25 and 29.9: 15 to 25 pounds

A BMI greater than 30: 11 to 20 pounds

Carrying twins? In that case, your weight gain target will likely change. The Institute of Medicine recommends the following for moms of multiples based on BMI: Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsWeight Gain During PregnancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsWeight Gain During PregnancySee All Sources

A BMI between 18.5 and 24.9: 37 to 54 pounds

A BMI between 26 and 30: 31 to 50 pounds

A BMI greater than 30: gain 25 to 42 pounds

That said, everyone's pregnancy will look different and that includes pregnancy weight gain. If you have questions, don't hesitate to talk to your practitioner, who will help you come up with a plan to make sure that you're gaining a healthy amount of weight.

What over-the-counter medications are safe?

You'll likely need some non-prescription medication at some point during your pregnancy, whether it's to ease a headache or a bad case of heartburn — and your practitioner should provide a list of recommended OTC meds that are safe to take .

While it's important to check with your doctor first, these typically get the green light:

Acetaminophen ( Tylenol ) for headache, pain, or fever.

Vitamin B6 and doxylamine (Unisom) or Diclegis for nausea and vomiting.

Chlorpheniramine and tripelennamine for cold and allergy symptoms.

Saline nasal spray for allergies, but check with your doctor for the dosing and brand. The same goes for saline sprays and nasal strips.

Fiber supplement for constipation .

What about prescription meds that I might take?

This is definitely a subject you'll want to go over with your OB/GYN. It's also imperative to note that you should never stop taking any of your meds without talking to your doctor first.

The best plan is to see your doctor before pregnancy to review all your current medical conditions and medications and decide whether it makes sense to continue your current meds, switch to a different medication or try a different treatment plan altogether. Depending on your case, you may be referred to a maternal-fetal medicine specialist .

Do I need to change my skin care routine?

It depends. If your beauty routine includes prescription products — especially those with retinol, or vitamin A, like isotretinoin (Accutane) or Retin A — you'll want to talk to your doctor about changing your skin care routine while expecting. Excessive amounts of Vitamin A can increase the risk of birth defects.

You'll also do well to avoid experimentation. Your skin is often more sensitive during pregnancy, so this may not be the best time to try new products.

What vaccinations should I get?

The vaccines you get during pregnancy can depend on particular risk factors, such as having a chronic illness or working or traveling in places with a higher chance of exposure. Some vaccines are must-haves during pregnancy:

Adult Tdap is recommended for every pregnant mother any time between 27 and 36 weeks. That's because very young babies are vulnerable to whooping cough , a contagious respiratory illness that can lead to pneumonia and even death — and babies can only receive their own first dose of the DTaP vaccine at 2 months. But by getting vaccinated during pregnancy, you help pass some immunity on to your child.

The flu and COVID-19 vaccines offer important protection against common seasonal viruses, especially since your immune system is weaker and particularly vulnerable to these illnesses during pregnancy. And with nine months to go, your pregnancy will inevitably overlap with some part of cold and flu season. These annual vaccines typically come out around August each year, but you can still get it later in the fall and winter.

The RSV vaccine , offered in the third trimester, will help protect your baby against this dangerous respiratory illness once she's born.

Can we discuss my birth plan?

While a birth plan isn't necessary (and, when the big day arrives, you may not end up following some or even a lot of it), many women make one to familiarize themselves with the labor and delivery process and to make sure everyone involved is aware of their personal preferences.

"If you have specific preferences for what you want or don't want to have happen during your labor, it is good to have [a birth plan]," says Community member MrsTruttle. "Of course, plans can change if there is a complication or baby is in distress but overall I think it's helpful to have so you and your doctors/birth team are on the same page."

Reviewing your birth plan with your doctor prior to labor provides an opportunity to discuss expectations (especially if you have a high-risk pregnancy, where you may have more restrictions during birth to stay safe) and review concerns you and your doctor may have regarding your experience.

What should I expect during labor and delivery?

Your labor and delivery can vary a lot depending on where you deliver — whether that's at a hospital , birthing center , or home . A health care practitioner will perform cervical exams intermittently to determine cervical dilation and effacement.

Your provider may also recommend interventions for your well-being and your baby's, including IV and electronic fetal monitoring , which should be explained to you as the need arises.

Discussing ahead of time also allows you to review pain management options (like an epidural ) so you can plan for the options available to you through various stages of labor.

Who ultimately brings your baby into the world depends on your physician's practice. Some have a number of OB/GYNs on-call, and you'll get whoever that person is when you go into labor. In other practices, you'll always be with your own doctor.

So be sure to ask how it works for your delivery so you're okay with what goes down on delivery day.

What's the likelihood I'll need a C-section?

Since about 1 in 3 women delivers by C-section, it's an important question to ask your doctor — especially if you're hoping for an unmedicated birth. Trusted SourceNational Vital Statistics ReportsBirth: Final Data for 2023See All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Vital Statistics ReportsBirth: Final Data for 2023See All Sources

Reviewing your personal risks with your provider prior to labor helps guide your expectations. While the answer is unique in each case, common risk factors for C-sections include:

Obesity

Gestational diabetes

Suspected macrosomia (larger than average baby)

Post-term pregnancy (going past your due date)

Previous cesarean delivery

Advanced maternal age (i.e., you're 35 years old or older)

The bottom line: Don't be afraid to call your practitioner if you're unsure about anything. They know this is likely a new experience for you, and can help you figure out what's normal and what's not.