11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas

princess birthday party frosted cookies

Trust us — these ideas will make your little one's birthday party a crowning achievement.

Sometimes, little ones want (and deserve) the royal treatment for their birthday. That's when a princess birthday party becomes the perfect theme. It combines elements of make believe with sparkles and treats. What could be better?

Start with the basics — like picking a date and making a guest list. (Not sure who to invite? Here's more about toddler birthday party etiquette .) Then think about ways you can work this regal theme into your day-of celebrations. From cute favors to beautiful backdrops, there's plenty of magic to sprinkle all over your party, and this list is packed with ideas to make sure you rule the day.

Princess birthday party decorations

1. Castle photo backdrop

princess birthday party castle photo backdrop

Short of building an actual kingdom for the day, a castle backdrop is the best way to establish the royal theme. This pastel pink cutout is incredible, but when accented with pink, white and gold balloons, it turns into something extra festive and fun. Kids (and their parents) will line up for photos.

2. Princess centerpieces

princess birthday party centerpieces

If the birthday babe is all-in on a favorite princess or movie, add a touch of Tiana or Belle or Cinderella to the party! Dayci of CalitheMaker Shop created these beautiful 3D paper centerpieces for a Princess and the Frog-themed party and accented the table with simple strands of eucalyptus.

3. Magical color scheme

princess birthday party color scheme

Plenty of princess parties are pink, but a more varied palette can look just as festive. This green, blue, purple and peach combo looks like it would fit right in at Disneyland. Pro tip: If you're looking for an easy way to tie a color scheme together, try a balloon arch! Just use balloons that match other aspects of your party like the plates, favors, banners and more.

Princess birthday party games

4. Dress-up station

The only thing more fun than a photo booth is a photo booth with costumes and props! Pick up some assorted royal attire from secondhand stores, costume shops or online marketplaces, and hang it on a rolling rack in the yard. Kids will have a blast trying on outfits and getting their picture snapped in their crowns, gowns and capes.

5. Blow-up bounce castle

princess birthday party bounce castle

Is there a more perfect activity for a princess party than a bounce castle? This one from Play Play Zone leans into the pink theme and features a ball pit, but any bounce castle will wow pint-sized party goers. ( Birthday safety tip : Don't forget to supervise all of the castle visitors!)

6. Crafty crown making

This cool craft serves as a party activity and a party favor all in one. Have kids decorate their own crowns with construction paper and stick-on jewels. Everyone gets to keep their creation, and leave the party as a prince or princess.

Princess birthday party food

7. Crown cupcakes

princess birthday party cupcakes

How sweet are these? Simple vanilla cupcakes get a pretty princess makeover with a swirl of pink buttercream frosting and some white chocolate crowns. Adding a paper crown topper works just as well if you're planning to DIY.

8. Cookies with royal icing

princess birthday party cookies

Okay, so it might not technically be royal icing (made of water and confectioners' sugar), but this icing created Cinderella's dress and a pumpkin coach, so it's definitely fancy. These cookies would look regal displayed on a dessert table and make for some tasty favors.

9. Castle cake topper

princess birthday party cake with castle topper

With a topper this amazing, you can keep the birthday cake simple! This accessory features a cool castle, the birthday girl's name and her age on one of the turrets. (It's a fun keepsake too once you clean off the frosting residue!) If going custom isn’t an option, there are tons of less-expensive options you can order online.

Princess birthday party favors

10. Enchanted favors

princess birthday party mirror favors

Mirror, mirror on the wall, what's the most creative favor of them all? This! Pink, white and blue hand mirrors are a sophisticated nod to Snow White. Here, starry tulle and thick-cut ribbon secure the mirror to little beaded purses (a dollar store find) and custom acrylic name tags sourced from Etsy.

11. Fancy favor display

princess birthday party goodie bag display

Goodie bags are always fun, but they seem even more impressive when they're curated and displayed in a cool way. This "Once Upon a Treat" wall makes pink and blue gable boxes look fancy and serves as functional decor.

WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Birthday Party Dos and Don'ts , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a First Birthday Party , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes , January 2022.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Space Birthday Party Ideas That Are Out of This World Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Dog-Themed Ideas for a Pawfect Puppy Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Throw a T-Rex-iffic Dinosaur Birthday Party That'll Go Down in History Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Turn Baby's First Birthday Party Into a 'Winter Onederland' Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Host a 'Wild One' Birthday That's a Roaring Good Time Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Celebrate 'Mr. Onederful' With a Dapper First Birthday Bash Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window