Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Seeing those two little lines appear on a pregnancy test is always a breathtaking moment. Whether you've been eagerly trying to conceive, were caught off guard by the unexpected news or can't wait to surprise your loved ones with the announcement, the element of shock can make revealing your pregnancy incredibly exciting!

Most pregnancy announcements have some element of surprise (after all, they are announcements) , but if you really want to play up just how surprising the news really is, you can do so with one of these announcements that emphasize the shock factor to family and friends.

From creative flat-lays that capture the unexpected beauty of this moment to elaborate reveals tailored just for your partner, hare are our favorite surprise pregnancy announcements, crafted for dog moms and dads, future grandmas and grandpas , twin parents-to-be and more.

1. Secret’s out

more coffee please

One of the most popular sayings for surprise baby announcements is, “We’ve been keeping a little secret…” This one from the Leintz family has a little bit of everything: a custom onesie, sonograms and a letterboard to spell it all out.

2. Mid-photoshoot surprise

midshoot surprise

What happens when a first anniversary photoshoot turns into a surprise baby announcement? Photo magic. This dad-to-be didn't know the exciting news yet, so his wife surprised him during their shoot. Photographer @caitlinbachtold captured the super special moment and the candid reactions to learning the news are absolute gold.

3. Shock and Aww

shock and aww announcement

Many parents are just as surprised as their family and friends to learn they're expecting. If that's you, share in the shock with this flat-lay digital pregnancy announcement template from Etsy that says "We're just as shocked as you!"

4. Pup parent must-have

pup parent announcement

Is your fur baby about to become a big sibling ? Tell everyone all about it when you share a photo of your dog wearing this bandana that says "Guess what? Mom's Pregnant!" which comes in a wide range of colors.

5. Expect the unexpected

expect the unexpected announcement

Still in shock over your news? You can’t go wrong with this best-selling flat-lay designthat reads "The best things in life are unexpected." Plus, you can customize it with a onesie and sonogram.

6. Auntie to mom era

aunt pregnancy announcement

Family not expecting a pregnancy announcement? Get your niece or nephew involved in your surprise pregnancy announcement when they wear this adorable T-shirt that reads "my aunt has my cousin in the oven." It's perfect for an Instagram post or a surprise for the rest of the family at your next gathering.

7. For an in-person reveal

in person reveal

These personalizable cards are available for parents-to-be who want to give their family and friends something physical that shares the new-to-everyone news. Choose between a white or kraft paper envelope, and add a sonogram photo and message about your baby’s upcoming arrival.

8. Two-for-one surprise

two for one pregnancy announcement

Finding out you’re pregnant is one thing, but learning that twins are on the way makes it two times more surprising. Announce it with a funny digital template that has a message written on two onesies: PLOT TWIST.

9. Future grandparent announcement

grandparent pregnancy announcement

Watching your parents become grandparents is a universally wonderful experience. Let them know about their new job title with this cheeky onesie that dons the message "Surprise! You are going to be babysitters! Oops… I mean grandparents."

10. Little bean brewing

little bean announcement

Spill the beans about your pregnancy with this customizable digital template . The onesie in this flat lay says "Time to spill the beans!" which is an A+ option for coffee lovers. Bonus points if you talk about how much coffee will be required after baby’s arrival in the caption.

11. Surprise par-tee

par tee announcement

This “surprise” maternity shirt is available in 13 colors and sizes XS to 3XL. The little footprints over the belly with the words "Surprise" will subtly say it all.