How to Find the Best Stroller for Your Family: A Comprehensive Guide

Best Baby Strollers 2025

Quick Summary

The best stroller is the Mockingbird Single-to-Double stroller, according to testers from the What to Expect staff and user community, who praise the convertible stroller's versatility, maneuverability and price point.

Like many first-time parents expecting a baby, I agonized over the decision of which stroller to buy. After all, finding the best stroller isn’t all that different from buying a new car. I found myself asking some of the same questions: How good is the suspension? What kind of terrain can it handle? What kind of storage does it have? With so many models available, choosing a stroller can feel as weighty as buying a car.

But shopping for strollers is also highly personal. Identifying the best stroller means considering your family’s lifestyle, taking into account how often you’ll be using it, where you’ll be using it and whether you’ll need it to grow with your family. That was something I didn’t consider enough when I was expecting my first son: At the time, I wanted an easy-use, travel-friendly model I could easily stash in a closet in my small apartment. While I loved the stroller I chose, two years later — pregnant with my second and parenting a toddler who was still too little to walk long distances — I found myself needing to shop for a double stroller , too.

Whether you need a sleek city stroller or a model that can fit up to three kids, read on for our complete guide to the best strollers on the market right now.

How I Chose the Best Strollers

In the end, the best stroller to buy is the one that safely gets your baby from point A to point B and works with your family’s lifestyle. (An umbrella stroller won’t exactly cut it for a family of three-under-3, for instance.) In order to help narrow down your choices, I first referenced stroller guidelines from the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) and the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Although every stroller on the market needs to adhere to the CPSC’s safety standards, there are some features that may add an extra level of security, according to the AAP. They recommend strollers:

Have easy-to-operate brakes that lock two wheels instead of just one

A wide base that can’t easily be tipped over

A five-point harness with straps over both shoulders, hips and between the legs

One footrest that extends across both sitting areas (for a side-by-side double stroller).

To ensure that we were featuring the absolute safest and best strollers on the market, I eliminated any that didn’t have these features.

Next, I spoke to three parents on the What to Expect editorial team who have tested and reviewed dozens of top-rated strollers. I asked about the stroller brands and models they’ve tested, features they liked (and disliked) and whether they’d recommend the stroller to other parents.

After that, I turned to our What to Expect community: I pored through countless community reviews to learn more about the strollers parents are loving right now. Finally, I analyzed results from the 2024 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards , in which more than 770 parents in the What to Expect community voted for their favorite strollers and shared detailed feedback.

Based on this research, I identified the 12 best strollers as those that are easy to maneuver, versatile, built to last, and thoughtfully designed with ample storage space.

Best Stroller Overall

Mockingbird Single-To-Double Stroller 3.0

Versatile

One-handed fold

Large storage basket

Some found it bulky and hard to fit in a smaller car

Weight : 28 lbs. with one seat; 36 lbs. with two seats

: 28 lbs. with one seat; 36 lbs. with two seats

Dimensions : ‎25.5 x 40 x 33 inches

Weight/Age limit : Up to 50 lbs

Under-carriage storage : Yes

Why We Love It

Many single-to-double strollers cost a small fortune: But the Mockingbird stroller is the solution to that expensive problem. Beloved by What to Expect parents, the Mockingbird is often compared to the Uppababy Vista V3 and touted as a more affordable yet just as convenient option.

is the solution to that expensive problem. Beloved by What to Expect parents, the Mockingbird is often compared to the Uppababy Vista V3 and touted as a more affordable yet just as convenient option.

The Mockingbird delivers so much at a fraction of the price of many luxe strollers. It converts to a double stroller with the 2nd Seat Kit for families planning on having more than one (and can even accommodate three with the Riding Board ), but also is ready for use right after bringing baby home if you use the additional bassinet , a car seat adapter or infant inserts to the toddler seat.

The Mockingbird delivers so much at a fraction of the price of many luxe strollers. It converts to a double stroller with the

, a car seat adapter or infant inserts to the toddler seat.

The lates edition has a few perks parents will love: a magnetic harness for easier buckling, a LegShade for full-body sun protection, and two in-seat pockets plus a stash pocket to hold even more essentials.

As far as the ride goes? Leah Rocketto , What to Expect’s Associate Shopping Director, says that the Mockingbird glides smoothly, even over bumpy pavement. She also loves the one-handed fold that “actually works,” unlike some other strollers that end up requiring two hands to push the frame down. “Many parents may write this off as unnecessary, but it comes in handy if you’re holding a child while also storing your stroller,” she says. It also comes with added bonuses like an extra-large storage basket that can hold an impressive 25 pounds.

Video Reviews

Mockingbird Stroller Review

Community Reviews

"Love it! We travel a ton with it! My 9-month-old has already been on flights. The bottom has so much storage I can fit my entire carryon duffle bag under it. We go for walks every day around the neighborhood. I also highly recommend getting the bassinet attachment as we used that exclusively for the first three months. Also the cup holder is a must. It rides so smooth."

"It's fantastic! I traveled once with it and found it way too heavy and bulky so have since gotten a lightweight, smaller travel stroller. But for home it’s so nice, rides smooth, tons of storage."

"We LOVE ours! We are having baby number 3 and they have another attachment so my 5 year old can ride on it too and still have the two youngest in the seats! One of our best purchases."

Best Affordable Stroller

Chicco Bravo Quick-Fold Stroller

Plenty of storage

car seat compatible

adjusts to multiple heights

folds with one hand

Some parents say the ride could be smoother

Weight : 24.9 lbs

Dimensions : 35.2 x 22.8 x 42.7 inches

Weight limit : Up to 50 lbs.

Under-carriage storage : Yes

Why We Love It

The Chicco Bravo Quick-Fold is one of the more popular strollers in the What to Expect community, and parents love how versatile and generously sized it is given its lower price point. The forward-facing seat is appropriate for babies 6 months and older, but if you have a newborn, you can easily snap in any Chicco infant car seat to create a versatile travel system — no adapter needed. (If you’re also in the market for a car seat, know that the Chicco Bravo travel system is also very popular and you can save by buying both together.)

The Chicco Bravo Quick-Fold is one of the more popular strollers in the What to Expect community, and parents love how versatile and generously sized it is given its lower price point. The forward-facing seat is appropriate for babies 6 months and older, but if you have a newborn, you can easily snap in any Chicco infant car seat to create a versatile travel system — no adapter needed. (If you’re also in the market for a car seat, know that the

The Bravo’s features are impressive and rival those of many higher-end strollers. Think: a UPF canopy, multi-position seat recline, adjustable handlebar (ideal for taller parents), mesh peekaboo window, cup holder and parent tray with plenty of storage for a phone (an underrated feature for long walks). The whole thing swiftly folds with one hand and a single motion which, true to its name, is incredibly easy to do.

Parents say the Bravo works very well on smooth surfaces, though it can be harder to push on bumpier ground. Also, keep in mind that this is a single stroller, so it can’t convert to add more seats in the future, if flexibility is important to you.

Video Reviews

Chicco Bravo Primo Trio Travel System Review

Community Reviews

“I used the Chicco for with my first child and LOVED it — it’s very user friendly and everything clicks into place very easily. The only con I had was that it didn’t come with a toddler tray (you can get it separately but it’s pretty plain), but besides that I love it. It’s also waterproof which is a nice bonus when you get stuck on a walk with the baby.”

“I had the Chicco Bravo travel system for my now- 16-month-old. Super easy to use, pretty lightweight, no complaints. We keep the Chicco Bravo in one of our cars at all times so we can use it on the go.”

“We just got the Bravo Travel System. I LOVE IT! The stroller is so smooth on flat surfaces.”

Best Travel System Stroller

Nuna TRVL lx + PIPA urbn Travel System

One-handed fold

No-base car seat install

Lightweight and compact

Near-flat recline for naps

Not for rough terrain

Slightly lower car seat weight limit

Weight: Stroller: 17 lbs; Car seat: 7 lbs

Dimensions: Stroller: 32 x 21 x 45.5 inches; Cart seat: 25 L x 17.5 x 22 inches

Weight/Age limit: Stroller: up to 50 lbs; Car seat: 4–22 lbs (<29" tall)

Under-carriage storage: Yes

Why We Love It

At $900, the Nuna TRVL lx + PIPA urbn Travel System is an investment — but if you're going to splurge on one stroller setup, this might be the one. It’s sleek, folds in seconds with one hand, installs easily without a car seat base and grows with your baby well into toddlerhood. (That’s a major win over the Doona, which doesn’t offer that kind of longevity.)

Liz Buxton , What to Expect’s Shopping Director and a first-time mom, keeps this stroller in her trunk at all times:

“I used this for my daughter Lou’s first flight, and it handled everything — security, gate checks, car transfers — without stress or struggle," she says. "I can collapse the stroller while holding her and a diaper bag, then pop the car seat into an Uber without dealing with a base. It’s intuitive, compact and actually pretty sleek looking.”

Two standout features Liz swears by: the pull-tab recline that drops the seat to a nearly flat position (perfect for Lou’s naps before she could sit up) and the genuinely impressive one-handed fold. It’s the kind of flexibility that lets you skip the bulky extras and still feel ready for anything from day one.

The stroller stands on its own when folded, fits into tight spaces and feels far more polished than most compact options. While the PIPA urbn car seat tops out at 22 pounds, the TRVL lx stroller holds up to 50, making this system a smarter long-term choice than many infant-only setups. For parents who want style, simplicity and smart design all in one, this travel system checks all the boxes.

Video Reviews

Nuna TRVL lx + PIPA urbn Travel System Review

Community Reviews

bbaker2468 "I have the pipa lite rx and the trvl which is their lightest weight travel stroller. Absolutely love them both. I literally giggling everytime I close it because it’s fun and easy. I didn’t have to break stride closing it to carry up stairs on my subway trips in nyc. Used the set all the time in restaurants so he could hang with us at table height."

nrg1224 "Obsessed with my nuna. I have used their products for around 5 years (my oldest is 5) we have had the pipa lita lx, rava, aace booster and Demi stroller. They are worth the money IMO, the ease of installation is amazing, the car seat is super light weight and held up awesome for two babies. I’d have used It for this one but It expired, im buying their new version this time the nuna aire car seat. Long story short love their products I’m a loyal fan! Lol"

Best Affordable Travel System Stroller

Graco Modes 3 Lite DLX Travel System

Includes a popular stroller

car seat and base at an excellent price point

May not handle bumps as well as other strollers

Weight : 39.2 lbs

Dimensions : ‎34 x 25.75 x 41 inches

Weight/Age limit : Up to 30 lbs or 32 inches

Under-carriage storage : Yes

Why We Love It

When it comes to value, few travel systems deliver quite like the Graco Modes line . And the brand’s 3 Lite DLX model is particularly great. The price for both the stroller, compatible infant car seat and car seat base is $400 — car seats alone can cost that much, and quite a few of the standalone strollers on this list top that price, too. You can fit any Graco infant car seat directly into the frame or seat with a one-step attachment, making it incredibly easy to take your baby from car to stroller and back again.

Graco is a trusted name in the baby world, so you can feel confident that you won’t be sacrificing quality either. “This travel system offers a great price point, and I think you get good quality for that price point,” says Kimberlee Beck, What to Expect’s engagement marketing manager. She loves the stroller’s one-handed fold and the fact that it stands up on its own when closed, as well as its versatility — there are nine seat configurations you can take advantage of.

The Graco Modes 3 Lite DLX is technically the line’s jogging stroller, which Kimberlee says helps make it so easy to maneuver. The two front wheels, which are close together, make turning corners a breeze. “It’s not too heavy to handle, either,” she says.

While the stroller is uncomplicated to fold, Kimberlee does wish it was easier to open. “You have to hold the lock feature open while maneuvering the handle and then it opens toward you,” she says. Reviewers also say that this stroller isn’t quite as shock-absorbing and smooth as some of the pricier models out there, so if you’ll be navigating bumpy terrain often, it may not be the best stroller choice for you.

Video Reviews

Graco Modes 3 Lite DLX Travel System Review

Community Reviews

horizons “I have a Graco Modes and loved it. The bassinet got a lot of use. Tons of basket space and I love how far the hood goes out.”

Girl-momm “We have this one, I would 100 percent recommend it, I love how the two wheels in the front are together for easy maneuverability, you can close it up with one hand, the stroller has tons of room for a baby to grow into and can be used for a few years.”

Best Car Seat Stroller

Doona Infant Car Seat and Stroller

Car seat and stroller in one

lightweight

Short

babies outgrow it relatively quickly

some parents say the ride could be smoother

Weight : 16.5 lbs

Dimensions : 39 x 17.3 x 32.2 inches

Weight/Age limit: Up to 35 lbs or 32 inches

Under-carriage storage : No

Why We Love It

For parents on the go, you can’t beat the flexibility and convenience of the Doona , which is actually a hybrid car seat and stroller that weighs just 16.5 pounds.

Simply click a button, and the Doona goes from a stroller to a car seat. The wheels fold in for car rides, then fold back out again to stroll. Use it on planes, trains and automobiles — this system works no matter where the wind takes you.

Don’t expect it to perform quite as well as dedicated strollers, though. The wheels won’t take bumps quite as easily. And because it’s not a true stroller, it’s not the best place for baby to sit for prolonged periods of time. Still, many parents find the convenience of going from car to sidewalk is well worth it.

The biggest downside is longevity — or lack thereof: Once baby hits 35 pounds or 32 inches — somewhere around 1 year old, though often sooner for some children — and outgrows the car seat, you’ll need to spring for both a new car seat and a new stroller. So while it can be an incredibly convenient option, some parents dislike how short a lifespan it has, especially considering that for the price ($550) you could also buy a full-size stroller that would last for a number of years.

For more details on this hybrid piece, read one mom’s honest review of the Doona stroller .

Video Reviews

Doona Infant Car Seat/Stroller Review

Community Reviews

“100 percent I love it! It’s the best purchase I have made. I do also have the Uppababy Vista for growing the family and longer walks. But for convenience, travel and ease of use, the Doona is the best!”

“The Doona is amazing for travel! My husband is obsessed with it, it’s so easy and you don’t need to lug all kinds of baby stuff. I also like it for when it’s just me running into the grocery or a quick errand vs, putting his car seat on the stroller. The convenience and small footprint are a winner for us!”

“I love my Doona, very convenient. I’m 5’6”, my husband is 6’3” and he felt that the length of the stroller handle is bad for his back when he pushed our daughter, I was fine with the height. My daughter used the Doona until she was a little over a year, maybe 14 or 15 months. The stroller is heavy, I have to admit. Overall, I’m planning on using it again for baby number two.”

Best Convertible Stroller

UPPAbaby Vista V3

Converts to hold up to three kids

Smooth suspension and easy steering

Oversized storage basket

Height-adjustable handlebar

Bulky when folded

Takes up trunk space

Weight : 27 lbs

Dimensions : ‎36 x 25.7 x 39.5 inches

Weight/Age limit : From birth (with bassinet) to 50 lbs (toddler seat)

Under-carriage storage : Yes— holds up to 30 lbs

Why We Love It

Looking for a stroller that can handle the newborn days and keep up as your family grows? The UPPAbaby Vista V3 is up for the challenge. This premium convertible stroller is sturdy, smooth and thoughtfully designed for the long haul. It starts as a single stroller, works from day one with the compatible bassinet (sold separately), and later converts to a double — or even a triple — with the RumbleSeat or PiggyBack ride-along board . For families who plan to use their stroller every day, this one’s a smart and flexible investment.

Liz has used the Vista V3 daily since Lou was born, deeming it, "the SUV of strollers: luxe, sturdy and smooth."

"I use it for neighborhood walks and trips into town, and it glides so easily over sidewalks, curbs and even rough park terrain," she says. "The bassinet was amazing for newborn strolls — so cozy — and now we love flipping the toddler seat to face in or out, depending on Lou’s mood.”

The Vista V3’s Smooth FlexRide Suspension helps absorb bumps and makes steering feel almost effortless, even with one hand. The oversized underseat basket (holds up to 30 pounds) fits everything from diaper bags to dinner ingredients. You’ll also get a height-adjustable handlebar, an extendable UPF 50+ canopy with mesh panels for airflow and a one-step fold that stands on its own.

It’s not the most compact pick — the bulkier frame takes up trunk space and can be a tight squeeze indoors. But for daily adventures, especially outside, the Vista V3 shines.

Bonus points for the style: The newest Vista V3 models come in fresh, eye-catching colors. Mystic Aqua, in particular, is a standout — bold, elevated and a refreshing break from the sea of strollers in black and gray.

Video Reviews

UPPAbaby Vista V3 Stroller Review

Community Reviews

“I have one. Really happy with it — so smooth to push even when the basket is full. Don't find it heavy and it fits in my dual cab ute behind the driver's seat. We got it because we knew we would have more than one baby and didn't want them too far apart.”

“I love the Vista as a double and a single. It makes life so much easier with two under 2. It fits in grocery store aisles like a dream and it maneuvers super well. The basket on the bottom is large and great for shopping. Cons: It is super cumbersome and hard to push if you go off pavement.”

“We love ours. Totally worth every penny. Customer service is amazing when we had to repair a piece!”

Best Umbrella Stroller

Summer Infant 3Dlite Convenience Stroller

Lightweight

four reclining positions

large storage basket

Like other umbrella strollers

this one is not appropriate for newborns

Weight: 13 lbs

Dimensions: 18 x 17 x 43 inches

Weight/age limit: 6 months up to 50 lbs or 43 inches

Under-carriage storage : Yes

Why We Love It

Sometimes you need a heavy-duty stroller with all the bells and whistles. Other times, you just need an umbrella stroller. Lightweight and smaller than a full-size stroller, umbrella strollers are ideal for on-the-go families. And the 13-pound Summer Infant 3Dlite Convenience Stroller is one of the most popular options within our What to Expect community.

Many umbrella strollers don’t recline, so parents love that the Summer Infant 3Dlite has four different reclining positions, which can help ensure your baby can sit and even sleep comfortably. (Just remember that strollers should not be used for routine sleep, and you should keep a close eye on your little one while she snoozes.) Despite its lighter weight and slimmer profile, this stroller still delivers many of the features you’d want in a stroller of any size — anti-shock front wheels, lockable rear wheels and a large storage basket for anything you need to tote. It's also offered at a lower price point than other strollers.

The Summer Infant 3Dlite Convenience Stroller is also quite sturdy, despite its flexibility, so it takes sidewalks and slightly bumpy terrain in stride. At the end of the day, this stroller is a great way to transport babies who weigh as much as 50 pounds — that’s well into toddlerhood. Because of this, many parents say this is one of the best options for traveling as well as for quick errands.

The AAP warns against hanging bags off the handlebars of any stroller, since the extra weight can cause them to tip backwards. But that’s especially important with an umbrella stroller, because they're so lightweight and, therefore, more tip-prone.

Community Reviews

babymountaingoat "My mom got the Summer Infant 3DLite for us to keep at her house when we visit. I really liked using it and we bought it because they live on dirt roads and it worked really well on them. I’ll say I found it a little cumbersome to fold up, but honestly I only tried a couple times and I’m sure I’d get the hang of it using it more. I thought it was a good stroller for the price especially. I would definitely recommend if you are looking for pushing on uneven terrain."

klahl02 “I got this at Walmart after wanting to get rid of our bulkier stroller. I am tall and the regular umbrella strollers are too short for me and I have to hunch and walk to push them. This is a bit taller but still folds down to compact size. It also has a small area underneath for storage. My only complaint would be that the wheels are bulky when folded but it helps it be sturdy on the go. It fits easily into my hatchback.”

Best Jogging Stroller

Thule Urban Glide 3

All-terrain suspension

One-handed fold

Large wheels and swivel front wheel

UPF 50+ canopy with ventilation

Bulky when folded

Expensive

Weight: 26.2 lbs

Dimensions: 34.6 x 22.8 x 12.2 inches (folded)

Weight/age limit: Up to 75 lbs

Under-carriage storage: Yes

Why We Love It

If staying active with your little one is part of your post-baby game plan, the Thule Urban Glide 3 just might be your new favorite running buddy. This high-performance jogging stroller glides like a dream — thanks to its rear suspension and air-filled tires — and looks sleek and sporty without feeling bulky. Whether you’re strolling sun-dappled sidewalks or jogging bumpy trails, this stroller keeps the ride smooth for both you and your tiny copilot.

What to Expect Community member and contributing creator Gabriella Barrera has been putting the Urban Glide 3 through its paces with her 14-month-old son, Louie. “I can push this stroller with just the tips of my fingers, even on bumpy terrain,” she says. “Louie always falls asleep during walks or runs, and I’ve been able to keep him comfortably in the stroller for much longer stretches of time.”

Her favorite features? The generously sized canopy (a must for mid-jog naps and shielding that sweet face from the Texas sun), the built-in hand brake for extra control, and the zippered undercarriage storage that actually fits more than just a diaper and a dream. The suspension is ultra-smooth, and the wheels pop off easily for storage. One note: While the fold isn’t exactly one-handed as advertised, Gabriella says the thoughtful design more than makes up for the extra step.

Any downsides? The price tag might give you pause — it’s definitely a splurge. And for a stroller in this higher range, Gabriella notes a couple of surprising misses: “There’s no cup holder, which feels like a big oversight for something built for movement. And no snack tray for Louie is kind of a bummer.”

Still, she says the performance and thoughtful design justify the investment: “Compared to my previous jogging stroller, this one feels like a major upgrade. It makes me feel more confident running on different terrain — which is probably more fun for Louie, too.”

Video Reviews

Thule Urban Glide 3 Jogging Stroller Review

Community Reviews

"We love our Thule Urban Glide! Super sleek looking. Husband is an avid athlete, does iron man races, etc and he loves running with the Thule. We also bought the bassinet attachment when our first was born and it was the best for neighborhood walks to cafes, restaurants, etc. Big and comfy. Seat doesn't fully sit upright but doesn't bother our 2 year old at all."

"I have it! Love everything about it….such a smooth ride and good height for taller parents."

"This is the only stroller we have so we use it for everything and everywhere. Indoors, outdoors, smooth pavement, and off-road. It’s been great for daily walks and I’ve run with it a TON. Love it!!

It’s a little tight in some local shops and we’ll occasionally leave it at the host stand in some restaurants rather than pull it up to the table. But there’s really no where we haven’t been able to use it.

For us, it’s been very well worth the cost! It’s super sturdy too. I only wish they made a travel bag for air travel."

"We have the Urban Glide 2, my husband has been very happy with it for jogs on the limestone ‘rails to trails’ in town. It is pretty reclined so I think personally I’m glad it’s not my only stroller, we have a lighter weight one for going in tight spaces and stores and such."

Best Double Stroller

Baby Jogger City Select 2 Double Stroller

Has 24 possible configurations to accommodate up to three kids

The second seat is sold separately

Weight : 26.75 lbs

Dimensions : 41.1 x 23.8 x 35 inches

Weight/Age limit : Birth to age 5, up to 45 lbs per seat

Under-carriage storage : Yes

Why We Love It

The Baby Jogger City Select 2 Double Stroller is a popular choice among parents of multiples in the What to Expect community. This is a convertible double stroller, meaning it can be used as a single stroller initially then changed to a double by adding a second seat. You can also use the City Select 2with two seats and a back glider board, allowing you to push three children at once. (Just note that the second seat and glider board are sold separately, so if you intend to use this as a double stroller from day one, make sure to purchase the second seat, too.)

The Baby Jogger City Select 2 Double Stroller is a popular choice among parents of multiples in the What to Expect community. This is a convertible double stroller, meaning it can be used as a single stroller initially then changed to a double by adding a second seat. You can also use the

with two seats and a back glider board, allowing you to push three children at once. (Just note that the

Reviewers appreciate how compatible this stroller is with a variety of car seats — an especially helpful feature for parents of multiples who drive often. It can be much easier to attach a car seat into a stroller as a travel system than unclip and re-clip two babies every time you make a stop. Baby Jogger, Britax, Chicco, Cybex, Graco, Maxi-Cosi, Nuna, Peg Perego and UPPAbaby infant car seats all work in this stroller (you’ll have to purchase adapters separately, however). And because it’s narrower than most side-by-side double strollers (and many convertible doubles, too), you’ll likely find it easier to maneuver in tight spaces, making it an equally good choice for families who live in cities.

Other nice features include reclining seats, a UV 50+ canopy with a peekaboo window (helpful to easily check on baby when she’s forward-facing), a telescoping handlebar and one-handed fold.

Video Reviews

Baby Jogger City Select 2 Double Stroller Review

Community Reviews

“I love my City Select Double by Baby Jogger. You can snap in two infant seats and both kids can go up to 45 pounds each.”

“We have the Baby Jogger City Select Double and love it! Was great with our infant seats (Chicco Keyfit 30s) and at 15 months old, our boys still do great in it and it fits everywhere, is easy to maneuver and does well on all types of terrain.”

“I have the Baby Jogger City Select Double I use all the time except when I'm taking cabs. If you have your own car, then City Select is a great option. It is sturdy and has so many different seat configurations. Worth every penny. I also have a single stroller (Baby Jogger City Mini) I use for times when I want to go out with just one baby and don't want to lug around the heavy double one.”

Best Triple Stroller

Zoe The Triov2

Fits three children

very compact when folded

Disney-approved

Can be tough to maneuver

Weight: 32.2 lbs. with all three seats

32.2 lbs. with all three seats

Dimensions : 43 x 30 x 49 inches

Weight/Age limit : 3 months up to 45 lbs. per seat

: 3 months up to 45 lbs. per seat

Under-carriage storage : Yes

Why We Love It

Most strollers designed for multiples have just two infant or toddler seats with an optional rider board for an older child. But families with triplets or three under 5 have a much harder time finding a stroller that can fit their whole brood. One of the few options on the market that can accommodate larger families is the Zoe The Triov2 , the updated version of the brand’s Trio+. (If you have four kids, the brand also has its Tribe+ stroller that starts as a quad and can be downsized to a double.)

Most strollers designed for multiples have just two infant or toddler seats with an optional rider board for an older child. But families with triplets or three under 5 have a much harder time finding a stroller that can fit their whole brood. One of the few options on the market that can accommodate larger families is the Zoe The Triov2 , the updated version of the brand’s Trio+. (If you have four kids, the brand also has its

The Triov2 would be an excellent stroller regardless of how many children it could seat. Although it’s not designed for newborns, it reclines 140 degrees (in twin mode) or 120 degrees (with the third add-on seat) and is safe for babies 3 months and older who have good head control. Strollers that accommodate multiple children are often on the bulky side, but this one manages to be as sleek as possible: It has a lightweight aluminum frame, a slim profile and can fold up easily. If you have twins and a toddler, you’ll also appreciate that it can convert down to a double when your older child outgrows the stroller years.

There are also a number of nice-to-have features included, such as a parent cup holder, two child cup holders, a snack cup and adjustable footrest (notable, since those are often add-ons you pay extra for with other strollers). Many families also appreciate that it’s approved for use in Disney .

There are also a number of nice-to-have features included, such as a parent cup holder, two child cup holders, a snack cup and adjustable footrest (notable, since those are often add-ons you pay extra for with other strollers). Many families also appreciate that it’s

More kids typically means less maneuverability, so it’s not very surprising that The Triov2 isn’t the easiest to push on tough terrain. But on pavement, parents say it works well. And you can’t beat the price and design for larger families.

Community Reviews

“We have the Zoe stroller. We have 3-month-old twins and a 2.5-year-old toddler. So I got the triple stroller. It’s not great on gravel, but not an issue for everyone. I love how easy it is to fold/unfold/attach. The extra long canopies are nice too! The triple with all the kids (toddler in front) isn’t the easiest to push, but still not bad for a mile or two walk. I wish it had the option of bigger tires! It does fold down and fit in our car’s trunk, so that’s a major bonus, too.”

“I have the Zoe Triple which I love. It is lightweight and folds up small.”

“My friend with triplets said she’s been through quite a few strollers and has liked the Zoe The Trio+ stroller the best.”

Best Stroller for Toddlers

Bugaboo Butterfly

Lightweight and easy to maneuver

Streamlined design

High-end finishes to hold up to toddler wear and tear

Expensive

Weight : 16.1 lbs.

Dimensions : 36.4 x 17.7 x 40 inches

Weight/age limit : Up to 50 lbs.

Under-carriage storage : Yes

Why We Love It

Once your toddler is toddling more than strolling, your stroller needs shift. You might no longer need a newborn bassinet or a full-on travel system — and you may not want to haul around a giant set of wheels for quick outings or airport adventures. What you do want? A compact stroller that folds like a dream, fits just about anywhere, and still has space for your little explorer’s must-haves (snacks, stuffies, and a sippy cup or two). Enter: the Bugaboo Butterfly .

The Butterfly is beloved by parents for its super simple one-second fold (yes, really), light weight (a smidge over 16 pounds), and carry-on-compatible size when folded. It’s easy to store in a closet, car trunk or even an airplane overhead bin — and just as easy to maneuver through tight spaces or busy sidewalks. Bonus: The roomy underseat basket fits all the essentials (and then some).

What to Expect staffer Steph Fisher put the Butterfly to the test during family trips — including a whirlwind week at Disney World. It quickly became her favorite travel companion. “It handles surprisingly well on uneven terrain for a travel stroller,” she says. “The fold and unfold was key — we had to break it down fast for buses, but could roll it right onto the Skyliner.”

She also raved about the storage: “The underseat basket gave us tons of space for all our gear and souvenirs on long park days.” Her toddler napped soundly thanks to the deep recline and extended canopy — and when her 6-year-old’s legs gave out, he climbed in too. “He’s tall but still under the 50-pound limit, and it was spacious enough for him.”

Yes, the Butterfly is on the pricier side — but for many parents (Steph included), the quality and long-term use are more than worth it. With one of the highest weight limits in its category and a tall backrest for growing kids, this stroller can go the distance. As Steph says, “If you can swing the price, every bit of it feels worth it.”

Video Reviews

Bugaboo Butterfly Stroller Review

Community Reviews

"I have it and recommend it. I’ve flown with it, and it’s extremely handy. One-handed fold up, fits into overhead locker. My child loves it, finds it so comfortable and it’s very easy to push on footpaths. Love it!"

"I love mine! I heard about the seat liner pilling but so far ours is perfect, it’s very tidy but somehow roomy… I use it for my 2 year, 3 month old who’s quite petite, but my tall 4 year old fits in it comfortably, too."

"Yes absolutely recommend it, only regret is not buying it sooner!"

Best Stroller Wagon

Larktale Caravan Coupe V2

Sturdy

Easy to fold

Five different storage compartments in and out of the wagon

Heavy

Weight : 39.8 lbs.

Dimensions: ‎49.5 x 25 x 42.5 inches

Weight/Age limit: From 6 months to 65 lbs. per seat

From 6 months to 65 lbs. per seat

Under-carriage storage : No, but plenty removable storage consoles

Why We Love It

For a stroller wagon that offers a few more bells and whistles without taking up more space, consider the Larktale Caravan Coupe . Though only slightly bigger than competitors, this luxe stroller wagon offers a slew of features that make it worth the more expensive price tag. To start, there are five — yes five! — storage units that help you bring everything you need in an organized fashion. This includes a rear- or front-attaching storage basket; an inner storage console and interior mesh pockets so riders have easy access to snacks, drinks and more; an exterior mesh pocket; and a removable handlebar console to keep your necessities within reach.

. Though only slightly bigger than competitors, this luxe stroller wagon offers a slew of features that make it worth the more expensive price tag. To start, there are five — yes five! — storage units that help you bring everything you need in an organized fashion. This includes a rear- or front-attaching storage basket; an inner storage console and interior mesh pockets so riders have easy access to snacks, drinks and more; an exterior mesh pocket; and a removable handlebar console to keep your necessities within reach.

The stroller wagon features a large, foldable sun canopy with a mesh panel to ensure proper air flow, and comes with a rain cover to keep kids dry during drizzly adventures. Plus, it’s easy to fold flat for convenient storage in cars and closets.

The Larktale Caravan Coupe can comfortably fit up to two kids, with individually reclining seats to enhance comfort. The one downside is that it’s pretty heavy at 40 pounds, but Leah says that’s a small price to pay for what the Larktale provides.

“I was shocked that, despite being heavy, the Larktale stroller wagon is super easy to maneuver,” she says, adding that she recently used the wagon on a trip to the zoo and had no trouble weaving in and out of crowds or moving through doors. “My 2-year-old daughter and her 3-year-old friend were securely seated and had plenty of room to stretch their legs, and they were able to take in the views even with the canopy up. I especially loved and appreciated the console which held each of their water bottles and snack canisters. It gave them a sense of independence and gave me a break from constantly fetching food.”

Leah adds that the break can be a little difficult to operate when you first use the wagon, but after a few pushes it loosens for easy foot operation.

What to Look for in a Baby Stroller

There are a few additional factors to consider when buying a stroller to ensure it suits your family’s specific needs, beyond those we used to create our list. These include:

Family size : Consider your current — and future — family size. If you only have one child or plan to space children several years apart, a single stroller may be all you need. But if you're expecting multiples or planning closely spaced siblings, you'll want to consider a convertible or double stroller. We selected a variety of strollers to suit different family sizes.

Location : Families living in urban areas may appreciate a narrower stroller with strong maneuverability to help navigate small doorways and busy streets. Those in the suburbs who tend to drive more than walk might prefer a travel system that lets you click the infant car seat directly into the stroller frame. We selected strollers of varying sizes — both in use and when folded — to suit different living environments.

Cost : Strollers can be incredibly expensive, but there are excellent budget-friendly options available. And if your timing is right, major retailers often offer significant discounts during shopping events like Black Friday , Cyber Monday and Amazon Prime Day . Just keep in mind: Investing upfront in a quality stroller may save you money long-term — especially if you plan to have more than one child.

Adaptable design : The best strollers grow with your family and adapt to changing needs — whether that means accommodating an infant car seat or adding a bassinet attachment, second seat, or rider board.

FAQs

Which baby stroller brand is best?

There isn’t exactly a “best” stroller brand because the best stroller for one family might not be the same for another. That said, some of the most popular stroller brands include Graco, Chicco and Evenflo for all-around strollers, while brands like BOB Gear, Baby Jogger and Thule are common choices for parents looking for all-terrain or jogging strollers. Popular luxury stroller brands include Uppababy, Maxi-Cosi and Cybex. All of these brands are great options for your stroller depending on your preferences and price range.

Which stroller is best to buy?

For What to Expect editors, we say that the Mockingbird Single-To-Double Stroller 2.0 is the Best Stroller Overall due to its easy maneuverability, lightweight design and quick one-handed fold, but that doesn’t mean it’s the best stroller for every family. You may require a single-to-double stroller if you’re expecting your family to grow, a double stroller for twins or a jogging stroller to keep up with your active lifestyle. The best stroller is one that is big enough for your family, easy to use and fits within your budget.

American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), How to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy Explained , October 2023. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), How to Choose a Safe Baby Stroller , August 2022. U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Carriages and Strollers Business Guidance & Small Entity Compliance Guide , 2024.

Your Next Read

How to Buy a Baby Stroller By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

The Best Stroller Travel Systems That Parents Say Make Life Easier Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 10 Best Stroller Footmuffs To Keep Your Baby Warm on the Coldest Winter Walks Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

7 Best Convertible and All-in-One Car Seats, Tested and Reviewed by Real Parents Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

I Chose the Nuna Travel System Over the Doona — Here’s Why I’d Do It Again By Elizabeth Buxton, Director of Commerce Content Strategy

Is the Doona Car Seat & Stroller Worth the $550 Price Tag? Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

12 Best Maternity Coats When You Can No Longer Zip Your Jacket, According to a Mom of 2 Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Are Baby Walkers Safe? Here's What the Experts Say Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window