How to Take Professional-Looking Newborn Photos at Home

baby photoshoot at home

Capture your baby's first weeks — without shelling out for a pro photographer — using these tips from parents who went the DIY route.

Those first few days with your baby are so special. You're going to want to capture those tiny fingers, round cheeks and adorable newborn faces forever, but professional photo shoots can cost hundreds of dollars.

If paying for a photographer isn't in your budget, you can still capture beautiful photos of your baby's first days. Parents in the What to Expect community got to talking about how they DIYed their newborn pictures. Here are the tips that got them through their photo shoots.

Take the photos early

Those first days whiz by, but making some time for photos will help you preserve those special moments forever.

"The ideal time is when baby is five to 10 days old so they are still sleepy and you can easily pose them." — missthompson

Get baby ready

Take cues from the star of the show when planning the shoot.

"I just made sure she was well fed, sleepy and warm. I also used a white noise machine to make sure the sound of the camera didn’t startle her. I did it in the morning when she’s usually the sleepiest and the light is best." — tilly_mae

Filter the light

Letting in a lot of light can greatly improve your pics, but so can filtering it with sheer curtains or a sheet.

"I found the room in my house with the best natural light and put a white sheet up so that the light wasn't so harsh and it filtered through nicely." — tilly_mae

Create a cute background

Switch up the theme by using different patterned blankets as backdrops and swapping in props like stuffed toys. Tip: A from-above shot is easy to get and your baby can stay on her back.

"Just used bed sheets on our living room couch when he was tiny with blankets and pillows underneath to help with propping him up." — jessieg123

Use a pillow

While it’s okay to pose your baby with pillows and blankets for a short photo shoot, don't leave her unattended, especially when she’s sleeping. As soon as you’re finished, make sure you transfer her to a safe sleeping position .

"Use a Boppy or some sort of pillow to prop up your baby, use a blanket as the backdrop and make sure the back of it is held tight to get that infinite look." — leguene

Pick up your iPhone

You don’t need a professional camera to capture professional-looking shots. A smartphone camera can yield surprisingly crisp results. Bonus tip: Use portrait mode!

"We actually tried taking our photos with our Canon Rebel, but they weren't turning out so I switched to my iPhone and they looked so much better!" — Littleashley

Do a costume change

Have a few accessories or different clothes at the ready for your miniature model to change into. You’ll end up with a bunch more options.

"You can change headbands or outfits to get more variety in your photos." — aleashya

Get close

Try to capture the details, like the tiny yawns, smiles, fingers and toes. Focusing on these details will remind you how delicate your baby once was and also might help you capture some sweet moments.

Try a different angle

Get creative with your stance while photographing your little peanut .

"Take the photos from at least three different angles. That will also give you more of a variety to choose from. However, when taking the photo, do not shoot upward towards the baby. What I mean by this is not to shoot the photo where you can see up the baby's nose." — aleashya

Be patient

A little preparation goes a long way, but be prepared to go with the flow once the photo shoot starts.

"Have everything set up before you even pick up the baby, and make sure you take some practice shots first. (You can even use a doll to practice and see what it will look like) ... Then, once you do place her, have lots of patience, and be ready to stop and do it over in a while if she gets frustrated. Usually, I resigned myself to the fact that I won't get the exact photo I want, but it will be good enough." — danielmeowmeow

Edit your photos

Don't be afraid to desaturate, go black and white, add a filter and play around with color. It can give a simple photo a totally new look. Experiment with the different Instagram features, the Photoshop Express Photo Editor app or any other photo editing app you like.

Go easy on yourself

You can take beautiful photos as an amateur, but the final results might not look exactly like what the pros do, and that’s okay.

"Keep it simple. Pinterest can be great for ideas, but keep in mind a lot of those photos are composites, you can't copy them without serious editing." — NicoleMoses613

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Easy-to-Take Holiday Photos You’ll Cherish for Years to Come By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

8 Tips to Get the Sweetest Photos of Your Kids — Without Fancy Equipment or a Full Day Photoshoot Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Picture-Perfect Maternity Photo Ideas for Every Parent-to-Be Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

This Is Your Sign to Have a Valentine's Day Photo Shoot With Your Baby By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Sweet Monthly Photo Shoot Ideas for Every Family By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Can You Sleep Train a Newborn? What Works and What Needs to Wait Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here’s How Much Sleep Babies Actually Need Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Newborn Sleep Basics Every Parent Should Know Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How Do You Actually Get Your Baby on a Sleep Schedule? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Baby Nap Schedules: How to Help Your Little One Get the Daytime Sleep He Needs Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Photos Every Pregnant Mom Needs — Because You'll Regret Not Taking Them Later Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Best Activities for a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's How to Establish a Bedtime Routine for Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window