12 Best Maternity Coats When You Can No Longer Zip Your Jacket, According to a Mom of 2

Best Maternity Coats and Jackets for Winter - H&M green parka, wool coat from Modern Eternity, and Puffer from Mountain Warehouse

Quick Summary

According to moms in the What to Expect community, Modern Eternity makes some of the best options, offering everything from tailored wool topcoats to 3-in-1 quilted parkas.

If you’ll be pregnant this winter, I highly recommend investing in a maternity coat. During my first pregnancy, I thought I could bypass the expensive purchase and wear my regular jacket. I quickly learned, however, that having a little extra room to accommodate my burgeoning belly was necessary for my own comfort. Bonus: Because of the chic designs and oversized trends, you can continue wearing a maternity coat long after your little one is born. I wore mine for both pregnancies, surviving a New York fall and winter, making it a worthwhile long-term investment.

Of course, if you don’t want to commit to a maternity coat, there are also jacket extenders that do the same job for a fraction of the cost. Ahead, I cover everything you need to know about shopping for this winter wardrobe staple, including what to look for and how to find the right size.

Types of Maternity Coats

What sets the best maternity coats apart is their accommodation of your growing baby bump, as well as their usability beyond nine months of pregnancy. Here's a look at some of the most common types of maternity winter coats I initially came across in my own search for one:

3-in-1 maternity coats: If you're looking for an investment piece that will last beyond pregnancy, a 3-in-1 coat is for you. You can wear the coat with a small bump then add an extender panel as your belly grows. Once baby arrives, you can continue to use the panel to wear baby in a carrier against your chest to shield them from the cold.

Jacket extenders: These aren't coats, but rather an insert panel that simply zips into your existing coat so you can keep wearing an already-loved winter jacket without investing in a new maternity-specific one. Some moms in extremely cold climates recommend extenders so they can keep wearing the high-quality winter coats they already have. And, you can use it for other seasons like light spring and fall jackets or raincoats. It might not look super elegant, but it’s a smart and cost-effective solution.

Aside from 3-in-1 coats and jacket extenders, other maternity coats are similar to regular coats, but with more room. You can shop maternity puffer coats, parkas, fleece jackets and more that are designed to have enough space for your bump as you grow, so you can wear it through the end of your pregnancy.

How I Chose the Best Maternity Coats

In addition to my own experience, I relied heavily on first-hand reviews and recommendations from moms in the What to Expect community. And although personal preference will always play a role in choosing the best option for you, I was able to get a sense of which maternity coats most moms love. I also considered material, adjustability and seasonality to provide a wide range of options to fit your lifestyle.

Here, the best maternity coats and jackets if you're dressing for two (or more!) this winter.

Freelance writer Patrice Williams originally contributed to this article.

Best 3-in-1 Puffer Maternity Coat

Modern Eternity Gianna 3 in 1 Maternity Hybrid Puffer Jacket

Can be worn three ways

machine-washable

waterproof

Expensive

Size range: XS-XL

Material: Nylon

Why We Love It

Modern Eternity's Gianna Maternity Puffer Jacket covers many of the bases for style, comfort and versatility. This puffer includes a 3-in-1 design, with a removable panel that accommodates either a baby bump or a baby in a carrier so you'll get multiple seasons of wear out of it. It's also waterproof to help keep you dry on snowy or rainy days, and it can easily be machine washed so you won't have a problem keeping it looking like new. Anyone who lives in windy places will also like the drawstring hood so you can pull it tight and keep your head warm.

Moms-to-be appreciated how much space this puffer has in the torso, with some not needing to use the extender for quite a while. As far as sizing goes, Modern Eternity recommends buying your pre-pregnancy size, which reviewers say is accurate.

Community Reviews

I just got one from modern eternity... It's a regular coat, then has a zip in panel that can be for maternity, or, you can flip the panel and wear it over a baby in a carrier. I'm in love with it.

“I bought a 3-in-1 coat from Modern Eternity. $169, but it will fit me post-baby and it's waterproof & good to -15. I live on Vancouver Island so waterproof was an absolute need. I've walked in complete downpours and stayed dry.”

“I got one from Modern Eternity and it’s great because it will work with baby sling and AFTER baby!”

Best 3-in-1 Parka Maternity Coat

Seraphine Women’s 3-in-1 Winter Maternity Parka

Windproof

water-resistant

machine-washable

Expensive

Size range: 2-20

Material: Polyester, cotton

Why We Love It

Versatility is truly the key with this cozy Seraphine winter parka , which earned our best overall pick because of its long-lasting design and excellent quality that keeps you warm. The 3-in-1 style is suitable for every stage of pregnancy, as you can wear this coat with a small bump and then add the zip-on panel for your third trimester and postpartum baby-wearing. Many new moms raved about the extender panel which can be attached to your jacket for enough room to hold baby in a carrier against your chest. It's also windproof and water-resistant, making it great if you live somewhere windy and damp. And the drawstring ties at the waist and hem allow you to maintain a fitted look as your bump grows. This is a great middle-of-the-road coat too as it's warm enough for chilly climates but you won't feel overly bundled up as you can in some puffer jackets. Use it for multiple seasons to get the most amount of wear.

Community Reviews

"It’s very soft and cozy. I am looking forward to using it once baby gets here too!"

"I just bought the navy blue one few weeks ago, I love it! It’s warm (warm enough for London) and really soft and comfy inside. I had a similar coat with my first. He was a March baby but it was a really cold spring, I did find the panel really useful for walks to the park and coffee shop."

“I just got it and love it! It’s so soft and cozy. Seems really well made.”

“I like that this one I can wear without the insert since there's lots of room to grow but still waist defining. And then when I'm giant at the end (I get a giant beach ball under there haha) I can add it if needed.”

Best Fleece Maternity Jacket

Smallshow Women’s 2-in-1 Maternity Fleece Zip Up

Lower-priced than other coats

machine-washable

Panel sold separately

Size range: S-XXL

Material: Polyester

Why We Love It

What to Expect community members love Smallshow's nursing clothes, and the brand's maternity jacket is also pretty clutch. The hoodie-style maternity jacket is made with a soft, polar fleece that'll see you comfortably through multiple seasons. It's soft to the touch and easy to move in, and many moms like that it's great for day-to-day wear, as well as outdoor activities like trips to the park or zoo.

If you're someone who lives in a place where temperatures don't get too low or you need a spring or fall jacket, this lightweight fleece is a smart pick. While it's obviously great for wearing to accommodate your growing bump, many new moms found it especially comfortable for baby-wearing, due to the flexible fleece. The downside is that the extender panel is sold separately, but even with it added on, the total price of the jacket is still at a lower price point than other coats.

Best Sweatshirt-Style Maternity Jacket

Ingrid & Isabel Cozy Reversible Sherpa Maternity Jacket

Reversible for versatility

Zip pockets

Can be worn after pregnancy

Dry clean only

Size range : XS-XL

Material : Polyester

Why We Love It

This Ingrid & Isabel Cozy Reversible Sherpa Maternity Jacket lives up to its name: moms say it feels like you’re wearing a blanket. It’s also a great reversible option. One side is sherpa for days when you just need a warmer layer, and the other is made of a water-repellent material that’s great for heading out in misting rain or light snow. It has three zippered pockets for safekeeping and a relaxed fit that can easily accommodate your belly – plus, you can just leave it unzipped or half-zipped if needed. But here’s why it earns a place on my list: it isn’t an obvious maternity item, so you can definitely wear it after giving birth, justifying the higher price point.

Best Maternity Jacket Extender

MakeMyBellyFit Universal Jacket Extender

Wind- and water-resistant

universal zipper adapter

Expensive

Size range: One size

Material: Polyester

Why We Love It

A great jacket extender is a smart solution for the mom-to-be who doesn't want to purchase a new maternity coat. The MakeMyBellyFit Jacket Extender attaches to your existing coat or jacket for a roomier fit to accommodate your growing belly, but it's also great for baby-wearing as it allows plenty of space for baby in a carrier. It's also great for multi-season use, since you can attach it to raincoats, winter puffers, light fleece jackets and more. Although it is expensive, it will be cost-effective for many in the long-run if you use it for multiple types of coats and seasons.

Several moms who live in especially cold locations, like Chicago to Canada, raved about this extender for allowing them to continue wearing their existing high-performance winter coats. What's great about this extender, too, is that after baby is born, both parents can take turns using it to hold baby in a carrier and keep you both warm, thanks to the polar fleece design.

Just keep in mind that while the zipper converter does work on most coats, it won't work on Metaluxe zippers, so double check your winter jacket before purchasing.

Community Reviews

"I would buy a regular jacket and get a Make My Belly Fit extender. They're a Canadian company (woo!) and they're pretty amazing! I get compliments on mine all the time. Since they zip into any jacket you can use them after baby gets here so you can baby-wear under your jacket as well. They're awesome!"

"Make my belly fit jacket extender is the best. I think they're on sale today too for cyber Monday. They are also great for resale. With my first I bought a maternity jacket but it was pretty useless to me after baby was born. Wish I bout this extender then!"

"I have an extender from "Make My Belly Fit". It was gifted to me during my first pregnancy and it's amazing! It comes with a removable polar fleece layer (I'm in the mountains in Canada... so you better believe that comes in handy lol)."

“I got the universal extender from make my belly fit , fits on my fall coat , rain coat , winter parka and my husband can also use it next winter for baby wearing on his parka . In Ottawa /mtl for context we have lots of different coats so for us it’s worth it.”

“100% recommend this jacket extender. My girlfriend in Yellowknife gifted me one when I was pregnant with my first. she has used them through multiple NWT winters and spends a decent amount of time outside. I'm in the mountains in BC and have loved mine!”

Best Non-Maternity (But Bump-Friendly) Jacket

Orolay Women's Down Jacket

Great color options

size range

deep pockets

Can fit tight in the shoulders

Size range: XXS-XXL

Material: Polyester and sherpa

Why We Love It

Although it's not a dedicated maternity coat, the Orolay Down Jacket is beloved by the WTE community. Moms-to-be consistently rave about its warmth, roominess for pregnancy and versatility to be worn post-pregnancy, as well. The exterior features large pockets and cozy sherpa material, while the inside is super warm and spacious to accommodate your growing belly. The side panel has a few buttons which can be tightened or let out for a snugger or roomier fit, respectively. And there are also side zips at the hem. Though it’s not maternity-specific, many pregnant people say they prefer it to dedicated maternity jackets.

Community Reviews

"I bought the orolay parka on Amazon. It is not a pregnancy coat but it is meant to fit a bit large and has size zippers that can open for more space. Cute for pregnancy and beyond."

"Highly recommend the Orolay coat that was super popular on Amazon a few years ago. It runs really big as it is, and is the warmest coat I may have ever owned."

“I got “the Amazon jacket” for my first pregnancy and used it for my second and plan on using it for this one as well. It’s such a great jacket! I even use it not pregnant. I sized up to a medium but tbh I could’ve done fine with my regular size small cause it expands so much. There’s side zipper and snaps in the front that allow you to expand in all directions and you can use it as a regular winter coat when you’re not pregnant. It comes in a thousand colors I love this coat so much!”

“This one is not technically maternity but I bought it because several of my preggo friends used it before, during and after pregnancy! It has zippers on the side to expand the fit! It’s so warm!”

Best Puffer Maternity Coat

Ingrid & Isabel Maternity Grow With You Puffer Jacket

Machine-washable

often goes on sale

Might run large

Size range: XS-XL

Material: Polyester

Why We Love It

There's no denying how absolutely warm and toasty some puffer jackets can be, but there's also no denying some of them can look (and feel!) bulky and less than flattering. One puffer that manages to maintain a level of warmth with a surprisingly sleek fit is Ingrid & Isabel's Maternity Grow With You Puffer Jacket. In addition to the relaxed silhouette, the puffer jacket is designed to grow with your body: You can unzip the sides to give yourseld eight more inches of room! Because of this, it runs fairly true to size. And it's easy to care for because you can just toss it in the washing machine.

nzip the sides to give yourseld eight more inches of room! Because of this, it runs fairly true to size.

Best Waterproof Maternity Coat

Mountain Warehouse Amethyst Long Padded Jacket

Water-resistant fabric

Insulated for warmth

Adjustable hood and hem

Only available in black

Size range : 2–24

Materials : 100% polyester

Why We Love It

If you need something that will keep you both warm and dry, this Mountain Warehouse Amethyst Padded Jacket will do the trick. The outer material is water-resistant, allowing droplets to simply roll off rather than soaking in. It’s insulated for heat retention to keep you cozy, and the longer length is an ideal buffer against wind, sleet and snow. I love that the hem and hood are adjustable for a custom fit, and that the collar also goes up, taking on the role of a scarf. The black is a chic look, although I do wish it came in a few other colors.

Best Wool Maternity Jacket

Modern Eternity 3-in-1 Maternity Wool Blend Coat

Formal style

Extender panel makes it versatile

Nursing friendly

Can wear after baby is born

Pricey

Limited colors

Size range : XS–XL

Materials : 54% wool, 44% polyester, 2% polyamide

Why We Love It

A cozy, chic wool coat can make even the coldest of winters a bit more bearable. This Modern Eternity 3-in-1 Maternity Wool Blend Coat is a great addition to your wardrobe, especially if you’ll have more formal events to attend to. The soft wool feel is warm, and the collar can be kept up to block wind or folded down if needed.

While pricey, its versatility makes it well worth the extra money. It comes with an extender panel that can be removed, allowing you to give yourself more space when pregnant. After giving birth, you can remove the panel if you want and continue wearing this coat.

You can also wear this postpartum while keeping your baby snug. A cozy panel is compatible with most baby carriers or slings and can keep your little one extra warm. Better yet, it doubles as a nursing-friendly panel, providing both of you some privacy.

Best Down Maternity Coat

Modern Eternity Lightweight Down 3-in-1 Maternity/Nursing Jacket

Includes an extender panel

washes easily

The hood is a bit small when pulled up

Size range: XS-XL

Material: Nylon, down, feather fill

Why We Love It

A good down coat is important in especially cold climates, as it provides plenty of warmth and insulation. A favorite brand among the WTE community, Modern Eternity has a solid option for moms-to-be, with its lightweight 3-in-1 down maternity coat . The down and feather fill is warm without being overly bulky or stifling, instead maintaining a lightweight fit. While some puffers and down coats can be pretty shapeless, we love that this one has a defined silhouette, whether you're wearing it during pregnancy or choose to remove the extender and wear it after the baby is born. There are also a few small but important details that make it stand out, such as the elastic in the hem for extra comfort and sleeve cuffs to keep the jacket more insulated on those breezy days. And because it's a 3-in-1 maternity coat, you'll get tons of use out of it while pregnant and afterward, whether you’re wearing baby or using it as a normal coat.

Best Plus-Size Maternity Coat

Yours Clothing Bump It Up Maternity Black Double Zip Parka

Machine-washable

adjustable drawstring

Limited color options

Size range: 10 - 28

Material: Cotton, polyester

Why We Love It

If you're shopping for plus-size maternity coats, look no further than UK-based brand Yours Clothing. They have a variety of options, including parkas and puffers with sizes available up to 28. This Bump It Up Maternity Midi Coat in particular has a soft outer cotton shell and polyester lining that keeps you warm without being bulky and uncomfortable. We also like that it includes a drawstring waistband so you can easily adjust the shape throughout pregnancy and the postpartum period. The roomy faux fur-rimmed hood will also keep your head warm, while the casual style is great when you're looking for an easy, lightweight option.

Best Maternity Parka

H&M MAMA Padded Parka

Great for a range of climates

Adjusts to growing boddy

May run large

Size range: XS - XXL

Material: Polyester

Why We Love It

For that classic parka style, you can't go wrong with this H&M Maternity Parka . The jacket has a longer hem, hitting at the knewwss, and is perfect for chillier climates. What we really love is the addition of the elastic drawstrings at the hem, allowing you to adjust the coat for a better fit. The coat also has an elastic wasit, helping it grow with your bump. The sleeves provide just enough space so you can easily and comfortably layer a heavy sweater underneath for colder months. Yet, it's a great lightweight option for wearing during spring or fall or in areas where winters aren't too cold.

What to Look for in Maternity Coats

Luckily, there's no shortage of on-trend outerwear, even for moms-to-be. These days, you can find everything from tailored wool coats and bright puffers to weatherproof rain gear, all designed with your bump and lifestyle in mind. As with any coat, however, you'll want to keep the below key factors in mind when shopping.

Material: As with all outerwear, maternity coats come in a wide range of materials. If you’re looking for a lightweight option, check out fleece coats or sweatshirt jackets. Many parka-style jackets also work for cooler temperatures without being too bulky. But for the warmest of coats, look for options that are made with insulated fabric and are long to keep you protected from head to toe. Still commuting to work? I’d also recommend a wool trench or single-breasted style for a more fashionable cold-weather option.

Adjustability: Because your body will be changing during and after pregnancy, you’ll want to consider a few adjustable features. The most obvious is the extender panel, which is an insert that zips into your jacket to make it larger, as mentioned previously. This way, you won’t be swimming in a too-large coat before your third trimester or won’t have to worry about it being too tight when carrying baby. Another helpful feature is drawstrings around the waist and at the bottom of the coat so you can adjust to your size and keep the warmth locked inside.

Seasonality: Consider what time of year you’ll wear your maternity coat. Do you need a heavy puffer for the coldest months in the heart of winter, a lightweight parka for cooler temperatures, or perhaps even just a waterproof jacket for rainy days? Depending on the timing of your pregnancy and the climate you live in, you might not need a heavy-duty maternity coat (especially if you’re already sweating more than usual).

FAQ Maternity Coats

Do I really need a maternity winter coat?

Whether you truly need a maternity coat can be a matter of preference. Many parents in the What to Expect community say they’ve gone through their entire pregnancy without ever buying a maternity coat. Instead, some choose to wear their usual jacket without buttoning it, buy a size up in a non-maternity coat or even wear their partner's coat.

Some women, however, choose to buy a maternity coat because they want something specifically designed to fit their growing body. Also, for those who live in cold or windy climates, a warm maternity coat that fits you properly will best help you brave the elements.

If you don't want to buy a new coat, you can also check out companies that let you rent maternity clothes. Rent the Runway and Nuuly , for instance, allows you to rent maternity coats in addition to other maternity essentials so you can spend less than you would on getting a new coat. Many moms in the What to Expect community also suggest buying maternity coats secondhand from consignment stores or online marketplaces like Facebook and Poshmark.

How to size for a maternity coat?

Shopping for the right size maternity coat might feel intimidating, but it doesn't have to be. Typically, your size in maternity clothing will be the same as your pre-pregnancy size. Many brands that specifically design maternity wear have in-depth size charts, so you're not just shopping for a coat that fits you today but will work throughout your pregnancy.

Anywhere else you recommend shopping for a maternity coat?

While I certainly favor Modern Eternity and Seraphine, there are plenty of other shop-worthy retailers out there that offer maternity coats. I also recommend checking out PinkBlush , Boohoo (especially for trendy aviators and trenches ), Kohl’s (how cute is the drawstring style?) and Old Navy .

Your Next Read

When to Buy and Start Wearing Maternity Clothes Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

The Best Winter Car Seat Safety Gear to Keep Baby Warm By Korin Miller, Contributing Writer

The 10 Best Stroller Footmuffs To Keep Your Baby Warm on the Coldest Winter Walks Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

11 Gorgeous Winter Maternity Photos Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How to Dress a Newborn Baby for the Weather Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

How to Dress a Toddler for the Weather Fact Checked by Jill Malter

13 Fabulous Fall Maternity Photos to Honor a New Season of Your Life Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Picture-Perfect Maternity Photo Ideas for Every Parent-to-Be Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

14 Gorgeous Plus-Size Maternity Photos That'll Inspire You to Document This Beautiful Stage Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window