Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Pregnancy announcements are undeniably adorable. They're a blend of happiness and a touch of relief when you finally get to share your life-altering news with loved ones. The ways to announce seem limitless: perhaps with a clever pun like "here's the scoop," or through a tiny onesie that reflects the joy of soon meeting your little one. Either way, the cuteness factor is sure to be through the roof!

If you're looking to share your news in the most precious way possible, here are some of the cutest, most Aww-worthy pregnancy announcements for flower enthusiasts, ice cream aficionados and more.

1. The most magical hour

magical hour announcement

A blanket, sonogram and the whole family on a sprawling lawn … does it get any cuter than this shot by Pennsylvania-based photographer @marikphotography ? To tie it all together, mom Genesis added the sweetest caption: “and then there were five ?? grateful for the gift of life and family.”

2. Mom and dad portraits

mom and dad annoucement

All eyes are on these parents’ beaming smiles and the growing bump in this series of black and white portraits. These are chic, timeless and oh-so-special.

3. Here’s the scoop

here's the scoop pregnancy announcement

What’s sweeter than ice cream? This family shared the latest “scoop”: These two siblings are expecting a little sister – there isn't anything sweeter than that!

4. The writing’s on the wall

writing on the wall announcement

Whether you’re renovating your home or preparing baby’s room, you have the perfect photo opp, inspired by these happy parents-to-be.They used a soon-to-be-painted wall to paint "Mom + Dad July '24" and sat right underneath with their ultrasound to announce the news. Later on in the photoshoot, their dog joined in on the fun, too.

5. Extra, extra!

extra extra announcement

The latest headline: You’re expecting! Spread the sweet news with this creative and customizable template from Etsy . You can personalize the newspaper from front to back so that every inch of the announcement is all about your sweet little bundle of joy.

6. New BFF on the way

new bff announcement

Your cute new best friend is coming soon! Say it with this onesie, which you can personalize with your due date and is sure to cue the smiles!

7. Tu-lips are sealed no more

tulips pregnancy announcement

Digital templates allow you to quickly and beautifully announce the upcoming arrival of your little one. This one features a delicate blanket (what's more darling?), bouquet of white tulips and a space for your own sonogram, baby name and due date.

8. Fuss-free family announcement

fuss free family announcement

For a more outdoorsy feel, this customizable digital template dons baby’s last name and your due date on a clothesline that's set in front of the most beautiful scenery. Within two hours, you’ll have a whimsical, realistic-looking and incredibly cute pregnancy announcement.

9. Sweet signage

sweet signage announcement

Dreaming of a digital flat-lay design? Order one of these wooden due date plaques , which will include your baby’s last name and the month and year you’re due. Just pair it with some adorable props — like the example here – because there's really nothing cuter!

10. Stuffie with a surprise

stuffie with a surprise

Order this personalized elephant stuffed animal , complete with baby’s last name and due date, and then surprise everyone with your big news. And then when your LO arrives, she’ll have a new lovey (which, by the way, is the cutest way to cuddle up with your bundle of joy!).

good fortune announcement

You’ve never felt more fortunate, so it only makes sense to announce your pregnancy to family and friends with these custom-made fortune cookies . How clever and cute! Sneak these into your takeout bag and wait for the big reveal!

12. Foodie favorite

food favorite announcement

Another delicious yet super sweet pregnancy announcement? These two stork cookies from Etsy, which you can personalize with your own due date and give out to friends and family.