12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party

farm birthday party

Host a picture-perfect barnyard bash — no actual cows required — for your little one's big day.

You've likely spent a lot of this past year teaching your child about animals and the fun sounds they make, so it’s only natural that your baby or toddler finds cows (or horses or pigs or goats) absolutely fascinating. Showcase that love for animals by hosting a fun farm-themed birthday party for your child's first, second or third year bash.

This list is filled with moo-velous ideas like chick cupcakes, barnyard backdrops and galloping favors for real barn burner. (Pro tip: Brush up on your toddler birthday etiquette and party safety tips as well for a successful event.) Ready to be udderly inspired?

Farm birthday party decorations

1. Photo backdrop

farm birthday party photo backdrop

A great photo station serves as an activity to keep everyone busy during the party and makes birthday memories more eye-catching. This one incorporates a fun barn mural; pink, brown and cow print balloons; fresh flowers and dried corn stalks; and a spotted stand for placing the birthday cake . Something more simple like a poster or grouped garlands would do the trick, too!

2. Special signage

farm birthday party sign

A sign can welcome guests to a barnyard bash and thank them for coming to the party — a lovely and thoughtful touch that really solidifies your theme. If custom posters aren't in the budget, you can source templated designs online and print them out at an office supply store.

3. Horse place settings

farm birthday party horse place setting idea

A pony figurine placed on each plate can entice kids to sit in their chairs for cake. Some themed paper goods — like disposable plates and napkins featuring barns — complete the look.

Farm birthday party food

4. Barnyard cake

farm birthday party cake

Should you serve cupcakes or cake? Make everyone happy by including both! Cut into a showstopping cake that showcases a sugary barn while offering up a grab-and-go dessert option: cupcakes decorated to look like pigs, chickens and cows.

5. Spotty sweets

farm birthday party cow marshmallow pops

The best birthday parties pack fun ideas big and small, and a little marshmallow treat is a great example. Use edible food coloring markers to turn jumbo marshmallows into "moo-rshmallow" pops. Kids and adults will get a major kick out of this fun snack.

6. Cow cookies

farm birthday party cookies

These sugar cookies embrace the farm focus by featuring cows decked out in flower crowns and pretty pink barns. Additional ideas for cut-out cookies include the guest of honor's name and age.

7. Haystack snacks

farm birthday party haystack veggie straw snacks

Veggie straws pass for hay, so why not wrap some up for guests to munch on? Plus, this salty favorite can balance out all of the sweets.

8. Grazing table

farm birthday party grazing table

Make average crudite platters way more fun by presenting them as a "farm stand." Just place assorted fruits and veggies on different trays, and give guests little berry baskets so they can pick their own produce sampler.

Farm birthday party favors

9. Milk bottles

farm birthday party milk bottle favors

These festive paper "milk jugs" are the perfect vessel for holding candy or little toys for guests to take home with them. Plus, kids can reuse them as a catchall or piggy bank (well, cow bank).

10. Candy apples

farm birthday party candy apple favors

Going apple picking is a beloved fall tradition, so why not add a bit of that magic to a birthday party ? Have guests "pick" their own apples at your farm party, but offer up caramel apples as an unexpected treat. It's a sweet way to thank them for their presence (and any birthday presents ).

11. Piggy bags

farm birthday party piggy bag favors

You've heard of doggy bags, but this party calls for a piggy bag! Pack up treats or leftovers for guests in cute gable boxes with farm-themed stickers — like these ones that say "pig out!" The red bandana is a fun bonus favor for budding cowboys and cowgirls.

12. Stick horses

farm birthday party stick horses favors

What kid hasn’t asked for a pony before? Hobby horses make great seat savers and even better party favors. They’re an especially fun addition for an outdoor party that has plenty of space to play.

WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a First Birthday Party , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes , January 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Birthday Party Dos and Don'ts , November 2022.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Dog-Themed Ideas for a Pawfect Puppy Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Space Birthday Party Ideas That Are Out of This World Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Host a 'Wild One' Birthday That's a Roaring Good Time Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Throw a T-Rex-iffic Dinosaur Birthday Party That'll Go Down in History Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Turn Baby's First Birthday Party Into a 'Winter Onederland' Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window