Take these as your sign to book a snowy photoshoot before baby arrives.

The holidays are a time for gratitude, love and plenty of celebrations and these feelings are even more magical when you’re expecting. If you’re excited to showcase your growing bump in a festive way, you can take some inspiration from other families' own winter wonderland shoots.

Think cozy outerwear, snow-dusted trees, and festive holiday décor — these are the essentials for capturing beautiful winter maternity moments.

Matching flannels

matching flannel maternity photos

Mom and dad donned the same red and black flannel for their snowy maternity photoshoot . They paired their looks with black pants and white sneakers, and hopefully they snagged a similar outfit for baby to wear once they arrive!

Lots of snow and smiles

snow and smiles maternity

A sparkly long-sleeve gown and a tree-lined atmosphere combine for this glam-meets-nature maternity session. Mom-to-be Hasitha is beaming, too, while embracing her growing bump .

Winter wonderland

winter wonderland photo

All eyes are on mom-to-be Brittany’s bump-accentuating ball gown. The elegance of the maternity look is the perfect complement to the snow-filled landscape behind the expecting parents.

Woodsy and wintry

woodsy maternity shoot

This maternity photo shoot in northeastern Italy is just stunning, and we’re especially partial to the one featuring a log-covered backdrop. It’s rustic, whimsical and makes us want to book a trip to the beautiful mountains of Italy — ASAP.

The most wonderful time of the year

Christmas maternity shoot

Take the comfort of your living room into the great outdoors for the most adorable Christmas-themed maternity photos. Complete with trees, wrapped presents and stockings hung on the mantle, this is the most special way to celebrate the season.

Sunny and snowy

sunny and snowy maternity shoot

When a blanket of snow covered Washington, D.C., this couple headed out with cozy and cute ensembles (including a pair of comfy winter boots for the mom-to-be!). Bonus: The ruched, long-sleeve dress will be a postpartum favorite, too!

Hands touching hands

hands touching hands maternity shoot

Does this photo make you want to sing “Sweet Caroline” at the top of your lungs? Hands touching hands, reaching out… There’s also something so dreamy about the snow falling in the background of @evawaltheredit’s photo that includes her beautiful bump.

Picnic for three

picnic for three

In this special snap, parents have their hands on the bump while enjoying their time on a picnic blanket. For a winter-themed shoot, their outfits worked together perfectly, combining a wintry blue and Christmas red.

Winter in Dallas

winter in dallas photo shoot

Some places won’t see snow — but you can still dress for the occasion. With a white sweater dress for mom and a puffy vest for dad, this Dallas maternity photoshoot has all the winter vibes (without the bone-chilling temperatures).

Short and sweet

short and sweet pregnancy announcement

This What to Expect mom wore a mid-length, fall maternity dress after they experienced a surprise snowfall. Even though the weather was unexpected, her red nails and green dress coincide with the Christmassy weather.

Black and white bliss

black and white bliss maternity

With a pair of baby booties in hand, these parents-to-be were all smiles during their outdoor winter maternity photoshoot. Warm, coordinating coats also lean into the cozy atmosphere.