These digital layouts take the guesswork out of your upcoming social media post.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Congratulations on your exciting news! As you prepare to share the joy of your pregnancy with your loved ones, you're likely considering how best to announce it. Some couples opt for a memorable photo shoot , complete with sonogram pictures, bump-friendly attire and a card sent out in the mail. Others prefer a simpler approach, like a heartfelt social media post .

Getting these announcements out to your friends and family is easier than ever. Thanks to the creativity of countless online artisans, you have a plethora of pregnancy announcement templates at your fingertips. These templates are not only customizable but also incredibly easy to use.

Simply choose a design, upload your sonogram or other photo and add details about your baby's due date to create a personalized announcement in mere minutes. And the best part? You're not limited to digital announcements. Many Etsy sellers offer physical products, such as newspaper-style announcements, that you can order online and have delivered. With these 12 templates, you can celebrate this special moment in a way that's uniquely yours.

1. Two on the way

two on the way

Having twins? What a surprise! This digital template shows two onesies to detail your extra exciting news, plus a fun personalized letterboard. You can also add in your own sonogram with Baby A and Baby B, to create a pregnancy announcement that's double the fun.

2. Rainbow baby bliss

rainbow baby bliss

If you've experienced a pregnancy loss , this beautiful rainbow baby pregnancy announcement is all you need to express your unparalleled joy. With wooden toys all centered in the shape of a heart, dried flowers, a personalized letterboard, your baby's sonogram and some extra lighting to really set the mood, there's nothing more special than this inspiring announcement.

3. Making headlines

making headlines

Extra, extra, read all about it! You and your partner are expecting, and it’s making headlines. With this template , you can customize a newspaper announcement and order one, two, five, 10, 30, 60 or 120 copies. As the example image shows, these can be a great prop to add to your pregnancy announcement photo shoot if that's the route you choose!

4. Adding a new player to your team

Adding a new player to your team

Sporty families will love this digital pregnancy announcement template , which announces that your “team” is gaining another player with some digital soccer balls, a circular letter board you can personalize, and a variety of fun baby items to set the mood. This one is all about soccer, but there are options for football and baseball fans, too.

5. For the ‘Harry Potter’ fans

Harry potter annoucement

Your wizarding world is about to get a lot more interesting. If you and your partner are Potterheads, consider this announcement that says your baby wizard will be sorted soon. The background sets the Harry Potter scene with broomsticks, wizarding world lightning and other Potter-fan favorites.

6. Baby boy in blue

baby boy annoucement

Roses are red, and baby boy announcements are typically blue. You can share your news and reveal baby’s sex all at once with this blue and white template . An adorable baby blanket sets the announcement scene as the background, then a personalized letter board sits in the center of a variety of baby favorites.

7. Baby girl in pink

baby girl annoucement

Have a little girl on the way? This floral and pink template will tell everyone you’re about to welcome a daughter. The pretty dark pink template has a heart border made out of roses, with a — you guessed it — personalized letterboard in the center. This one's perfect for the girliest of girl announcements!

8. Surprise celebration

surprise celebration

With this vintage,earth tone-inspired template, friends and family can join in on the unexpected news that you’re expecting. It also comes with clear instructions on how to personalize the digital letterboard, sonogram and due date items through an easy-to-use tool called Canva, making creating your own special announcement a breeze.

9. Adventure awaits

adventure awaits annoucement

Love the great outdoors? You're about to embark on your biggest adventure yet, and this digital template features a camping style format with a teddy bear, candles and balloons all set behind a gorgeous mountainous background. Add your sonogram, change the text on the picture frame-inspired letterboard and tailor it to your journey. You can also edit it yourself, or ask the Etsy creator to do it for you.

10. The grand finale

grande finale annoucement

Blend humor and sweetness with this template , which will promise everyone that this is officially the last time you’ll announce a pregnancy . This one is extra special as it allows you to pop a picture of your other kiddos next to your soon-to-be addition's sonogram.

11. Sweet and citrus-inspired

sweet and citrus annoucement

Your little cutie is coming! If you and your partner are pun people, there’s no better pregnancy announcement template . Cutie oranges (get it?) line the various props and trinkets, while wooden letter blocks and a customizable letterboard are set in the middle.

12. The happiest announcement on Earth

Disney annoucement

You can venture to the Happiest Place on Earth to snap a photo with your sonogram, or you can use this customizable, Disney-themed template to add magic to your Instagram grid. The announcement features a beautiful sunset image of the one and only Cinderella's castle in the background, with a onesie and your sonogram hanging in front.