12 Smart Ways to Get Ready for Labor (Physically and Mentally)

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Labor and Delivery Preparation

Wondering how you can prepare for childbirth? The last few weeks of pregnancy are always the longest — but they can also be the busiest.

Not only is your body preparing for childbirth (thanks, Braxton Hicks contractions!), but your mind is too, which is why that urge to "nest" may have resulted in a freezer full of chili and a stack of burp cloths that you've washed and folded twice.

Still, the prospect of labor can seem overwhelming, especially if this is your first baby, though even seasoned parents may face a flood of conflicting feelings. Worries about pain, fatigue, finding help, and whether you've learned enough about the process can weigh you down.

Relax, Mama — help is on the way with these smart and easy ideas to help you mentally and physically prepare for labor. Check it out and know that accomplishing just a few things on this list can be enough to make you feel empowered and in control. You've got this!

Key Takeaways

You can get your mind and body ready for labor. Simple steps like taking a childbirth class, getting good sleep, eating well, and staying active can build your confidence and stamina for the big day.

Planning ahead can help you feel more calm and in control. Packing your hospital bag, preregistering, touring your birth location, and lining up support at home can take a lot of last-minute stress off your plate.

It's okay if things don't go exactly according to plan. Asking questions, focusing on relaxation, and writing down your preferences can all help — but remember, the ultimate goal is a healthy you and a healthy baby.

What can you do to prepare for labor?

Take a class

The most important thing parents-to-be can do to prepare for labor and delivery is to take a childbirth class. The choices are wide and varied, but most cover relaxation techniques, how to breathe, various labor positions , pain relief options , and some tips related to basic newborn care. You'll also have a chance to meet new people, connect with your partner, and ask any questions you have about your upcoming big day.

Rest up

You can't exactly bank sleep and then withdraw it later when you're exhausted from late-night feeding and burp sessions (although that would be nice!). But getting enough shut-eye in the third trimester will help you feel rested and refreshed. So try hitting the hay a little earlier and taking a nap when you need one.

Eat right

Fueling your soon-to-labor body with healthy meals is another smart path to success when it comes to preparing for childbirth. As you near the end of your pregnancy, fill your plate with nutrient-dense pregnancy superfoods such as lean meats, lentils, yogurt, wild salmon, nuts, veggies, and whole grains.

Keep moving

We're not gonna lie — labor is hard work, which is why getting regular exercise during pregnancy sets you up nicely to tackle this challenge. By sticking to a routine that you enjoy, whether it's walking, swimming, low-impact dance classes, or gentle yoga, you'll improve your strength and stamina, and both of these will come in handy when it's time to push.

"I stayed active my whole first pregnancy with strength workouts and HIIT, plus pilates or yoga when I needed something light. Even the dr was surprised my first came so fast," reports What to Expect Community mom Nov24mama. If you can, aim for 30 minutes of exercise at least five days a week.

Feel confident walking into the delivery room with the What to Expect app , where you'll find week-by-week guidance, packing lists, birth plan tips, and support from parents who've been there.

Focus on relaxation

If you see it, you can achieve it! Practicing mindfulness via mediation , yoga, or deep breathing can help train your mind to stay focused and relaxed on the big day. Stretching, visualizing techniques, or hypnosis can all be used to ease fear and anxiety. You might even consider hypnobirthing as a relaxation tool to employ during labor.

Preregister and tour

Filling out the hospital paperwork that you need to submit before you arrive is a quick job to tick off this list. Mail or scan it back or put it in the bag that you'll bring to the hospital. It's also a good idea to take a tour of the hospital or birthing center, whether in person or virtually, so you can envision where you'll deliver and learn the various policies.

"My friends that have had babies already also did yours and said they really thought it was helpful to be able to see where you'll be, what their processes are, etc.," says What to Expect Community mom sesieseed. "I think it will help reduce stress the day of just to know where to park, check in, etc. My OB also said that most questions for her come out of the hospital visit as it sort of kick starts people on visualizing the day and how things will happen."

Pack your hospital bag

Another easy do-ahead task is to pack a hospital bag so it's ready to go (and putting one together is kind of fun!). Check out our handy lists of the items you really should include when you go to the hospital or birthing center, as well as some other items that are nice to have on hand for you, your new baby and your partner.

Gather some help

Create a support system before heading into labor with some friends and family lined up to lend a hand. Whenever you can, say yes to extra help, whether it's an offer to walk your dog, cook a meal, or run a load of laundry. You might also consider hiring a doula , either for comfort and support during labor or as a postpartum helper .

Write a birth plan

While certainly not mandatory, making your wishes known before you're in labor can help you feel empowered and prepared — and a birth plan is the perfect place to lay it all out. By putting pen to paper, you can let your labor and delivery team know how you feel about pain relief, certain birthing positions, IV use, as well as your partner's role (cord cutting, suctioning, and holding the baby, for instance).

Stock up on supplies

How good does it feel to open the pantry and see your favorite granola bars? You'll enjoy the same nice vibes if you've loaded up on laundry detergent , paper towels, and some meals in the freezer. "Nesting," or stocking up on what you might need ahead of time means less stress and fewer mad dashes to the store — and more time cuddling your sweet new baby.

Seek positivity

That horror story your cousin posted about her labor that took two days isn't helping your nerves one bit. And as much as you love your mother, times have changed since she gave birth decades ago. Your best bet for peace of mind is to avoid the digital rabbit hole and carefully edit what you read and whom you listen to as you approach your due date.

"I'm avoiding social media for the duration of my third trimester. Completely deleted all socials from my phone!" says What to Expect Community member mom2deutch. "I told friends and family if they need to get a hold of me to just text so I don't miss any important messages. :) I got way too stressed last time getting sucked into the new mom algorithm, and I don't want to deal with that this time."

Ask questions

It's normal to wonder or worry about the labor process, so try to speak up and ask whatever's on your mind. Two great people to hit up with your questions: your doctor, whom you'll see more and more toward the end of pregnancy, and the person who leads your birthing class. Truth: It's a good bet that several others in the group have the exact same concerns.

Keep in mind that even with the best laid plans, your labor may ultimately differ from what you'd envisioned. If you get to the big day and something's missing in your hospital bag or it looks like you'll need an epidural when you wanted an unmedicated birth, try to take these road bumps in stride. After all, a healthy baby and mother are the most important outcomes!