12 Space Birthday Party Ideas That Are Out of This World

space birthday party

Somewhere, in a galaxy near you, an amazing party is about to commence!

Whether it's your little one's first birthday party or the fifth, the party-planning tasks can pile up. Simplify your to-do list by choosing a birthday party theme that dictates the activities, decorations, favors and food — and kids will be over the moon about this one!

A space-themed birthday party allows kids (and parents) to use their imaginations and draw inspiration from the sun and the moon, shooting stars and comets, and astronauts and aliens. Whether they're chowing down on asteroid cookies or getting lost in a galaxy of balloons, little ones will surely have a memorable time. Here are some stellar ideas that will make your space party a successful mission.

Space birthday party invitations

1. Launch your party space-themed invitations

Get the party started the moment guests open the invitation. Online stationery shops offer plenty of space-themed options with stars, planets, astronauts and spaceships.

Ask guests to join you to celebrate your little one's first (or any subsequent) trip around the sun. (A bit of toddler birthday party etiquette : Specify whether parents are expected to stay.)

Space birthday party decorations

2. Choose a cool color scheme

space birthday party color scheme

Outer space is (of course) dark, but just because the real thing is big and black doesn't mean you can’t have a little more fun with colors at your space party. Bring in pops of cobalt, turquoise, orange, navy, red and silver — in the balloons, signage and other decor — to give it a youthful spin.

3. Put together space rock centerpieces

Rock candy has an out-of-this-world look. Incorporate it into your party by grouping sticks of purple, blue and white crystalized sweets in clear vases. These easy, edible centerpieces can double as a dessert or take-home favors.

4. Fill the room with a galaxy of balloons

space birthday party balloons

Balloons are a cost-effective way to add a major burst of color and fun to a party — and they work especially well for an abstract theme like space. Plus, when filled with helium, they're anti-gravity!

Different sized balloons in a variety of blue shades (along with some fun one-offs, like an astronaut, spaceship and some silver stars — as seen in this garland from Balloons Wow) make a major visual impact.

5. Set the table with rocket plates

space birthday party tablescape

Get ready to blast off! Sweet rocket-shaped plates are the perfect finishing touch for a party table. Admittedly, the oval shape may not be the most practical, so save them for apps or layer them on top of round, iridescent paper plates.

6. Hang up some sunny signage

space birthday party signs

No party is complete without festive bunting. This one (made by Paper Blitz) works in the space theme with rockets, planets and shooting stars, as well as the age of the birthday boy or girl.

Space birthday party food

7. Make a star-studded cake

space birthday party cake

A classic cake can get a galaxy-inspired makeover with some star sprinkles and fondant planets. Set a tiny astronaut figurine on top for the final touch.

8. Decorate asteroid cookies

space birthday party cookies

Who wouldn't gravitate toward these cool cookies? Planets and stars tend to steal the show in space party decor, but these cookies make the case for asteroids belonging in the mix. If you'd prefer to DIY, just flood your cookies with light gray frosting and place some chocolate chips on top to resemble craters.

9. Serve star-studded treats

Even peanut butter and jelly sandwiches can feel thematic by taking a small extra step: Use a cookie cutter to cut PB&Js (and rice crispy treats or even cheese and crackers) into star shapes to fit with the rest of the party. Plus, the cute shape just makes everything more fun to eat — especially in the minds of picky eaters .

Keep party safety in mind, and avoid serving any round and firm food (like grapes and hot dogs, unless sliced) or sticky and gooey ones (like gum and thick globs of peanut butter) to younger attendees.

Space birthday party games

10. Make edible constellations

Looking for a boredom-busting party activity? Gather some thin pretzel sticks and marshmallows, and pass them out to partygoers to make constellations. Kids can use marshmallows as sticky "joints" to connect the sticks into fun shapes. When they're done creating, they have a sweet and salty snack to munch on.

11. Land the astronaut on the moon

Here's a space-themed twist on pin the tail on the donkey: Stick a paper moon to a black poster board, and hang it up somewhere in the party room. Then blindfold guests, give them a couple spins and have them try to stick a cut-out astronaut as close to the middle as they can.

12. Moonwalk to some tunes

Encourage wriggly toddler guests to express their sky-high excitement on the dance floor. Blast tunes like Elton John's "Rocket Man" and R.E.M.'s "Man on the Moon" for a round of freeze dance.

WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Birthday Party Dos and Don'ts , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a First Birthday Party , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes , January 2022.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Dog-Themed Ideas for a Pawfect Puppy Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Throw a T-Rex-iffic Dinosaur Birthday Party That'll Go Down in History Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Gender Reveal Themes to Inspire Your Special Celebration Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window