12 Tricks to Get Your Toddler to Take Medicine

Copy changes throughout, including adding additional tips, and med review.

how to get your child to take medicine

No toddler is a fan of taking medicine, but these surefire strategies can help make the process a bit easier.

When your toddler is sick, you want to do whatever you can to make her feel better — like giving her extra hugs and kisses, cuddling up with her in bed, or letting her watch her favorite video. But battling with her to get her to take medicine is probably not one of your favorite feel-better strategies.

So what can you do when your hot-tempered tot refuses to take the medication you know she needs? While Mary Poppins may have resorted to a spoonful of sugar, you’d like to find another way to make the medicine go down.

To the rescue, these helpful tips for coaxing your stubborn toddler to take medicine:

Give your toddler medicine a different way

Delivery can make all the difference. So if your toddler has already turned up her nose at the small medicine cup that came with her prescription, for example, ask your doctor or pharmacist for a different dosing tool, such as a dropper, plastic syringe (sans the needle!) that squirts out liquid meds, or a dosing spoon. Any variation in your approach may distract her enough to get the medicine into her mouth.

Just make sure to only use a dosing tool that comes from your doctor or pharmacist — teaspoons, tablespoons or other household spoons aren’t an accurate way to dispense medicine, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Use Liquid Medicines for ChildrenSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Use Liquid Medicines for ChildrenSee All Sources

Break it up into smaller doses

Give your toddler small amounts of medicine over several minutes instead of all at once. It may be easier to swallow if she doesn’t have to down it all in one gulp.

Of course, if your little one feels that this strategy is merely prolonging the agony, this option isn’t for you.

Hide the medicine in food

Ask your doctor if it’s okay to sneak the medicine into foods or drinks. If you get the thumbs-up, stir it into a small amount of applesauce or Jell-O. (Applesauce à la penicillin isn’t half bad.)

But remember, if you do mix the meds into something else, your toddler needs to eat or drink the whole thing in order to get the full dosage. It’s also smart to confirm with your child’s doctor that the food or drink you’re going to use won’t interact with the medication. Some medications may not work properly if taken with grapefruit juice or milk, for example, the AAP notes. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsFood and Medication InteractionsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsFood and Medication InteractionsSee All Sources

Aim correctly

Taste buds are concentrated on the front and center of the tongue, so bypass those finicky taste zones by placing the medicine near the back of her tongue. Or try dropping it between the rear gum and the inside of her cheek, where it will easily glide down her throat with minimal contact with taste buds. Trusted SourceSeattle Children'sMedicine - Refusal to TakeSee All Sources [3] (Yes, this requires a bit of skill, and maybe an extra set of hands to keep your toddler still while you perfect your dunk shot.)

Trusted SourceSeattle Children'sMedicine - Refusal to TakeSee All Sources

Just be sure to avoid aiming for the back of her throat, which can cause gagging or choking, according to the AAP.

Offer a treat

A little bribery can go a long way. Promise your child a small but special prize in return for taking her medicine. Stickers, a food she loves to eat, a fun outing, or a little trinket might inspire her to open wide.

Make sure you deliver on what you promise, though — not following through could make it even harder to get her to take her medicine in the future!

Watch your reaction

Even if you’re feeling bad about forcing your tot to drink something she hates, don’t apologize. Be matter-of-fact about it, or even cheerful (if you can pull it off), because this will signal to your toddler that taking medicine isn’t a hardship.

And don’t let your facial expressions give you away either. Trying to get your toddler to take medicine with a grimace on your face will clue her into the fact that she’s in for something unpleasant.

Give your child a say

Empower your child by letting her choose between different flavors or colors of medicine if that’s an option. That way, she’ll feel like she has some control over the situation.

Even letting your little one choose between a syringe or medicine cup, if your doctor or pharmacist has given you both, could make her more receptive to trying it.

Let her hold the syringe or cup

Some children are more willing to take medicine if they can hold the syringe or cup, according to the AAP. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsMedicine - Refusal to TakeSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsMedicine - Refusal to TakeSee All Sources

With your child sitting up, place the syringe beyond her teeth and aim for the pouch inside her cheek, then tell her she can hold it while you push the plunger. Or have her hold the little medicine cup herself, with your guidance.

Add a flavorful twist to the medicine if you can

Ask your pharmacist if they can mask the taste of the yucky-tasting liquid with a better-tasting flavoring such as FLAVORx.

The flavorings, ranging from root beer to tangerine, are FDA-approved and medically designed to combat the bad taste and smell of liquid medicines. It may be the answer to your medicine-taking troubles.

Try a different form of medicine

If liquid drops seem to be out of the question, ask the doctor or pharmacist if the medicine comes in another form that’s appropriate for children.

They might be able to prescribe you the same medicine in another form, such as dissolvable strips, chewable tablets or powders. One of them just might be easier for your reluctant toddler to take.

Adjust the temperature

Ask the pharmacist if temperature can alter the efficacy of the medicine. If not, try keeping it in the refrigerator and giving your child the medicine cold instead of at room temperature. Sometimes the medicinal taste is less pronounced when chilled.

Time it just right

Unless you were told the medicine must be taken on a full stomach or shouldn’t be taken with food, you can offer it right before mealtime. Your reluctant toddler may be more likely to open up when she's hungry. Make sure to have her favorite meal or snack ready as a reward!

Though getting your little one to take her medicine can be challenging, rest assured that this phase won’t last forever. Children thrive on routine: Once your tot gets into the habit of taking medicine — and as she gets older, understands that it will help her feel better — it will be a less frustrating process for you both.

Until then, you deserve praise for making the medicine go down in the most creative ways.