120 Astrological Baby Names Inspired by Your Baby's Zodiac Sign

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

mom snuggling with baby in star pajamas, baby names by astrological sign

Let the stars decide your baby's name with this list based on your baby's zodiac sign.

Choosing a name for your baby can feel overwhelming at times. After all, there are so many names to consider — and it can be hard to settle on the right name if you haven’t met your little one yet.

That’s why some parents look for inspiration above — in the stars, that is. If you know your baby’s approximate birth date, you can choose a baby name that’s inspired by her zodiac sign .

“You can choose a name that’s based on the literal zodiac sign or take into consideration the characteristics or energy of that sign,” says Maressa Brown, the author of Raising Baby by the Stars: A New Parent’s Guide to Astrology .

You might choose to name your Pisces baby Meena, for example, which means “fish" in Sanskrit. Or you may want to give your passionate Aries the name Rhys, which means “ardor.”

Here are some astrologically-inspired 10 names for each of the 12 zodiac signs.

10 Aries baby names

1. Jason

A hero of Greek mythology, Jason was the legendary leader of the Argonauts whose most infamous exploit was stealing the Golden Fleece — the pelt of the winged ram (and Aries’ constellation) Chrysomallos.

The name Jason also has a softer side, though: It comes from Greek, and means “healer.”

2. Marcus

Marcus is a Latin name thought to be connected to Mars, the Roman god of war and the ruling planet of Aries.

Marcus has been the given name to many legendary men of Roman history, including the famous general Marcus Antonius (Mark Antony) and the philosopher emperor Marcus Aurelius.

3. Marcella

Marcella is thought to be connected to Mars, the Roman god of war. It’s the feminine, Italian variation of Marcus by way of Marcellus, a Latin nickname for Marcus. Like its male counterpart, the name Marcella embodies the physical daring, assertiveness, and fiery persona of passionate, determined Aries.

4. Poppy

The color red is often associated with passionate, assertive Aries. Poppy is the name of the red flower, which was derived from the Old English word popaeg . While it’s always been popular in the U.K., the name only took off in the United States in the mid-2010s.

5. Rachel

Rachel comes from a Hebrew name meaning "ewe," which is the female counterpart of the ram, or Aries’ constellation. In the Hebrew Bible, Rachel first encounters Jacob — her eventual husband and the father of the 12 tribes of Israel — as she tends a flock of sheep.

The name saw a surge in popularity during the 1980s and 1990s, possibly with a little help from the beloved character of Rachel Green on the hit TV show Friends .

6. Rhys

Rhys is a traditional Welsh name that means "ardor" — as in passion or enthusiasm, two trademark characteristics of those born under the sign of Aries.

The name Rhys gained in popularity during the mid-aughts, but the feminine form, Reese, became more common around 2000, possibly due to the popularity of actress Reese Witherspoon.

7. Rory

Rory comes from the Old Irish name Ruiaidri, or “red king,” which is only fitting, since red is Aries’ signature color — a symbol of passion, courage, fire and blood.

While it has traditionally been a boys’ name (see: golfer Rory McIlroy), in recent years it has also become more popular as a girls’ name.

8. Shepard

Originally an English surname meaning someone who herded sheep for a living, the name Shepard started gaining in popularity as a first name in the mid 2010s. A male sheep is a ram — the symbol of energetic Aries.

9. Stephanie

Passionate. Independent. High-achieving. Those words are all perfectly suited to one of the most famous Aries singers and actresses of our time: Stefani Germanotta — aka, Lady Gaga.

Stephanie is the feminine form of the name Stephen, which comes from the Greek word meaning “crown” or “wreath.”

10. Tuesday

Why not join the Addams family and give your bundle of joy a (slightly more cheerful) weekday name? Tuesday comes from the Old English tiwesdaeg , meaning “Tiu's day.” Tiu is an ancient Germanic god who was the patron of warriors — much like the Roman god, Mars.

10 Taurus baby names

1. Adam

Adam is a play on the Hebrew word for “earth” ( adamah ) — and Taurus is the first earth sign in the zodiac. According to Genesis, Adam was created from the earth by God.

Adam has been a common name in English-speaking countries since the Middle Ages, but it saw an increase in popularity in the 1980s.

2. April

Taurus babies are born starting in late April — a spring month that’s associated with nature. April is likely derived from the Latin word aperire , meaning “to open” — as in, the opening of flowers.

3. Chloe

Chloe was a frequent nickname of the Greek goddess Demeter, the goddess of the harvest. The name also means “green shoot” — a nod to the earthy green colors of Taurus and the sign's known appreciation of beauty and nature.

4. Elizabeth

Tauruses are known for being thoughtful and deliberate — and was there anyone that embodied these characteristics more than Queen Elizabeth II, a famous Taurus?

The name goes beyond British royalty, though — it has roots in the Greek form of the Hebrew name Elisheva, meaning “my God is an oath.”

5. Emerald

Give your little one a name that celebrates the color and beauty of nature. Emerald — the word for a green gemstone — is also the traditional birthstone of May, which is ideal for May-born Taurus babies.

6. George

George is derived from the Greek word georgos , meaning “farmer” or “earth worker” — perfect for Taurus’ earth sign. The name has also been popular with British royalty: Six British kings have been named George.

Another famous George (who also happens to be a Taurus): George Clooney.

7. River

A nature-inspired name, River has its roots in the Latin word ripa , meaning “riverbank.” The name was more commonly given to boys (think: actor River Phoenix), but in recent years has also been given to girls.

8. Rose

Famed for its beauty and fragrance, the rose was the flower of the Greek goddess Venus, the same planet that rules Taurus and oversees their love of all things beauty.

Francophiles may also appreciate the name: It has Norman French roots, likely in the forms of Roese and Rhoese.

9. William

Sensitive and mindful, Tauruses are known for their love of art. So why not name your little one after one of the most celebrated artists in history, the playwright William Shakespeare (another famous Taurus)?

William also has an illustrious history given its popularity with English royalty, including today’s Prince William.

10. Violet

From the English word for “purple flower,” Violet is a nod to the nature-loving aspects of Taurus, an earth sign. The girls' name has been common in Scotland since the 16th century, but it took off in the U.S. starting in the early 2000s.

10 Gemini baby names

1. Angel

Geminis are constantly on the move, thanks in part to the ruling nature of the planet Mercury — i.e., the Roman counterpart of the Greek messenger god Hermes. The name Angel comes from the Greek word angelos , meaning "messenger."

2. Flavian

Flavian comes from the Latin flavus , meaning “golden” or “yellow-haired.” Yellow is considered a Gemini color, in part because it’s energetic, bright, and cheerful — all traits of a classic Gemini.

3. Gemma

For a more literal take on your little one’s sign, give your baby the name Gemma — or, Gem, for short. It also has Italian roots: Meaning “gem,” or “precious stone,” Gemma was also the name of Italian poet Dante Alighieri's wife.

4. Iris

Ruled by the planet Mercury, Geminis are famously good communicators. In ancient Greek religion, Iris was the goddess of rainbows ( iris means “rainbow” in Greek) and a messenger between gods and humans.

5. John

John is the given name of John F. Kennedy — another famous (and charismatic) Gemini. The name John has roots in Greek and Latin, but was derived from the Hebrew name Yochanan, meaning "Yahweh is gracious."

6. May

Babies born in the last week of May will likely be Geminis. The name May (itself a shortened version of Mary or Margaret) comes from the name Maia, the Roman goddess of spring.

7. Melissa

The word melissa means “bee” in Greek — a nod to the Gemini color of yellow, which symbolizes energy and cheerfulness, and the tendency of Geminis to zip from one activity to the next.

8. Morgan

A gender-neutral name, Morgan is given to both girls and boys. It was derived from the Old Welsh name Morcant, meaning “sea” and “circle.” The actor Morgan Freeman is a famous Gemini.

9. Tamsin

A shortened version of the name Thomasina — which is the feminine form of the name Thomas, meaning "twin" — Tamsin is a play on the Twins, which is the Gemini symbol.

10. Thomas

Speaking of the Gemini Twins, it’s only fitting to give your baby a name that literally means "twin." Thomas also has New Testament roots; in the Christian Bible, it was the name of one of the apostles.

10 Cancer baby names

1. Artemis

In ancient Greek religion, Artemis was the goddess of the moon — the same goddess who rules Cancer and represents maternal energy (giving Cancers their characteristic nurturing traits).

In the U.S., the name has been more popular in recent years, gaining traction in the early 2020s.

2. Delia

The name Delia was an epithet for Artemis, the goddess of the moon and the ruler of Cancer, a water sign. It was given to her because she and her twin brother Apollo were born on the island of Delos.

3. Diana

A fitting name for Princess Diana — a famously nurturing Cancer herself — Diana means “divine” or “goddess-like.” Diana was also the Roman goddess of the moon, the counterpart to the Greek goddess of the moon, Artemis, who rules Cancer.

4. Ernest

For sensitive, intuitive, and creative Cancers, the name Ernest is a good fit. The writer Ernest Hemingway, for example, was a famous Cancer. The name has its roots in the Old High German meaning — what else? — “serious” or “earnest.”

5. June

A common female name in the 1920s and 1930s, the name June — a Cancer month — has gained in popularity starting in the late aughts. June comes from the name of the Roman goddess Juno, the wife of Jupiter and the protectress of marriage and women.

6. Luna

Luna comes from the Latin word meaning “the moon,” the ruler of Cancer. Credit the moon with Cancer’s traditional traits, including compassion, sensitivity, and sentimentality. In the ancient Roman religion, Luna was the goddess of the moon.

7. Malala

What better inspiration for your baby than the famous Cancer Malala Yousafzai? Yousafzai, a Pakistani activist who survived an assassination attempt after speaking out about the importance of education for girls, is the youngest recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize.

8. Robin

Originally a shortened form of the name Robert, Robin was also the given name of the famous Cancer actor and comedian, Robin Williams. The name Robin is also known for belonging to that of the legendary hero of medieval England, Robin Hood.

9. Selena

A Latinized form of the name Selene — which means “moon” in Greek — Selena is the name to two famous singers: the Mexican-American singer Selena Quintanilla Pérez (known simply as Selena), as well as the famous Cancer singer, Selena Gomez.

10. Sterling

Derived from “sterling silver,” which came from the emblem on Norman coins, the name Sterling also means “excellent.”

As a color, silver is associated with the moon, the ruler of Cancer. Although the name has been popular in the U.S. since the 1800s, it saw a spike in popularity in the 2010s.

10 Leo baby names

1. Amelia

Leos are known for their daring and confidence — and what better symbol of daring and confidence than the famous Leo, Amelia Earhart, the first woman to fly solo over the Atlantic Ocean?

The name Amelia is a variant of Amalia, which comes from the Germanic amal , meaning “unceasing,” “vigorous” and “brave.”

2. Apollo

In Greek mythology, Apollo was the god of the sun and the ruler of Leo. In popular culture, the name Apollo symbolizes most of the characteristics of Leo: confident, outgoing and self-motivated.

3. Ari

Ari comes from the Hebrew word for “lion,” the symbol of Leo, and the embodiment of the sign’s characteristic. Other versions of the name include Arie and Arieh. While Ari has traditionally been a boy’s name, in recent years it’s also been given to girls.

4. Aurelia

Aurelia is a feminine version of the Roman name Aurelius — which was itself derived from the Latin word meaning “golden” or “gilded” (a symbol of the sun).

Along with being the name of early saints, the name Aurelius also belonged to that of the philosopher and emperor Marcus Aurelius.

5. Elio

An Italian name, Elio is a masculine name that comes from the Greek word helios , meaning “sun.” In Greek mythology, Helios — the Titan god of the sun — rode across the sky in a chariot pulled by four horses.

6. Estella

The sun is the brightest star in the sky — and the name Estella is derived from the Latin word stella , meaning "star.”

Estella wasn’t always a common name, but it saw a boost in popularity after the publication of Charles Dickens’ Great Expectations in 1860. Other twists on the name include Stella, Estelle, and Stela.

7. Jennifer

As the most popular girls name in the U.S. in the 1970s, Jennifer has been given to many famous women — including the famous Leo Jennifer Lopez.

The name is actually derived from the Normal French form of Gwenhwyfar, or Guinevere, the wife of King Arthur in the Arthurian legend.

8. Orville

A relatively new name, the word Orville was invented in the 1700s by the writer Fanny Burney, meaning “golden city,” in French.

Orville Wright, who flew the first successful airplane with his brother Wilbur, was a famous Leo, embodying all the daring and assertiveness that’s characteristic of this sign.

9. Phoebe

Phoebe is the Latin form of the Greek name Phoibe — which, of itself, comes from the Greek phoibos , meaning “bright” or “pure.”

The name saw a rise in popularity starting in the 1980s, most likely due to the character Phoebe Buffay on the hit TV show Friends.

10. Solana

Solana is the feminine variation of the name Solano, meaning “sun” — the ruler of big-hearted Leo. Solano is also the Spanish surname of Saint Francisco Solano, from the 1500s.

10 Virgo baby names

1. August

Born during the last week of August, Virgo babies are highly cerebral and intuitive. The month was named after the first, and arguably most famous, Roman emperor, Augustus — a word itself that means “exalted” and “venerable.”

2. Dolores

Virgos can be naturally prone to worrying, in part because their constant curiosity and inquisitiveness can lead to indecision. The name Dolores means “sorrows,” and stems from the Spanish Catholic epithet for Mary, meaning “Our Lady of Sorrows.”

3. Giselle

The middle name of Beyonce — a famous Virgo — Giselle has roots in the Old German gisal , meaning “pledge.”

It also has roots in France, where it was popular in the Middle Ages, before gaining popularity in the U.S. in the 20th century.

4. Hazel

The name Hazel — taken from “tree” or “light brown color” — is fitting for the earth sign Virgo, symbolized by the Maiden. The name wasn’t given until the 1800s, but it quickly became popular by the end of the century before seeing a resurgence in the late 20th century.

5. Idris

Ruled by Mercury, the planet of communication, Virgos are natural-born storytellers. The name Idris likely means “interpreter” in Arabic; in the Quran, Idris was the name of a prophet.

Today, Idris is the name of Idris Elba, the famous actor and a Virgo.

6. Kobe

The name Kobe is derived from the Hebrew name Ya’aqov. in the Hebrew Bible, Jacob is the father of the 12 tribes of Israel. Kobe Bryant, the famous basketball player, was a famous Virgo.

7. Magdalena

Virgo is symbolized the Maiden, and the name Magdalena comes from Mary Magdalene (meaning, “of Magdala”).

In the New Testament, Mary Magdalene was with Jesus during his ministry, and today is a popular saint.

8. Manon

A French variant of the name Marie — which itself is a form of the Hebrew name Mary — Manon is reminiscent of Virgo’s ruler, the Maiden. In France, the name remains popular, having peaked in the mid-1990s.

9. Rosario

Rosario means “rosary,” and has roots in the Spanish title of the Virgin Mary: “Nuestra Senora del Rosario,” or “Our Lady of the Rosary.”

Virgo is the Latin word for “virgin” or “maid,” the ruler of Virgo who is thoughtful and nurturing.

10. Virginia

Used in honor of Queen Elizabeth I, the virgin queen, the name Virginia likely comes from the Latin word virgo , meaning “maid” or “virgin.” (Virgo is symbolized by the Maiden.)

History lovers will also appreciate the fact that Virginia was the name of the first English baby born in the New World: Virginia Dare.

You can choose a name based on the literal zodiac sign or take into consideration the characteristics or energy of that sign.

Maressa Brown, Author of Raising Baby by the Stars

10 Libra baby names

1. Abel

The name Abel — meaning “breath” or “vapor” — suits the air sign Libra, who strives for balance and harmony. In the Hebrew Bible, Abel was the second son of Adam and Eve.

2. Aimee

Ruled by Venus, the planet of love, Libras are the aesthetes of the zodiac, and like Tauruses, have a great appreciation for beauty, art, and culture. The name Aimee is French for “beloved.”

3. Araceli

Derived from the Latin ara (meaning “altar”) and coeli (meaning “sky”), the feminine name Araceli means “altar of the sky” — a nod to Libra, an air sign. The name has been commonly used in Spain and Mexico, and enjoyed an uptick in popularity in the U.S. starting in the late 1960s.

4. Camellia

Warm-hearted and kind, Libra is often associated with the color pink. The name Camellia comes from the pink flower of the camellia shrub, which was named after the botanist Georg Josef Kamel.

5. Freya

From the Old Norse word freyja , meaning “lady,” the goddess Freya was associated with love and beauty — much like Venus, the ruling planet of Libra.

While the name has been common in European countries for decades, it only recently started gaining in popularity in the U.S. in the 2010s.

6. Julie

The name Julie has been linked to many famous and important women — including Julie Andrews, a famous Libra. Julie is the feminine form of the Roman name Julius, which was possibly related to the Roman god Jupiter.

7. Justice

Libra is represented by the Scales of Justice — the only inanimate object in the zodiac. The name Justice — which has been equally popular in the U.S. for both boys and girls — is an homage to Libra’s quest for balance and harmony.

8. Kamal

Kamal is the masculine form of the name Kamala, which means “pink” or “lotus” in Sanskrit.

In the zodiac, the color pink is often associated with kind, compassionate Libra.

9. Oscar

The famous playwright Oscar Wilde was a Libra. The name Oscar comes from the Old Irish “deer friend,” though it may also have roots in the Old English name Osgar.

Oscar has been popular in the U.S. for more than 100 years, but it enjoyed a brief bump in popularity in the 1990s.

10. Themis

Libra is represented by the Scales of Justice — and the feminine name Themis is Greek for “law of nature” or “divine law.”

In ancient Greek religion, Themis was a Titan who was depicted holding a pair of scales while blindfolded.

10 Scorpio baby names

1. Douglas

Derived from the Gaelic words dubh and glais , the name Douglas means “dark river” — a nod to Scorpio’s fixed water sign as well as their dark and mysterious personalities.

2. Dylan

As a water sign, the Scorpio tends to be emotionally intelligent and intuitive. The name Dylan, which is derived from the Welsh words dy and llanw , means “to flow” — as in, to the sea. It’s also thought that the name Dylan comes from a Celtic god of the sea.

3. Ebony

The name Ebony — which comes from the black wood of the ebony tree — pays homage to Scorpio’s dark and mysterious personality. It also has roots in the Egyptian word hbnj . The name was most popular in the U.S. in the 1980s.

4. Joaquin

Joaquin comes from the Hebrew Jehoiachin , meaning “Yahweh will establish.” In the Hebrew Bible, Jehoiachin (or Jeconiah) was one of the last kings of Judah. Joaquin Phoenix is a famous Scorpio.

5. Kieran

Scorpios are known for their emotional depth as well as their darkly mysterious personalities. The name Kieran is derived from the Irish word ciar , for “black.” According to Irish legend, Ciar was the ancestor of the tribe of Ciarraige, after the County Kerry.

6. Krishna

Meaning “black” or “dark” in Sanskrit — a play on Scorpio’s intense and darkly mysterious personality — Krishna is the name of a Hindu god that’s believed to be an incarnation of the god Vishnu.

7. Muriel

With their passionate personalities, Scorpios are often mistaken for fire signs — but in fact, Scorpio is a water sign, which explains their typically intuitive and emotionally intelligent nature.

Muriel is the Anglicized form of the Irish name Muirgel, meaning “sea-bright.”

8. Sojourner

Scorpios are intensely passionate and resolute — and perhaps no one embodies these traits quite like the famous Scorpio Sojourner Truth, an ex-slave and women’s rights activist who adopted the name in 1843.

9. Sylvia

The famous Scorpio Silvia Plath captures the sign’s fierce intelligence and mysterious personality. A feminine form of Silvius, Sylvia has roots in the Latin word silva , meaning “wood” or “forest.”

10. Theodore

Ruled in part by the planet Mars — the planet of action and energy — Theodore was the given name to Theodore Roosevelt, the 26th president of the U.S. who embraced the bully pulpit and famously founded the Rough Rider cavalry unit.

10 Sagittarius baby names

1. Archer

Sagittarius is symbolized by the Archer — the mythical, half-human, half-horse creature whose weapon was (what else?) a bow and arrow.

The name Archer comes from an English surname meaning “bowman,” and may have Old French origins.

2. Bridget

A fire sign, Sagittarius is ruled by the planet Jupiter, which oversees fortune and abundance. The name Bridget is derived from the Old Irish Brigit, and in Irish mythology was the name of the goddess of fire.

3. Fiamma

The feminine name Fiamma means “flame” in Italian — ideal for the fire sign Sagittarius.

Sagittariuses are the full-of-life entertainers of the zodiac, and are often free-spirited adventure seekers.

4. Mayumi

A take on the Archer, the symbol of Sagittarius, Mayumi is a feminine name that comes from the Japanese words ma (meaning “real” or “genuine”) and yumi (meaning “archery bow”).

5. Philip

Philip comes from the Greek name Philippos, which means “friend of horses” — a reference, in this case, to the half-horse, half-horse Archer that symbolizes Sagittarius.

The name also has a stately history: It’s been given to nearly a dozen kings of France and Spain, as well as the late Prince Philip of the U.K.

6. Remy

Full of wanderlust, Sagittarians are natural-born adventure lovers. The name Remy — a French form of the Latin word remigis , means “oarsman” or “rower” — is a nod to the Sagittarians’ love of travel.

It’s slightly more common as a boy’s name, but in the U.S., it’s been growing in popularity since the mid-2010s.

7. Samuel

Samuel was the real name of the famous Sagittarius author Mark Twain. It comes from the Hebrew name Shemu’el, meaning “name of God.” In the Hebrew Bible, Samuel was the last of the judges.

8. Seraphina

Seraphina is the feminine form of the name Seraphinus, which is itself derived from the Hebrew word seraphim .

Meaning “fiery ones” — a tribute to Sag’s fire sign — seraphim are described in the Bible as a type of angel with six wings.

9. Taylor

Sagittarians are known for their independent, free-spirited personalities. One well-known Sagittarian is the singer and entertainer Taylor Swift (who may also be the most famous person on the planet).

While the name has been traditionally given to girls, in the U.S., it’s also becoming more common as a boys’ name.

10. Walt

Fortune often smiles on Sagittarius, which is ruled by Jupiter, the planet of abundance.

And perhaps no one embodies this more than the famous Sagittarius Walt Disney, the founder of Disney. Walt is the shortened form of the name “Walter,” which means “power of the army.”

10 Capricorn baby names

1. Aaron

Meaning “high mountain,” the name Aaron embodies earthy Capricorn. It’s also an homage to the hard-working nature of Capricorn — the slow and steady plodding of climbing a mountain to reach a goal.

2. Acacia

An earth sign, Capricorns are known for their maturity and sense of responsibility. The name Acacia — from a type of tree, and derived from the Greek word for “thorn” — is a nod to the Capricorn’s close link to nature.

3. Alexander

From the Greek name Alexandros, meaning “defending men,” the name Alexander embodies the sense of tradition and responsibility that defines a Capricorn.

Founding father Alexander Hamilton — the very definition of industriousness and wisdom — was a famous Capricorn.

4. Janis

The name Janis is derived from Jane, which itself is an Old French, feminine form of the name Johannes, or John. The rock singer Janis Joplin was a famous Capricorn.

5. January

The birth month for Capricorn, the month of January is named for the Roman god Janus — the god of gateways and beginnings. January is traditionally a feminine name, with the actress January Jones being the one of the most notable examples.

6. Liadan

From the Old Irish word liath , meaning "gray,” Liadan is a feminine name of Irish origin. The color gray is associated with the wisdom and practicality that’s characteristic of Capricorns.

7. Mei

Born during the winter months, the name Mei hails from the Chinese word mei, which means “beautiful plum.”

In Chinese art, plums are one of the “three friends of winter,” along with pine and bamboo. Together, they represent steadfastness, perseverance and resilience — key traits of Capricorn.

8. Noel

Babies born on December 25th are Capricorns — and the name Noel means “born on Christmas.”

In the Middle Ages, the name was given to children who were born that day. In the U.S., it’s slightly more popular as a boys’ name, but it’s also given to girls.

9. Solomon

Renowned for his wisdom, King Solomon of the Hebrew Bible was also the author of the books of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon.

The name honors the wisdom, responsibility, and maturity that are traditional Capricorn traits.

10. Yves

The name Yves comes from the Germanic word beginning with iwa , meaning “yew” (a kind of tree, and a nod to Capricorn's earth sign). The name, which is masculine, belonged to those of saints from Cornwall, France, and Brittany.

10 Aquarius baby names

1. Abraham

As an air sign, Aquarians tend to be intellectual, social, and deeply committed to humanitarian causes. One famous Aquarius was Abraham Lincoln, the 16th president of the U.S. who abolished slavery. In Hebrew, the name means “father of many.”

2. Bellamy

With their sense of community and willingness to help others, there’s no better friend than an Aquarius. The name Bellamy (which, in the U.S., is just as common in girls as it is in boys) is derived from the Old French bel ami, meaning “beautiful friend.”

3. Indra

Independent and sensitive, Aquarius is one of the three air signs in the zodiac. The masculine name Indra is a nod to the sky, meaning “possessing drops of rain.” Indra is also the name of the ancient Hindu warrior god of the sky and rain.

4. Isaac

With their tendency to experiment and innovate, Aquarians tend to be the scientists of the zodiac. The name Isaac — meaning “he will rejoice” in Hebrew — is the given name of Isaac Newton, the famous scientist who discovered the theory of gravity as well as the science fiction writer Isaac Asimov.

5. Nadira

Aquarians are notably contrarian, so why not give your little one a name that means unique? The name Nadira is the feminine form of the name Nadir, which means “rare” in Arabic.

6. Niall

A nod to Aquarius — an air sign — the masculine name Niall comes from the name Neil, which is probably derived from the Old Irish for “cloud.”

7. Rosa

Ruled by the planets Uranus (the planet of rebellion and sudden change) and Saturn (the planet of responsibility and commitment), Aquarians tend to be concerned with humanitarian issues.

The name Rosa, after the famous civil rights activist Rosa Parks, is a nod to the sign’s commitment to making a difference in the world.

8. Saturday

Wednesday isn’t the only name inspired by the days of the week. Aquarius is partly ruled by Saturn, the planet of responsibility and commitment — and the word Saturday is derived from the Latin “Saturn’s Day.”

9. Sunil

Pay homage to the air sign Aquarius with the name Sunil, meaning “dark blue” (i.e., the color of the night sky) in Sanskrit. The name is popular as a boy’s name in India.

10. Tadgh

Tap into your little Aquarian’s humanitarian instincts: The name Tadgh comes from the Old Irish word tadg, meaning “philosopher” or “poet.”

An air sign, Aquarius is dedicated to helping their community and others around them.

10 Pisces baby names

1. Adrian

Intuitive Pisces is a water sign symbolized by the Fish. Adrian comes from the name Hadrian, which itself was the name of a Roman settlement called Adria — the same town that inspired the name for the Adriatic Sea.

2. Aislin

Pisces is partly ruled by Neptune, the planet of imagination, illusions and dreams. The name Aislin comes from the feminine name Aisling, which means “dream” or “vision” in Irish.

3. Chiharu

As a water sign, Pisces (which is symbolized by the Fish) is intuitive and emotional. In Japanese, the name Chiharu — which can be masculine or feminine — means "one thousand springs."

4. Daniel

Since Pisces is ruled partly by the planet Neptune, the planet of dreams, Pisces tend to be perceptive and intuitive, and even a little psychic.

In the Hebrew Bible, the prophet Daniel interpreted dreams for King Nebuchadnezzar during his captivity in Babylon.

5. Triton

Most famously Ariel’s father in The Little Mermaid, Triton — meaning “the sea,” possibly from the Old Irish trethan — is a name that references Pisces’ water sign.

Triton is also a moon of Neptune, the ruling planet of Pisces that bestows fortune and abundance.

6. Meena

Pisces is symbolized by the Fish — and the feminine name Meena comes from Mina, meaning “fish” in Sanskrit. Mina was also the name given to the daughters of two goddesses, Ushas and Kubera.

7. Nadiyya

A feminine name that means "moist with dew" in Arabic, Nadiyya is a nod to the water sign Pisces, the daydreamers of the zodiac.

In the U.S., the spelling Nadia is more common, having grown in popularity since the mid-1970s.

8. Nina

The artists of the zodiac, Pisces are brimming with emotional intuition and creativity. Nina Simone, the American singer, pianist, and civil rights activist, was a famous Pisces.

The name Nina is a shortened form of names like Antonina and Giannina, and also means “little girl” in Spanish.

9. Simone

As a water sign, Pisces are highly perceptive and intuitive. The feminine name Simone comes from the masculine Simon, which is derived from the Hebrew word for “to hear” or “to listen.”

Simone Biles — the Olympic-winning American gymnast — is one particularly famous Pisces.

10. Yoko

A water sign that’s symbolized by the Fish, Pisces is deeply intuitive and emotionally intelligent. The feminine name Yoko — most famously given to the artist and singer Yoko Ono — means “ocean child,” and comes from the Japanese yo (meaning “ocean”) and ko (meaning “child”).

Even if an astrology baby name doesn’t feel like fate, choosing a few options never hurts.

“They can be a good tiebreaker for when you meet your baby,” says Brown.

Still hunting for the perfect baby name? Open the What to Expect app for the top 1,000 names — plus tips for naming your baby from parents who have been there too.