Let foliage and fall festivities be your inspiration.

Autumn is a truly magical time of year, and for expectant moms, it's especially wonderful. You've made it through the sweltering summer, and now it's the perfect moment to start thinking about cozy winter maternity wear . Embrace the season by enjoying the stunning fall foliage, visiting a pumpkin patch or slipping into a classic fall hue to show off your beautiful bump in some maternity photos.

For a little inspiration, see how these 13 couples captured the spirit of the season in their fall maternity shoots.

Hocus pocus

hocus pocus

There are no pumpkins or ghosts in sight, but this fall maternity shoot screams Halloween. With all black ensembles and pops of orange (including the mom-to-be’s hair!), these unique and bold looks are all the inspo you need to take some bewitching bump photos.

Sonogram smooches

Sonogram smooches

Parents-to-be @forestrainn and @qlankmusic shared a kiss last October while happily holding up their latest ultrasound photo. Their natural fall surroundings and neutral color palette resulted in this dreamy golden hour shot.

Fall florals

Fall florals photo

There aren’t too many spots that rival a farm for a fall maternity shoot. At one point during the session, this expecting mom also held a tiny pumpkin to represent her little one on the way.

Autumnal bliss

Autumnal bliss

While Southern California doesn’t have the same changing leaves as other parts of the world, this nature preserve in San Diego was perfect for some fall maternity photos. Combined with the mom-to-be’s green velvet gown, it’s an ideal setting that will make you want to cozy up with a pumpkin spice latte immediately.

I heart NYC

Central park maternity shoot

People flock to Central Park year-round, but it’s particularly iconic on a crisp fall day. This couple donned outfits with quintessential fall hues for these stunning maternity photos.

Foliage fun

foliage fun maternity shoot

With brown boots and big smiles, this couple got ready to welcome their baby in Dallas. Mom-to-be’s floral dress is also a whimsical choice that seamlessly transitions from the summer to fall season.

You’re so golden

You're so golden maternity shoot

Most fall photo shoots incorporate reds, oranges and browns. But this golden look is showstopping.

Mother in nature

mother nature photo shoot

There’s something extra special about the Midwest during the fall. This simple yet glamorous maternity shoot in Indiana is a stunner. It's giving autumn, with a touch of spooky, all in one!

Pumped up parents

pumped up parents maternity shoot

Pumpkins are all you really need to capture the beauty of fall. We love this photo, which shows the mom-to-be holding her bump and dad-to-be carrying his own little pumpkin.

Glowing in green

glowing in green maternity shoot

Green is a symbol for growth, making it a gorgeous and meaningful color to choose for your maternity photos. These were taken just before Thanksgiving, so it’s fitting that this mom-to-be is radiating with gratitude.

Sweater weather

sweater weather announcement

Fall calls for coziness and this photo captures just that. This mom-to-be's sweater dress, jacket, and fall manicure scream autumn and cooler temps — and the best part of the whole photo is that her adorable bump is front and center.

Get your kicks

get your kicks maternity shoot

A prop can go a long way in a maternity photoshoot, and these adorable baby shoes are are a great one. Complete with fall foliage in the background, this photo shows how excited this couple really is.

Casual and cute

casual and cute maternity photo

The best maternity photos show off a couple’s personalities, and this duo’s skater-chic, neutral wardrobe (including complementary Vans sneakers!) does just that. Their neutral colors really compliment the picture perfect fall background — and their smiles are unmatched.