Gender disappointment is nothing to be ashamed of, and it's more common than you might think.

Many parents dream of what parenthood will look like before their little one arrives. If you're mentally picking out dresses and hoping for a daughter, it can be quite a shock when an ultrasound (or prenatal test ) shows you're actually having a boy . If you've ever cut into a gender reveal cake and felt disappointed, you're far from the first person to feel that way.

Gender disappointment can also come with feelings of shame; you might feel bad because you know that your baby's health is what's more important at the end of the day. But it's completely normal to grieve the picture you had in your mind.

Many What to Expect moms have felt crushed at their gender reveals . "I have one boy and found out I was having fraternal twins — I did hope one would be a girl, but they are two boys,” shares one WTE Community mom. “I think most women who end up with all three of one gender [have some] degree of disappointment, whether they admit it or not!"

Even though it is very common to experience gender disappointment, it can help to know that you're not alone. Here are how some moms in the same boat have felt, plus some tips on how to cope.

You might deny or avoid the news at first

"My NIPT results didn't say 'female.' It said, 'Based on the absence of finding a Y chromosome, we predict the fetus is female.' I have been convinced it's a boy. I'm in denial. It's probably a girl, but I'm still holding on to the possibility that the tests were wrong. It's so tough. I was bawling the day I found out. And I hate explaining it to people, because of course the #1 thing we want is a healthy and happy baby no matter what!" — @bfernbpositive

"My results came in today, and I'm scared to look. [After having two girls,] we want a boy … But I can imagine a third girl fitting in perfectly with our family and getting to make use of all of the clothes and items we've been saving. I think it is going to be a hard pill to swallow either way, honestly. [Gender disappointment] is a real thing and doesn't make you a horrible person or mean you don't love your baby. It is okay to grieve the 'what if's.'" — @soontoBmamax3

You may struggle to connect with your baby right away

"I'm having crazy gender disappointment, to the point I already don't feel connected with this baby, and it's my first. I hate to feel this way, but I'm so shocked and never ever, ever saw myself as a boy mom. I literally don't even know what I'll do with a boy … I don't even want to tell people the gender because I'm genuinely devastated." — @mlicata

"I planned to keep the sex unknown until birth, but at 7 months, hospital staff ruined the surprise. I found out I was having a boy and was absolutely devastated for days. How would I connect with a boy? I only ever wanted to have a girl. But now that he's here, I couldn't imagine having a girl, he's just perfect … Right now you just need some time to feel some sadness for what you may not have. Good things will come." — @AmandaB620

Your partner or other kids can feel disappointed, too

"My husband and I just found out we are having our third girl (one boy and two girls currently), and I'm so sad. It's not that we are having another girl really, I'm sure she will be amazing. But our son has been telling everyone he meets that his baby brother is 'on the way' basically since our last baby was brought home from the hospital. So I think my husband and I convinced ourselves this was a boy. I was so sure of it! And it didn't help that our son cried when we cut open the cake and saw the pink icing." — @Saphron17

"I just found out I'm having a healthy baby boy. I have a 6-year-old girl and we have been talking about her having a little sister for the past four months. I am devastated … I am just mourning this little girl I created in my head, and I feel so bad for my daughter that she's not getting the little sister she wanted. I grew up in a house with three girls and I'm sad my daughter won't be able to have that sister relationship." — @aliciacoletti

"My husband was actually a bit disappointed our first was not a girl. He couldn't even hide it at the doctor's appointment. It took a week for him to get over it, because he really wanted a girl and saw himself as a girl dad. Now he is besties with our son and couldn't picture him being anything else but our son. Gender disappointment is also a thing for men, and [it's important to] let him process it." — @SunshineMama231

You will learn to accept and love your new baby

"When I was pregnant with my first, I was 1,000% sure it was a boy. When I found out we were having a girl, I went through all the emotions … All that changed well before my daughter was actually born. When I was feeling and seeing kicks in my belly, that's when I started feeling a strong connection with my daughter and those feelings of disappointment went away." — @MamaTreat27

"I have two boys, ages 9 and 12. When I found out that my second child was a boy I cried. Looking back, I am so happy that I had a boy as my second child. My boys are so close with each other. They like the same things (Legos, hide and seek, gaming, sports, etc.) and are the best of friends." — @marylandmommy301

The disappointment might not go away until birth

"Once you know the gender, it's kinda all you know about your baby for a long time. It's hard not to focus on that and the possible disappointment that may come. I felt this way about my son at first … Everything changed when he was born, and you actually meet them and get to know and love everything about them." — @bmf90

"I wanted a girl, and when I found out it was a boy, I cried for days. It still never really went away until he was born and in my arms, and I immediately knew I wouldn't have wanted it any other way. This second time, I was praying for a boy because I love my little one so much. When we found out it was a girl, I was disappointed. My poor husband even commented, "You're never happy are you?" which made me feel even worse. I'm excited for a girl now, and I think it's because I know when she's here she will be the missing piece we needed — just like her brother was." — @rlang1887

How to cope with gender disappointment

If you're experiencing any gender disappointment, remember that you're not alone — and that you're not a "bad" mom for feeling that way.

"We are capable of complexity and feeling more than one emotion at a time," says What to Expect Community member northmomma. "You can be grateful for a healthy pregnancy, excited for a girl, and heartbroken to not have a son. Let yourself feel and process your emotions so that you can move on and let yourself become used to (and then excited) to have another daughter. You might always dream of a son you will never have. That's normal and okay too."

Another good thing to do: "Talk to someone you know you can be open with," says Community member mmmomma91. "That's what helped me! I realized I'm much more suited to be a boy mom, and a lot of my hopes for a girl weren't actually about having a girl versus boy. It was about the idea of buying cute clothes, going shopping when they're older, etc."

FAQ

How do I get over gender disappointment?

The first step to getting over gender disappointment is being honest with yourself about your feelings. Then, try sharing those feelings with a friend, partner or loved one. People often feel better once they get things off their chest — and you may find you're not alone, which can help shed any feelings of shame. Once you've grieved the vision you had in your head, start thinking of a new one. Brainstorming baby names and picking out toys can help build excitement for your growing family. Many moms report gender disappointment fades with time, but if you're still feeling blue after a few days or weeks, then it's worth reaching out to a counselor to help you through it.

Is it normal to be upset about the gender of your baby?

Yes, gender disappointment is real and normal. While there aren't many scientific studies on the subject, many parents report feeling grief or disappointment around their child's gender reveal. Luckily, many parents also report those feelings eventually subside.

Why do I have gender disappointment?

Gender disappointment is a personal experience, and every parent's reasons are different. Perhaps you already have a son, or grew up in a home with a brother, and another boy would feel like familiar territory. Perhaps you've dreamed of a mother-daughter bond, or worry that you'll miss out on the experiences that come with being a "girl mom" or "boy mom." Social and cultural norms can also play a role. For decades, polls have shown Americans (slightly) prefer having boys to girls. Whatever your reasons are, your feelings are valid.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Gender Disappointment , November 2024. Gallup, Slight Preference for Boy Children Persists in U.S. , July 2018. Cambridge University Press, 'It's a Girl!' Is Gender Disappointment a Mental Health or Sociocultural Issue? , October 2023. Medicine, Healthcare and Philosophy , Is 'Gender Disappointment' a Unique Mental Illness? , December 2019.