These sugary showpieces all hold special surprises inside.

One second, you're gaping at a positive pregnancy test. Then, it's suddenly time to celebrate your little bundle of joy. But before you can imagine singing "Pat-a-Cake" to your little one, you might want to know if your growing baby is a boy or a girl. And if you're planning a gender reveal party , why not sweeten the deal with a gender reveal cake?

What is a gender reveal cake?

Cut and served at a gender reveal party, this delicious treat comes with an answer inside: boy or girl?

Ahead of time, you might undergo through noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT), chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or amniocentesis at your doctor’s recommendation as early as 10 weeks into your pregnancy. These determine biological sex based on chromosomes tested in the mother's blood: XX is considered female and XY is considered male. Alternatively, you may wait until the anatomy ultrasound , when a technician or doctor determines the sex based on fetal genitalia development.

At your appointment, let your doctor know that you want to learn your baby's sex later on as a surprise. Ask the practitioner to stow away the results in an envelope. From there, you can hand it to your local baker, or give it to the party host to submit the order. Just try not to peek!

Gender reveal cakes typically feature a combination of blue and pink, but you can choose any color of the rainbow, and adorn your cake with adorable critters or fun symbols. Parents will often cut into gender reveal cakes, and see pink- or blue-dyed cake or frosting as an indicator of the news.

This idea also works well with gender reveal cupcakes . You can even add blue or pink dye to just one of them, pass out to friends and family, and then see which loved one has the answer!

Gender reveal cake ideas

Bakers and chefs all over the world have come up with some pretty ingenious gender reveal food ideas. These noteworthy gender reveal cakes cover many different potential party themes (and make our stomachs growl) …

Gender reveal cakes with bees

gender reveal cake with bees

Now, if you're all wondering, "What will baby bee?", this cake is truly the bee's knees. Complete with sage green frosting, delicate baby’s breath flowers and a sweet little bee, it's as sophisticated as it is special.

Gender reveal cakes with a boho vibe

boho gender reveal cake

For an on-trend style with classic elements, this two-tiered white cake is lovingly adorned with a bear, colorful spheres and sprigs of hare's tail grass. You also can't go wrong with the effortlessly chic "boy or girl" gender reveal cake topper.

Gender reveal cakes with balloons

gender reveal cake with balloons

Up, up and away! This two-tiered hot air balloon cake is sure to make you feel elated — no matter the outcome.

Gender reveal cakes for Disney fans

lion king gender reveal cake

It's the circle of life! This Lion King-themed gender reveal cake shows a young Simba and Nala hanging out on top, and has a coordinating "girl or boy" sign on the side.

Gender reveal cakes with pastels

gender reveal cake with pastel blue and pink

Oh, baby! This gender reveal cake topper says it all. With one cut, you will learn a little more about your little one. The delicate touches of florals, metallic spheres and foil bring a whimsical feel to this one.

Gender reveal cakes with cookies

gender reveal cake with teddy bear cookies

For a bear-y lovely two-in-one dessert, this one was made with shortbread biscuits in the shape of two tiny bears.

Gender reveal cakes with moons and stars

gender reveal cake with moons and stars

Create a wonderfully dreamy atmosphere at your gender reveal with a cake that looks like a starry night. The two-tiered cake has gold stars and a crescent moon-shaped cake topper for extra whimsy.

Gender reveal cakes for spring

gender reveal cake with flowers

Everything's coming up roses for you and your growing family, so why not share that with a garden-inspired gender reveal cake? This one has three- and two-dimensional floral and botanical accents that are eye-catching and oh-so-colorful.

Gender reveal cakes with neutral tones

neutral gender reveal cake

If you want to divert from the blue-or-pink concept, go for neutrals like gold and brown. This gender reveal cake topper has a bite-size bear in a miniature hot air balloon.

Gender reveal cakes for twins

gender reveal cake for twins

Do you have two little ones growing? This cream-colored, two-tiered cake comes with blooms, macaron cookies and the letters A and B. The top tier reveals Baby A's sex, and the bottom announces Baby B's.

Gender reveal cakes with a rainbow

gender reveal cake with a rainbow

Whether your little one is a rainbow baby or you simply love the concept, find your pot of gold in this neutral-toned cake. It's also covered with colorful spheres and botanical accents, plus the "He or She" gender reveal cake topper is just too cute.

Gender reveal cakes with pearls

gender reveal cake with pearls

We love how tiny pearls are thoughtfully placed all over this one-tiered, all-white cake. There are also multisized white spheres and a gold "Oh Baby" sign displayed on the side.

Ideas for gender reveal cake pops

Looking for an alternative option for your big unveiling? TikTok users are constantly going viral with gender reveal cake pops.

Order a bunch of them for friends and family, and ask everyone to go around and take a big bite. Everyone at the party or only one lucky loved one can ultimately share whether you're expecting a boy or girl — just be specific that you need blue or pink cake underneath the frosting layer of one or more cake pops.

Gender reveal cake pops with flowers

pink and blue gender reveal cake pops

We love how these gender reveal cake pops showcase a soft pink base with a bright blue flower on top.

Gender reveal cake pops with moons and stars

celestial gender reveal cake pops

For a celestial take on gender reveal cake pops, check out these ones with gold moons and stars. We're also partial to the marshmallows that serve as clouds in this delightful set.

FAQ

How do gender reveal cakes work?

Parents will often cut into a gender reveal cake as a way to find out whether they're having baby boy or baby girl. Inside, they'll see pink- or blue-dyed cake or frosting.

What can I make for a gender reveal party?

In lieu of a gender reveal cake, you can make gender reveal cake pops or cupcakes as a sweet way to share the surprise.

Do you have cake at a gender reveal party?

It's not required, but many parents choose to include a gender reveal cake as part of their party plans. It's a fun way to both break the news and serve dessert to your guests.

How much cake do I need?

An 8-inch round cake will serve about 15 to 20 people, where as a 10-inch round cake will feed about 25 to 40 guests.

WhatToExpect.com, Noninvasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) , April 2022. WhatToExpect.com, The 20-Week Anatomy Scan , November 2021.