These moms celebrate their bodies — and their babies on the way.

Pregnancy is a beautiful thing, but for many moms, it can bring up a lot of emotions about the changes their bodies go through along the way. As one What to Expect mom recently said in the WTE Community, "I’m afraid I won’t be comfortable enough to take bump pics or have a maternity photo shoot."

What followed was an outpouring of support from plus-size parents and parents-to-be, sharing their own photos and encouraging words. As one wise mom advised, “I want to remind you your body is doing something amazing! You are growing life and that is beautiful…take the maternity photos.”

In the spirit of that sentiment, here are 14 beautiful pictures from different moms’ maternity shoots that serve as a gorgeous reminder to take the photos..

On cloud nine

on cloud nince

The glam, the dress, the cloud-covered backdrop. There are few combos more blissful than this blue moment captured by photographer @fadrotex_images . This mom looks confident and oh-so-happy.

Neutrals in nature

neutral maternity shoot

Greens and browns and a growing bump make this a nature-filled dreamscape. If you have a trail near your home, consider meeting your photographer there for an outdoor shoot.

Pregnancy portrait

Pregnancy portrait shoot

Celebrating her growing bump (and epically good hair day), @curlspluspretty donned a gorgeous tulle-covered ensemble. The soft smile and gentle hand on her belly tells you everything you need to know about her excitement to become a mom.

Waterfront bliss

waterfront bliss maternity shoot

The breeze off the waterfront acted like an in-studio fan in this outdoor maternity photoshoot. Plus, mom-to-be @hayleysykesmodelmumma’s slightly sheer off-the-shoulder gown served as the ultimate effortlessly chic outfit.

In-studio spotlight

in studio spotlight

Mom-to-be @ebnay_luv wore several looks for her maternity photoshoot, but we’re partial to this forest green two-piece set.The ruffle-lined top and the train on the skirt provide the “wow” factor, especially with the beautiful and natural studio lighting.

I want to remind you your body is doing something amazing! You are growing life and that is beautiful. Take the maternity photos.

- What to Expect mom

Glowing in gold

Glowing in gold

An enchanting garden and a yellow gown … need we say more? This couple’s photoshoot is an example of elegance and nature in perfect harmony. And the caption, "I’ve never felt closer to you than I have these last few weeks of pregnancy" is super sweet and emotional.

Beach babe

Beach babe maternity shoot

Is there anything better than a beachside photoshoot? Mom-to-be @tiff_vidal rocked a black bikini in her sweet and sandy series of pictures. Her pregnancy glow just radiates through each image.

If the crown fits

crown maternity shoot

“I think the divinity I feel internally about this little life translates well to an external representation,” shared mom-to-be @suzgilliessmith on Instagram. From the crown to the gown, this golden hour photo is nothing short of magical. The lacy dress highlights her growing bump and for that, it's perfect.

Boho beauty

Boho beauty maternity shoot

This Florida maternity shoot is giving boho. The wide brim hat and bump-hugging lace gown are the ideal accents to the couple’s natural surroundings.

Pretty in pink

pretty in pink maternity shoot

Whether you’re expecting a girl or simply love the color pink, a gown like this one is a standout option for a maternity photoshoot. Head over to your favorite nature reserve for the dreamiest backdrop imaginable.

Ode to joy

ode to joy maternity shoot

This is what happens when a professional photographer plans a maternity shoot — pure fun and joy. Pro tip: @kirstie.veatch highly recommends Ivy City Co. for a size-inclusive lineup of maternity-friendly clothing.

Miracle maker

miracle maker maternity shoot

The only thing sweeter than this golden hour photoshoot? The words from mom-to-be @rebecca.ibert in a post shared on the @plussizebirth page: “I can’t wait to look back and see just what my body was capable of and what a miracle it played a part in creating.”?

Paws-itively adorable

pawsitively adorable maternity shoot

What to Expect mom melie247's beautiful yet classic black and white photo captures her best furry friend and their soon-to-be big sibling. “ I struggle with body confidence, But I've never felt more beautiful than when I was pregnant," she says. Also, she's the mom who encouraged the What to Expect Community group to capture their pregnant bodies, saying "Take the maternity photos.”

Loving your bump

loving your bump maternity shoot

This What to Expect mama, graybabyy , dons a beautiful black bra and panties for her pregnancy photoshoot. She was originally worried she wouldn't get the perfect round bump for pictures and that she would feel low about herself, she says. Turns out, she loved the experience. "I ended up with all of it and I actually loved my baby belly,” she wrote in the What To Expect Community post. “I’m starting a bit heavier this time but I’m definitely less in my head about it than last time."

Simplicity at its finest

simplicity photo shoot

This in-studio shoot featured mom-to-be @maddyzanatta in a neutral bra and panties set with a relaxed pair of denim framing her bump. She had a few outfit changes, but we're loving the simplicity and intimacy of this look.