15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One

baby shower cupcake ideas

Treat friends and family to some showstopping cupcakes.

When you get to throw a baby shower for someone you love, it's the perfect time to be creative and have some fun with it. You can brainstorm cool baby shower themes , cute baby shower food , memorable baby shower favors , sweet baby shower drinks and maybe best of all … delicious desserts!

There’s plenty of great inspiration out there for baby shower cakes , but what about giving cupcakes a shot? They’re an adorable treat for an equally adorable mom-to-be, and there are so many ways to decorate them (or have them decorated by a professional — no judgment here).

Whether you plan to make them yourself or outsource, get inspired by these gorgeous baby shower cupcake ideas. There are pretty flowers, mermaid tails, succulents — truly something sweet for every kind of party.

Baby shower cupcake ideas

Floral baby shower cupcakes

floral baby shower cupcake

These buttercream rose cupcakes are simple but effective. Two-tone icing is topped with white sprinkles for a classic celebratory look that works well in pink or blue. To get the rose shape, use an open star piping nozzle, and start at the center of the cupcake, working outwards.

Celestial baby shower cupcakes

Celestial baby shower cupcakes

For expectant parents who are over-the-moon excited about meeting their little one, these treats are out of this world. The star sprinkles can nod to an outer space theme , or the saturated ombré icing makes them well-suited for a blue color scheme.

Little deer baby shower cupcakes

Little deer baby shower cupcakes

With white icing faces and jelly bean noses, these cupcakes are almost too dear (or is it deer?) to eat. They would pair well with a woodland-themed shower, especially for those due in the fall or winter.

Baby shower cupcakes with succulents

Baby shower cupcakes with succulents

Delicate succulent cupcakes work well for baby showers and first birthdays , if you want to think ahead. The botanical motif is a nice way to celebrate a growing baby and the birth of new life.

Rainbow baby shower cupcakes

Rainbow baby shower cupcakes

Rainbows are a sign of hope and beauty, so they're a wonderful emblem of love and excitement for a new baby. These treats are coated in simple blue icing and embellished with rainbow candy to make the colorful arch.

Mermaid baby shower cupcakes

mermaid baby shower cupcakes

Even sea-soned party goers will fall for adorable mermaid-themed cupcakes. They're coated in pink, purple, blue and gold sprinkles then topped with additional colorful buttercream. Special tail toppers (available online) make a big splash.

Unicorn baby shower cupcakes

unicorn baby shower cupcakes

If you'd rather go for another mythical creature, unicorns make for a super colorful baby shower theme . Professional or well-seasoned home bakers can shape horns and ears out of fondant, but you wouldn't be remiss to buy unicorn toppers for a simpler method.

Ocean baby shower cupcakes

ocean baby shower cupcakes

Ocean-centric cupcakes with fins, "bubbles" and gold seashells are a cool way to celebrate a baby whose parents love their beach time.

Honey bee baby shower cupcakes

honey bee baby shower cupcakes

What could be sweeter than these cupcakes? Cheery yellow hives (made with swirled icing), honeycomb (made of molded sugar) and tiny marzipan bees decorate these treats.

Jungle baby shower cupcakes

jungle baby shower cupcakes

Welcome to the jungle! If you're going for a wild party theme, try these cupcakes topped with teal and gold icing and molded sugar safari animals. (Look for silicone molds online or at craft stores.)

Pumpkin baby shower cupcakes

pumpkin baby shower cupcakes

A fall baby shower calls for lots of pumpkin decor, cupcakes included. Pastel pink pumpkins add a whimsical touch to the typical autumnal icon. Another great takeaway: Mix up thematic and more simple cupcake designs. When paired with pink pumpkins, the simple chocolate-frosted ones here look just as lovely.

Butterfly baby shower cupcakes

butterfly baby shower cupcakes

Butterflies are a classic design motif for babies and adults alike. Place pretty paper ones on top for a special, whimsical look that's especially nice in spring (and doesn't take a steady hand or piping expertise).

How to display baby shower cupcakes

Try a simple stand

baby shower cupcakes display stand

Sometimes simple is best. When you have cupcakes this beautiful, the best way to display them is by doing something minimal like placing them on a marble cake stand (or two, or three). This especially works well for a low-key celebration like a baby sprinkle .

Make a monogram

baby shower cupcakes monogram display

Say it with cupcakes. Use craft letters to spell out the baby's name or initials, and simply place the decorated treats inside.

Level up

tiered baby shower cupcakes display stand

A tiered stand is an adorable way to show off a variety of flavors and icing styles. The display makes it easy for guests to serve themselves, and it creates a particularly nice Instagram moment.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

14 Gender Reveal Cake Ideas to Share Your Sweet Baby News Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The Best Baby Shower Food and Drink Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Make Gender Reveal Cupcakes to Share Your Special News Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Gender Reveal Themes to Inspire Your Special Celebration Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 DIY Baby Shower Gifts Moms-to-Be Will Actually Use Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw a Winter Wonderland Baby Shower for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw a Fall-Themed Baby Shower for Your Little Pumpkin Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window