The 15 Best Pool Toys, According to a Mom of 4 Fish (I Mean, Kids!)

Best Pool Toys

Quick Summary

The best pool toys can help babies and toddlers explore water safely and in an age-appropriate manner. They’re also easy to dry off and store for the next round of fun, lasting beyond a single summer season.

As soon as the temperatures start to rise, I know my four kids will be begging to swim. And I’m happy to oblige. Whether it’s the main activity for the day or a quick pit stop, you can find us at the neighborhood pool or my sister’s backyard oasis — and always with a big bag of the best pool toys in tow.

Admittedly, I might have a pool toy problem. They’re fun for the whole family — including me! — and I can’t help but add to our collection every year. I’ve purchased everything from a canopied float my little ones bobbed around in as babies to wind-up and dive toys they chase after for hours now as active tots. Needless to say, I’ve learned that the best pool toys can make any water experience more memorable, which makes them just as important to pack as towels and sunscreen .

Curious which pool toys have passed the entertainment test for my babies and toddlers? Scroll on.

How I Chose the Best Pool Toys

I’ve spent over a decade researching, shopping for and testing dozens of different pool toys. So I know firsthand which are the most entertaining and undeniably durable. That’s why I only included toys that have survived at least one summer in my home (for context, my children are notoriously tough on their gear and playthings). I also limited considerations to toys designed for those between the ages of 3 months and 5 years.

But because every family is different, I also looked into which pool toys parents in the What to Expect community recommend and love. Based on their suggestions and reviews, I whittled down a list of contenders from 50 to just 15 pool toys that check the following boxes:

Safety: All of my favorite toys are free of small parts that can easily detach and become choking hazards.

Materials: Plastic and foam are durable and great in the water, and they’re also resistant to mold and bacterial growth. I focused on toys made from these materials.

Versatility: While not all pool toys can or should be used elsewhere, I made sure to include a variety of products that can also be used in the bath or at the beach.

Size: Not every family has a ton of space for toys, especially pool toys. That’s why I made sure to include products with a range of sizes, including toys that can be deflated or broken down easily for storage.

Durability: Pool toys should last more than a single season. The toys that made the final list should withstand regular use in the water and won’t pop or break easily, even in the hands of a toddler. My 2-year-old tends to throw things when she gets mad or frustrated — everything on this list has survived a summer or more in her hands.

Before diving into my list of favorites (all of which you can find in my overflowing garage), it’s essential to note that children should never be in the pool unsupervised and that you should never leave pool toys in the water once your child has finished playing. Otherwise, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) warns that they can become a drowning hazard for curious toddlers. I recommend investing in a large mesh bag to house your pool gear after the fun is over — it’s airy enough to help your toys dry off and the open weave makes it easy to spot what’s inside.

Best Inflatable Baby Float

Mambobaby Self-Inflating Baby Swim Float with Canopy

Over 10 fun designs

Can be used two ways

Comes with removable canopy

Pricey

Age Range: 3 to 24 months, up to 40 pounds

Weight: 1.88 pounds

Dimensions: 23.62 x 23.62 x 9.84 inches

Why We Love It

Mamobaby makes unique and durable pool floats that are eye-catching and, most important, safe for babies. This baby float is adorable and functional, as well as versatile: It can hold babies up to 40 pounds, which is more than some other baby floats on the market. Additionally, it self-inflates to make setup quick and easy.

It feels durable and comfortable, with two positions available depending on your child’s age. Use the breaststroke position for babies between 3 and 12 months of age and backstroke position for babies between 3 and 24 months. And even though it keeps baby secure thanks to a five-point harness, they’ll still be able to kick their legs around and move pretty freely. My youngest has three older siblings, and she loved being able to kick around after them in the pool with this float.

The canopy is a big plus, too. Babies and young children require as much sun protection as possible, and a canopy (paired with a great baby sunscreen ) is a great way to add extra shade when they’re floating in a pool. It’s also removable for easier storage or if you don’t feel you need it.

The canopy is a big plus, too. Babies and young children require as much sun protection as possible, and a canopy (paired with a great

) is a great way to add extra shade when they’re floating in a pool. It’s also removable for easier storage or if you don’t feel you need it.

One extremely important thing to keep in mind when using a baby pool float is that they are never to be used in place of adult supervision: Baby should always be within arm’s reach of an adult when using a pool float.

Community Reviews

“IT IS THE BEST!!!!”

“We got this floaty for our 20 week old and it's pretty nice. Just place baby in, velcro and snap. It's easy to use and feels very safe. The sun shade does offer protection to her face and body, but not really her legs. She was so comfortable in it she even took a nap in it lol. The only thing I didn't like was how little baby actually sits in the water. As you can see in the second picture, it's basically just her bum in the water.”

“We just got ours last weekend and have used it twice and I feel like it’s worth every penny. My son loves it and it feels so secure. Buy it you won’t regret it.”

Best Bucket Pool Toy

Skip Hop Zoo Stack & Pour Buckets

Versatile

Stackable for easy storage

Great for small hands

May grow mold eventually

Age Range: 9 months and up

Weight: 8.8 ounces

Dimensions: 3.6 x 2.9 x 3.4 inches

Why We Love It

These Skip Hop buckets are a simple yet exciting way for baby to enjoy the water: Fill them up, then either dump them out or watch the water sprinkle out of the bottom. To make it even more engaging, these buckets feature three different designs that sprinkle water out differently.

Between the small size and thick carry handle, these buckets are easy for small hands to grip. They’re great for use in a large pool, a kiddie pool, at a water table and in the bath, so they’re very versatile. They also stack for compact, easy storage.

My kids are obsessed with these buckets, whether they’re in the pool or tub . However, one thing to note is that, despite the water being able to drain out, they may still collect mold. While they’re not dishwasher safe, I’ve found that scrubbing the buckets every once in a while with dish soap eliminates any potential bacteria buildup issue.

My kids are obsessed with these buckets, whether they’re in the pool or tub . However, one thing to note is that, despite the water being able to drain out, they may still collect mold.

Community Reviews

“Skiphop makes little bath buckets that he loves.”

“We also have the buckets! My daughter loves them.”

“My daughter loves filling cups and buckets up with water and dumping them back out over and over! “

Best Wind-Up Pool Toy

Munchkin Wind Up Swimming Penguin Bath Toy

Inexpensive

Easy to use

No batteries needed

Water needs to drain out after a few rounds

Age Range: 9 months and up

Weight: .32 ounces

Dimensions: 4.5 x 3.9 x 1.2 inches

Why We Love It

Simple, low-maintenance and cute, this wind-up Munchkin penguin toy is a great option for younger babies who just need something to look at in the water. To make it work, all you have to do is wind up the arms and release: The penguin will “swim” through the water much to your baby’s delight. It’s designed to be easy enough that even your little one can operate it on their own.

This is a super compact option that is great for travel and can also be used in the bath, in a water table or in a kiddie pool. As a bonus, it’s under $10, so it’s a budget-friendly option, too. My toddler still belly laughs whenever she uses this, and now ropes her older siblings into games of keepaway. The only downside? This little animal takes in water as it swims, so you’ll need to put aside some time for it to properly drain after a few rounds of chase.

This is a super compact option that is great for travel and can also be used in the bath, in a water table or in a kiddie pool.

Best Versatile Pool Toy

TOMY Toomies Peppa’s Boat Adventure Bath Toy Set

Versatile ways to play

Great for the bathtub too

Toddler-favorite characters

All of the pieces may be hard to keep track of

Age Range: 18 months and up

Weight: 1.85 pounds

Dimensions: 11.88 x 6 x 10.25 inches

Why We Love It

For some imaginative play in the pool, look for floating versions of your kid’s favorite show or movie. This bath toy set is ideal for Peppa Pig fans and works just as well in a pool as it does in the bathroom. It comes with two boats and five characters, all of which float so you don’t need to worry about the toys sinking. If you have several kids, there are enough characters for everyone to get in on the fun without fighting for a turn.

For some imaginative play in the pool, look for floating versions of your kid’s favorite show or movie. This bath toy set is ideal for

fans and works just as well in a pool as it does in the bathroom. It comes with two boats and five characters, all of which float so you don’t need to worry about the toys sinking.

Although it’s on the pricier end of pool toys, this set is really versatile, making it a worthwhile investment . Pulling the string on the paddle boat allows it to rotate and “drive” through the water, while the other boat can be used as a pourer. This is a great pick for younger toddlers and babies playing in a kiddie pool, but older kids can have fun with it in a big pool as well. Just be aware that keeping track of all of the items might be a little tough, especially if you’re hanging out in a public pool like my family.

Although it’s on the pricier end of pool toys, this set is really versatile, making it a worthwhile investment .

Just be aware that keeping track of all of the items might be a little tough, especially if you’re hanging out in a public pool like my family.

Best Net Pool Toy

KECIABO Shark Fishing Play Set

Toy animals float

Each animal has a different feature

Compact and great for the bath too

The squirting toys can collect water and become moldy

They may fade in the sun

Age Range: 3 years and up

Weight: 9.9 ounces

Dimensions: 8 x 5 x 2 inches

Why We Love It

A toy net set is always a hit with toddlers. They promote imaginative play and encourage search and find skills, but they’re also versatile: You can use them in the bath, a water table, kiddie pool or even dry land. This set comes with six floating animals that kids can try to “catch” with the included basket. What makes these animals extra fun though is that they each have a different feature: Two spout water, two make cute sounds when squeezed, and two change color in warmer water temperatures. This makes them a little more interesting for kids and expands play potential outside of the water. My 5-year-old loves making noises with these for her little sister, adding a layer of imaginative fun, and I love that they can safely play with it together.

The main downside to many toys that squirt water is you’ll want to keep an eye out for mold buildup inside of the toys that spout water. (Just squeeze them out after each use to lower the risk.)

Community Reviews

Bananasando “We also have balls we throw in the water and a little “fishing kit” with floating fish they chase around the pool.”

Bananasando “We also have balls we throw in the water and a little “fishing kit” with floating fish they chase around the pool.”

Best Basketball Hoop Pool Toy

Intex Floating Hoops Basketball Game

Water-filled base for stability

Compact size

Inexpensive

Only comes with one ball

Age Range: 3 years and up

Weight: 1.1 pounds

Dimensions: 26.5 x 21.5 inches

Why We Love It

A floating basketball hoop offers a simple, easy game that a variety of age groups will love playing. This Intex Floating Hoop is small enough for toddlers to use, while still being a fun choice for older kids. Not to mention it’s relatively compact so it won’t take up a lot of space in your pool. The base fills with water for added stability, keeping it afloat and preventing it from toppling over too quickly.

Parents find that it’s easy to inflate and, when deflated, it’s small enough to be portable and travel-friendly. It’s a good starter hoop for younger kids just getting into basketball and they can even use it in the yard as well.

I’ve seen a lot of floating hoops come and go at my community pool, and this is one of the few that has staying power. We’ve had ours for two summers (and counting!) and because it’s still in such good shape, I’m anticipating plenty more years of use. The hoop is easy to inflate and, when deflated, it’s small enough to be portable and travel-friendly. It’s a good starter hoop for younger kids just getting into basketball and they can even use it in the yard as well. Just one thing to note: Because there’s only one ball, you may end up chasing after it a lot.

I’ve seen a lot of floating hoops come and go at my community pool, and this is one of the few that has staying power. We’ve had ours for two summers (and counting!) and because it’s still in such good shape, I’m anticipating plenty more years of use. The hoop is

easy to inflate and, when deflated, it’s small enough to be portable and travel-friendly. It’s a good starter hoop for younger kids just getting into basketball and they can even use it in the yard as well.

Just one thing to note: Because there’s only one ball, you may end up chasing after it a lot.

Best Water Squirter Pool Toy

Sunnylife Water Squirters

Small and lightweight

Easy to get the hang of

Cute designs

Long squirting distance

Need to be refilled often

Age Range: 3 years and up

Weight: .44 pounds

Dimensions: 7.09 x 3.15 x 3.15 inches

Why We Love It

The Sunnylife Water Squirters are compact enough for small hands to use and come in three adorable designs: a dolphin (pictured here), a shark , and an alligator . They’re fairly easy to use — you just submerge the top in water, then pull back to fill them — and they’re good for little ones because these squirters don't push the water out too intensely. My older kids love to have “water fights” with these, while my younger tots tap them for pretend play. The hard frame is also incredibly sturdy.

. They’re fairly easy to use — you just submerge the top in water, then pull back to fill them — and they’re good for little ones because these squirters don't push the water out too intensely. My older kids love to have “water fights” with these, while my younger tots tap them for pretend play. The hard frame is also incredibly sturdy.

Because these are small enough for young toddlers to hold, they also don’t hold a lot of water. This is a good thing so your tot doesn’t get water everywhere in a matter of seconds, but it can be annoying because they’ll need to be refilled often. There may also be a learning curve when toddlers are first starting to use these; they may take some getting used to before they can really use them on their own.

Community Reviews

Velomom “Some favorites here are sharks that swim once it touches water, anything that squirts water, and beach balls.”

Best Boat Pool Toy

Green Toys Ferry Boat

Encourages versatile play

Floats

Easy to clean

Boat may take on water that needs to be dumped out

Age Range: 3 years and up

Weight: 1.48 pounds

Dimensions: 12.75 x 7.75 x 8 inches

Why We Love It

There are a lot of floating boat toys out there, but we love this toy ferry boat from Green Toys. It floats while carrying the two included cars, so your child can play with this toy in the pool, tub or water table. There’s also a slide-out ramp to push cars in and out of, which your child can use out of the water. There’s also plenty of cargo space for other small toys if they don’t want to use just cars.

This is one of the longest-lasting toys in my house — it’s been passed down through three kids, and is currently a favorite of my youngest. It’s also dishwasher-safe, which is even more convenient for keeping mold at bay.

Community Reviews

nlc316 “We love the green toys smaller construction trucks in the pool. Or any green toy brand toy really! I have found my son plays with the trucks we take more than any specific pool toy, so we have some in his pool bag that don’t have any electronics and can go in the water”

Best Swimming Pool Toy

SwimWays Zoom-a-Rays Water Toy

Inexpensive

Encourages kids to swim

Compact

Paint can peel quickly

Age Range: Suggested use 5 years and up

Weight: 4.2 ounces

Dimensions: 10.5 x 1.44 x 10.5 inches

Why We Love It

Babies and older kids alike will enjoy playing with a toy that can zoom through the water. Shaped like little stingrays, these self-powered toys are fun to chase after and may even help foster some swimming skills. They come in a set of three, and they can breach, swirl or helix through the water, depending on how you want to play with them. Many parents opt to use these as bath toys, so they’ll make for a great toy in shallow water like a kiddie pool or water table, too.

Although these are suggested for kids ages 5 and up, you can use them in a different way with toddlers and babies: my youngest daughter was always fascinated just watching toys like these move through the water on their own, even when she was a baby. They’re compact and easy to travel with as well.

Best Splash Balls

Sun Squad Kids Splash Bombs

Inexpensive

Versatile

Easy to travel with

Encourages sibling play

Need to be squeezed out regularly (gets heavy fast!)

Age Range: Suggested use 6 years and up

Weight: .7 pounds

Dimensions: 8 x 5.5 x 2.5 inches

Why We Love It

Splash balls are a true pool play classic: They’re versatile enough for almost any age group, and they offer lots of open-ended play options. This affordable four pack is perfect whether you’re at the pool or the beach — I’ve even purchased them for my kids to use at their water table. Although the suggested use is for kids over 6, toddlers also love tossing these around and chasing after them because they float.

Alexandra Bisonó, What to Expect’s former Creative Director, shared her nearly 3-year-old daughter who is learning to swim is obsessed with them. “She loves these balls to throw, swim to and do all kinds of other activities,” she says. “They absorb water so she loves to squeeze them and watch it come out.” Another perk: these are soft and compact enough to easily stash in a suitcase if you’re headed on a tropical vacation.

Community Reviews

ecarney91 “The squishy water balls that absorb water are always fun. But again any ball that you don’t mind getting wet works.”

Best Non-Pool Toy

Fisher-Price Little People Farm Animal Friends 8-Piece Figure Set

Can be used practically everywhere

Won’t build up mold

Easy for little hands to hold

Doesn’t float easily

Age Range: 1 to 5 years

Weight: .47 pounds

Dimensions: 9 x 3 x 11 inches

Why We Love It

This adorable Fisher-Price Little People Farm Animal Friends set is technically not a pool toy, but my 2-year-old and her big sister will spend most of their pool time playing with these. I’ve watched them submerge the figures in buckets, perch them on floats, or just hold them close while paddling around. The toys are also a big draw with the neighborhood kids, who love to join in on the pretend play.

not a pool toy, but my 2-year-old and her big sister will spend most of their pool time playing with these. I’ve watched them submerge the figures in buckets, perch them on floats, or just hold them close while paddling around. The toys are also a big draw with the neighborhood kids, who love to join in on the pretend play.

Fisher-Price Little People toys don’t have holes, so you don’t have to stress about mold buildup. They’re also constructed with a durable, hard plastic. While they don’t float well, older siblings may love using them as diving toys (mine do!).

If you have a zero-entry pool like ours, these are excellent for the shallow end. And, of course, you can use them on dry land, too.

Community Reviews

mommak2021789 “Lately my girl has been loving the little people from fisher price! Not technically water toys but they don’t have holes so they can’t grow mold inside! They have little animals you can get too.”

Best Pool Goggles

Speedo Kids' Sunny Vibes Swim Goggles

Adorable design

Adjusts easily

Anti-fog lenses

Eye cups may not fit younger kids with narrower faces

Age Range: 3 to 8 years

Weight: .13 pounds

Dimensions: 1.5 x 7.52 x 5 inches

Why We Love It

Getting toddlers to put anything on their face can be a struggle, including goggles. But the Speedo Kids' Sunny Vibes Swim Goggles are made to be fun, with sweet styles little ones will actually be excited to slip on, like hearts, rainbows and sharks to suit your toddler’s growing tastes . These feature a toggle design for quick and easy adjustments, so you don’t have to worry as much about pinching skin and hair, or getting them on a little one who never sits still.

Getting toddlers to put anything on their face can be a struggle, including goggles. But the

. These feature a toggle design for quick and easy adjustments, so you don’t have to worry as much about pinching skin and hair, or getting them on a little one who never sits still.

While these goggles are technically for kids 3 and up, my 2-year-old likes to wear them as a fashion accessory to look like her big siblings. I’ve found that the toggle closure helps keep them in place, even though they’re not as effective at keeping water out of her eyes as they are on her big sister. Still, I appreciate that they protect her from big splashes and are helping to get her used to wearing goggles in the near future.

Best Infant Life Jacket for Pool Play

Coleman Stearns Kids Life Jacket

Good price point

Bright color is easy to spot

Padded leg strap to minimize chafing

Little kids may take time to get used to wearing it

Age Range: Infant to 30 pounds

Weight: .33 pounds

Why We Love It

Safety first! While little ones should never be left unattended in or around water, the Coleman Stearns infant life jacket provides your child with a little more freedom to paddle around while you stay within arm’s reach. As a mom who sails, I’ve always appreciated that this Coast Guard-approved flotation device has closed sides and two adjustable straps for a secure fit, along with a padded headrest for a more comfortable feel. My daughter was a little annoyed that she couldn’t move as freely in this at first as she could with her puddle jumper, but she quickly got used to it.

Safety first! While little ones should never be left unattended in or around water, the Coleman

provides your child with a little more freedom to paddle around while you stay within arm’s reach. As a mom who sails, I’ve always appreciated that this Coast Guard-approved flotation device has closed sides and two adjustable straps for a secure fit, along with a padded headrest for a more comfortable feel. My daughter was a little annoyed that she couldn’t move as freely in this at first as she could with her puddle jumper, but she quickly got used to it.

The jacket is extra padded — something my kids don’t complain about compared to other brands we’ve tried — and the zipper goes up easily, even after regular use. Best of all? This jacket will grow with your little one up to 30 pounds.

Community Reviews

ShellyC924 “The collar only comes up and bobbles around their neck if they are in the water. It keeps their head lifted so they can breathe. Out of the water, it lays totally flat and out of the way.”

Jesselizabeth918 “He actually seems to like the vest.”

Best Pool Noodle

WOW World of Watersports First Class Foam Pool Noodle

Textured surface is easy to grip

Several kids can float on it at the same time

Resistant to fading and ripping

Soft feel (unlike the scratchy noodles of yesteryear)

Expensive (compared to other pool noodles)

Age Range: 1 year and up

Weight: 2 pounds

Dimensions: 46 x 5.5 inches

Why We Love It

I’ve had cheap, standard foam models break down into a crumbling mess. But the WOW World of Watersports First Class Foam Pool Noodle boasts a strong, vinyl coating that makes it nearly indestructible, despite near-daily use by my four little ones. We’ve had ours for two summers now and it’s still going strong.

I’ve had cheap, standard foam models break down into a crumbling mess. But the

boasts a strong, vinyl coating that makes it nearly indestructible, despite near-daily use by my four little ones. We’ve had ours for two summers now and it’s still going strong.

This toy is wider than your average pool noodle, too, but the textured surface makes it easy for my 2-year-old to grip on her own. She loves hooking her arms over the top and bobbing around the pool, or simply slapping it on the water to make waves. (Just keep in mind that this isn’t designed to replace a life jacket and parental supervision in the water.)

And when no one else in the family is using this — which is rare, I might add — even I can float around on it, as it touts an impressive 250-pound weight limit.

Best Kickboard Pool Toy

Sunlite Sports Jr. Swimming Kickboard

Very sturdy construction

Designed for smaller hands

Lightly textured surface is easy to grip

Can double as a weapon against big siblings

Age Range: Unspecified

Weight: .42 pounds

Dimensions: 10 x 15 x 1.2 inches

Why We Love It

I originally bought the Sunlite Sports Jr. Swimming Kickboardon the recommendation of a swim teacher for my older son to help him nail down a proper swimming form, but it was quickly taken over by my younger children who now use it every time we go to the pool. My 2-year-old, for instance, uses it for its intended purpose (kicking around for a bit), before floating her dolls and other water toys around on it.

on the recommendation of a swim teacher for my older son to help him nail down a proper swimming form, but it was quickly taken over by my younger children who now use it every time we go to the pool. My 2-year-old, for instance, uses it for its intended purpose (kicking around for a bit), before floating her dolls and other water toys around on it.

To say I’m impressed at how sturdy this board is would be an understatement — ours is three years old and doesn’t even have a scratch. It has a slightly textured surface that makes it easy for my toddler to grip, and the edges are smooth, tamping down on the risk of chafing. Just be aware that toddlers may choose to use it as a weapon against older siblings, as we’ve unfortunately discovered.

Freelance contributor Jessica Booth originally contributed to this article.

Community Reviews

dgrhandsjk “He also LOVES the flutter boards and floating mats most public pools have.”

FAQs

Should pool toys be left in the pool?

Even though they’re made to be played with in the water, you shouldn’t leave pool toys in the pool when they’re not in use. Most pool toys and floats are made with PVC, which can slowly break down over time the more it is exposed to chlorine and sunlight. This can result in tears, leaks and cracks, which not only can make them unusable, but can also leak into your pool and clog a filtration system.

What can I do with my toddler in the pool?

There are lots of ways to entertain your toddler in the pool whether they can swim yet or not. Offering them simple pool toys, like something that glides through the water for them to chase or buckets they can fill and dump, is one way to keep them entertained. Plus, you’re helping them hone important fine motor skills at the same time.

Just remember to never leave your child unattended while in any amount of water — always ensure an adult is within arms’ reach of them.

How do you keep pool toys clean?

Taking proper care of your pool toys is the first step in keeping them clean. Always remove them from the pool once you’re done using them. Dry them off and be sure no water is stuck in a hidden crevice to avoid mold buildup. Deflate your inflatables after use and then, if necessary, clean them with a mix of either soap and water, vinegar and water, or baking soda and water. For smaller pool toys, remove them from the water and dry them off, then wipe them down with a mild soap and water or vinegar and water.

How do you store pool toys?

Pool toys should be stored in a cool, dry place. A shed can be a great option, especially one that is close to the pool for convenience. You can also buy an outdoor storage bench or bin or keep them in a garage. It’s best to put inflatables in a heavy duty bag or back in the box it came in to keep them protected from snags or nicks that can lead to tears and rips.

American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Pediatrics Updates Recommendations to Prevent Drowning in Children , March 2019.

Your Next Read

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

9 Best Swim Diapers to Keep Your Baby’s Poop Out of the Pool Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

Making Bathtime Fun for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Benefits of Water Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

26 Toys for 18-Month-Olds, According to Child Play Experts and Parents Alike Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

6 Best Standing Toys to Help Your Baby Meet a Milestone Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Swim Lessons for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

How to Clean Baby Toys By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Preventing Waterborne Illness in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Crafts for Toddlers Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Best Activities for 15-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window