15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

An open bible placed against a bright yellow background

From Myra to Samson, check out some of our favorite classic Biblical baby names here.

Searching for a powerful-but-unique baby name? Whether or not you're religious, Biblical baby names like Estelle, Myra, Asher, and Samson have interesting meanings and aren't as common as many other names that tend to top the charts each year. Below, 15 of our favorite religious-themed baby names that are equal parts classic and captivating.

Religious baby girl names

Ada. Coming from German, English, and Hebrew traditions, this punchy little girl name can be short for Adelaide and is an alternative to Ava; it’s one of first female names in the book of Genesis. You could nickname her “Addie.”

Amina. “Trustworthy or faithful” in Arabic, Amina is the mother of the prophet Mohammed — making it a timeless name among Muslims across the world.

Atara. Meaning “crown” in Hebrew, this little girl’s name is mentioned in the Books of Chronicles.

Estelle. The French form of the Persian name Esther, this was the Jewish captive whom Ahasuerus made his queen in the Bible — as well as the name of a British pop singer-songwriter.

Kala. Short for Kalila, or “beloved,” in Islam, this unusual but powerful name also stands for “time” in the Hindu faith.

Myra. A Latin moniker meaning “fragrant ointment,” this little girl’s name appears in the Bible in Acts 27:5 and made an appearance as a minor character in the Divergent series.

Olive. Love the uber-popular name Olivia, but looking for an original twist? This option is Biblical, appearing in Genesis; Sacha Baron Cohen, Drew Barrymore, and country singer Jake Owen all chose this name for their little girls.

Rhoda. A fresh take on the name “rose,” this Biblical name — appearing in Acts 12:13 — also means “from Rhodes” in Greek.

Find baby name ideas you’ll love in the What to Expect app .

Religious baby boy names

Asher. One of Jacob’s 12 sons in the Old Testament, in Hebrew this preppy name means “happy, blessed.” You can call him Ash for short, if you want to.

Boaz. Used by the 17th century Pilgrims and still common in Israel, this bold boy’s name means “swift, strong.” It’s associated with the story of Ruth and Boaz, read during the Jewish holiday Shavuot.

Bodhi. Meaning “enlightenment” in Sanskrit, the Bodhi is the tree where Buddha meditated his way to — you guessed it — enlightenment. This adorable baby boy name has been rising fast in popularity over the past years; it’s also what Megan Fox and Brian Austin Green called their son.

Gidon. A form of the Hebrew “Gideon,” this tree cutter was the judge who defeated the Midianites in the Bible.

Jokim. The Basque variant on the Spanish Joaquin (like the actor, Joaquin Phoenix) or the Hebrew Joachim, the name means “God will establish.”

Omar. A classic Hebrew and Arabic baby boy name meaning “reverent” or “follower of the Prophet,” this traditional-yet-sophisticated choice might make you think of the legendary actor Omar Sharif.

Samson. If you’re looking for a strong alternative to “Samuel,” this Hebrew name means “like the sun” and was the name of a judge and powerful warrior who helped the Israelites win their battle against the Philistines in the Bible. It’s also a song by the Grateful Dead based on the Biblical tale of Samson and Delilah.

Updates history

September 25, 2025

Editor: Colleen de Bellefonds/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,921 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

14 Baby Names That Mean Peace, Strength, and Wisdom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window