15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before

Minor copy updates.

baby boy irish baby name

You don't have to be Irish to get inspiration from this list of charming baby boy names.

If you’re on the hunt for a magnetic name for your baby-to-be, scroll through this list of Irish baby names for boys. Maybe you have Irish ancestors. Maybe you just happen to really like Guinness and castles and Celtic culture and all other things Irish. Either way, you’re sure to find a charming name on this list.

1. Adan. Aidan, which means “fiery,” is one of the most popular names for boys, and who can blame all the parents of all the Aidans: It’s a darling name. But if you want something a bit different for your baby boy, consider this equally darling version.

2. Alpin. Cute, right? And it conjures up lovely outdoorsy images of forests and mountains. It means “attractive.”

3. Brayan. Brian is a popular name (which means "strong, virtuous, and honorable"), but not as many Brayans (an alternative version).

4. Carlin. This name means "little champion" — appropriate, no? You could call him Carl or even Carley for short.

5. Cass. Short, sweet, and powerful. This is a short form of Cassidy, which means "clever" and "curly-haired."

6. Cavan. It’s similar to Kevin — but, well, different, too. It means "handsome."

7. Dermot. Sure, it rhymes with Kermit (and it’s technically an alternate form of that name), but it’s more suited for a baby boy. It means "free from envy."

8. Donell. This name is similar to the more old-fashioned names Donald and Don while still sounding a little more modern. It’s a form of Donnell, which means "brave" and "dark."

9. Farrell. This sweet name means "heroic" and "courageous" — everything you’re likely hoping your son will eventually be.

10. Galen. This lively name means "little" and "lively." And for short? You could call him Gael.

11. Korrigan. This is a form of Corrigan, which means "spearman." How’s that for a historical flashback?

12. Lennon. Are you a Beatles fan? This would be a good way to pay tribute. It means "small cloak" or "cape."

13. Rogan. Think you’ll be having a little ginger-haired baby boy? Then consider this name, which means "redhead." Awww.

14. Shane. One of the most Irish-sounding names on the list, this is one of the many variations of the name Sean, which is a form of John, which is actually Hebrew for “God is gracious.” Phew! Bottom line? It’s a terrific name.

15. Torrence. This is a bold name meaning "knolls." Toren would make a really good nickname.

Still searching for the perfect baby name? Open the What to Expect app for the top 1,000 names for boys and girls — plus get week-by-week updates on the tiny human you’re naming.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.