15 Elegant Russian Baby Girl Names That Feel Completely Modern

Updates to copy and formatting.

baby girl with Russian name

When it comes to naming your little girl, Russian baby girl names offer some of the most beautiful and unique options.

With names that have stood the test of time, these classic choices — often ending in “a” — will guarantee your child will stand out from the crowd. Here are some popular Russian baby girl names to consider for your little one. (And if you're not sure whether you're having a boy or a girl, check out our favorite Russian baby boy names too.)

Alla. This beloved Russian and Ukrainian girl’s name (pronounced all-ah) has different meanings depending which origin you trace it to. In Russian culture, it represents “other,” while Hebrew and Arabic ties give it the meaning of “ascend” or “to go up.” Regardless of how you look at it, this simple yet stunning name is a classic Russian choice.

Alina. Meaning “bright” and “beautiful,” Alina is a cheery baby girl name of Slavic origin that’s used throughout Russia and neighboring Slavic countries. It’s gorgeous on its own, or as the nickname Lina.

Anastasia. You’re probably familiar with the name Anastasia from the famous Russian Romanov princess and Disney movie. This regal name of Greek origin means “resurrection” and packs a ton of power. But if Anastasia feels too long for you, you can also call your little one Anya or Anna.

Anna. Though Anna is sometimes short for Anastasia, the name on its own has an entirely different meaning. This Latin form of the Greek and Hebrew name means “favor,” “grace,” or “beautiful.” Like Anastasia, girls named Anna can also go by Anya.

Elizaveta. The Russian form of Elizabeth, Elizaveta is a traditional name with religious origins. Meaning “God is my oath,” Elizaveta (Liza, for short) beautifully rolls off the tongue and is a unique spin on its anglicized version.

Lyubov. One of the most heartwarming names in Russian culture, Lyubov (pronounced loo-bov), means “love” or “she loves.” No wonder it’s a cherished Russian baby girl name. It’s just as popular now as it was a century ago, making it a timeless and modern choice.

Maria. Famous throughout many cultures, Maria is also a classic choice in Russia. It was one of the names of the Romanov princesses. Maria means “star of the sea” or “wished-for child” — perfect for the new little gift in your life. Your little girl can also go by the adorable nickname Masha.

Mila. You may link this name to the actress Mila Kunis, but did you know Mila means “gracious” or “dear”? A favorite Russian baby girl name, this simple yet tasteful Slavic pick is growing more and more popular in the U.S.

Nina. It’s the name of a goddess — for your little goddess. Sharing a name with a Babylonian ocean goddess and Incan goddess of fire, this traditional Russian baby girl name can mean “grace,” “favor,” or “pure.” Some say it also represents the old Slavonic word ninati, which means “to dream.”

Olga. This lovely Romanov princess name is actually of Old Norse and Scandinavian origin and means “blessed,” “holy,” or “successful.” It’s a charming pick that’s still popular throughout Russia, Ukraine, and beyond.

Tatiana. The fourth of the Romanov princess names, Tatiana is a timeless and elegant choice for a Russian baby girl name. It’s said to represent “fairy princess,” which is appropriate given its royal roots. Girls named Tatiana can also go by the sweet nickname Tanya.

Valentina. This stunning name is a feminine version of the Roman name Valentinus, which pulls from the Latin word “valens” and means “healthy” or “strong.” Though carrying an Italian pronunciation, Valentina is an extremely popular name in Russia — one that comes with the lovely nickname Valya.

Vera. With Slavic origins, Vera simply means “faith.” It’s also associated with the Latin word “vera,” which means “true.” The name took root in the late 19th century and has climbed in popularity ever since, making it a favorite choice for Russian baby girl names.

Yekaterina. If this name rings a bell, that’s because Yekaterina, pronounced eh-kat-er-eena, is the Russian version of Catherine (and also the name of one of Russia’s most revered rulers). Though the name is longer than others, it has a straightforward meaning: “pure.” It also comes with a slew of adorable nicknames, like Katya (arguably the most popular) and Katyusha.

Yulia. This name never grows old, probably because Yulia means “youthful” or “love’s child.” This famous Russian baby girl name with Latin origins is similar in nature to Julia or Julianne.

Find more beautiful baby girl names — along with their unique nicknames — in our free app

Ashley Zlatopolsky is a writer, editor and content strategist. She is a native Russian speaker and Detroit-based journalist. Zlatopolsky's work has been published in Rolling Stone , National Geographic , The Guardian , The Washington Post and more. Previously, she worked as a branded content strategist at USA TODAY. Zlatopolsky speaks Russian fluently and enjoys writing stories that connect to her culture and heritage.

Updates history

September 29, 2025

Editor: Lisa Lombardi/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,945 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Gorgeous Chinese Baby Girl Names That Inspire Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Cute, Quirky, and Easy to Say: 19 Adorable Welsh Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Fierce and Fearless: 9 Baby Names for Girls With Superhero Energy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window