Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun

toddler learning activities

Build on your child's newfound skills with these learning games that'll encourage developmental leaps and bounds. Bonus: They're also a lot of fun!

Playtime is actually work time for toddlers as they dive into the day, ready to explore everything in their path. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsThe Power of Play %u2013 How Fun and Games Help Children ThriveSee All Sources [1] And at this age, your tot is poised to take on some new activities, preferably ones that'll inspire her to keep up the learning. But this doesn't mean you need to rush out and restock your playroom — playing with old toys in new ways can be a blast, too.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsThe Power of Play %u2013 How Fun and Games Help Children ThriveSee All Sources

Need some ideas? Here are a whole host of learning activities for toddlers that'll challenge both the body and mind. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursMovement, Coordination and Your 1- to 2-Year OldSee All Sources [2] From color matching and water play to counting games and a cute scavenger hunt, these learning activities are as enriching as they are entertaining. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsMilestones During The First 2 YearsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursMovement, Coordination and Your 1- to 2-Year OldSee All Sources

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsMilestones During The First 2 YearsSee All Sources

Simple puzzles

Finding the right piece to fit the shape is an easy, noncompetitive way to stimulate a busy brain. Whether you have a shape sorter or a classic jigsaw , choosing and turning the puzzle parts around hones your tot's ability to test out ideas and solve problems.

Dress-up time

Pretend play is an important building block for kids' imaginations. Wearing a white dress shirt might transform her into a doctor or holding a frying pan can make her a chef. As pretend play becomes more sophisticated, your child will begin to narrate complex stories in which the sky's the limit.

Follow the leader

Toddlers love mimicking motions in this classic game, which is similar to Simon Says. When the actions are big, she'll put her gross motor skills to work. Ask her to hop on one foot, touch her toes or run an obstacle course through hula hoops outside in the yard.

Coloring and painting

A set of watercolors, markers or crayons can teach your tot the names of the shades as well as prompt her imagination when it comes to deciding what to create. This is also a calming activity that's smart to set up after a long day of running around.

Block building

This one is nearly the perfect toddler learning activity. It's open-ended, so your child can come up with designs and solve structural problems. Plus, it boosts motor skills (large and small, depending on the block size), and it's a great way for kids to play cooperatively .

Music making

No piano at home? Simple instruments like drums, maracas and tambourines (or even a couple of pots and pans) are equally terrific teaching tools.

Kids learn about cause and effect and phonemic awareness. That means distinguishing one sound from another, which is a critical skill for learning to read . Plus, musical instruments encourage (sometimes loud!) creative expression.

Clean-up time

Yup, putting toys away can involve learning too! Classifying and clearing away stuff — especially if you've labeled your shelves and toy bins with pictures — begins to teach and reinforce early math skills such as sorting and patterning.

It also pushes your child to problem-solve: "This toy doesn't fit. Now what?"

Water play

Scooping and measuring H2O with different containers and utensils introduces math skills as she gauges how much will fit in each cup.

Take this fun into the tub or set up a water station in a plastic container with a big beach towel underneath. You can also use sand or uncooked rice if you'd prefer a mess that's less wet.

Oodles of bubbles

Make your own bubbles with a cup of water, 1 tablespoon of glycerin and 2 tablespoons of dishwashing detergent. Bubble games boost hand-eye coordination and motor skills as well as language development. ("Wow, that big one is really high up!")

Scavenger hunts

You can teach simple words for your tot to sound out, and then offer her a tote bag to hold the things she finds around the house. Write the words and include pictures too, so budding readers can still figure out the list. Examples might include a hat, book, fork and cup.

I spy

Practice different colors and shape names with this take-anywhere game. Play it at home, while waiting in line at the store or in the car when you're out running errands. Take turns spying something red, something yellow, something round or something square.

Kitchen fun

Toddler learning activities in the kitchen offer a lesson in math and cooperation. ("I'll break the egg, and you mix it in.") Easy recipes for little kids include boxed brownies, quick breads, garden salad (ripping lettuce is so fun!) and quesadillas (layering grated cheese and other fixings between two tortillas).

Counting games

Set up a muffin tin with numbers labeled on the inside of each section. Next, offer some mini marshmallows or toothpicks, and have your tot fill each one with the correct number.

Lacing cards

These oversize cardboard squares are fun to complete, and your toddler will develop fine motor skills as she threads the yarn through the holes. Once a lacing card is finished, she'll also revel in a sense of accomplishment.

Clapping rhymes

Move over, babyish patty-cake ! Now's the time for a chant or song that's more complicated so your tot can hone coordination, listening and memorization skills. Ones to try: "Miss Mary Mack," "Where Is Thumbkin?," "Itsy-Bitsy Spider" and "She'll Be Coming 'Round the Mountain."