15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

british baby girl names

Bryce, Greer, and more cheerful baby girl names from England, Scotland, and Wales.

If you're looking for a joyful-sounding baby girl name to celebrate your daughter-to-be, there might be one (or several!) on this list of British baby names for girls that you'll love.

Hailing from England, Scotland, and Wales, these British names have more than sparkle and vivaciousness in common; like many British boy names , most of these names for girls can be shortened into cool nicknames that are equal parts fun and cheerful.

Want more charming monikers from across the pond? We've got endless baby name inspiration in the What to Expect app .

Adeline . This English name could be pronounced two different ways — "Adelynn" or "Adeleen" — depending on your preference. It's a form of the German name Adelaide, which means "noble and serene."

Bryce. This Welsh name could be used for a girl (think actress Bryce Dallas Howard) or a boy. It means "alert, ambitious."

Dylan. Here's another gender-neutral name that's rising in popularity for girls and boys. It means "born of the sea" in the Welsh tradition.

Ebrill. This beautiful Welsh name means "born in April." Due in April? Ebrill would be more than appropriate.

Edie. Looking for something short and sweet? This familiar form of Edith — which means "rich gift" — may suit your baby girl perfectly.

Georgina. If you want a name that lends itself to cute nicknames, this English pick might be the one for you. It's a familiar form of Georgia, which means "farmer" in the Greek tradition. You could call her Gigi or Georgie for short.

Greer. This Scottish name is unique but still easy to pronounce. It would pair particularly well with a long last name. It means "vigilant."

Henrietta. This is a strong, vintage-sounding name, which means "ruler of the household" in the English tradition. Etta would be a really sweet nickname.

Joleen. How about a feminine name and a gender-neutral nickname? Joleen/Jo is the best of both worlds. It's a familiar form of Jolene, which means "God will increase" in the Hebrew tradition.

Lynlee. This stunning English name actually sounds like two first names. It's a form of Lynn, which means "waterfall."

Marjorie. We love this old-fashioned name that's coming back in fashion. It's a Scottish version of Mary (Hebrew for "bitter"). You could call her Marjie for short.

Marlena. Yet another name that sounds like a combination of two… this one's an English version of Marlene, meaning "high tower" in the Greek tradition.

Rosie. Considering Rose but want something just a bit more familiar and endearing? This English version could work.

Starling. This English name — meaning, no real surprise here, "bird" — is ideal if you love the outdoors and want to cultivate an appreciation of nature in your little one. Plus, it's simply gorgeous, even shortened to Star.

Teagan. This Welsh name means "beautiful, attractive" and like many of the other British names above, it could be used for a girl or a boy.

Updates history

September 25, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,740 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Cute, Quirky, and Easy to Say: 19 Adorable Welsh Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Searching for a Dashing Baby Boy Name? These 15 British Boy Names Deliver Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

26 Baby Names Inspired by the British Royal Family Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

19 Gorgeous Chinese Baby Girl Names That Inspire Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window