15 Strong Russian Baby Boy Names With Sweet Nicknames

Updates to copy and formatting.

baby boy with Russian name

If you’re looking for a name that connects to Russia’s storied past but is still widely used today, consider one of these Russian baby boy names for your little one.

Looking for a classic, timeless name for your baby boy? Many popular Russian boys’ names exude strength.

As with Russian baby girl names , Russian baby boy names often come with an adorable nickname that can be just as appealing as the full version.

Aleksander. Often spelled Aleksander in Russian, the derivative of the famous Greek name Alexander means “defender of men.” It was also the name of several Russian czars. A common Russian nickname is Sasha — perfect for your little one.

Aleksei. If you’re a fan of Russian royal history, you might know that Aleksei was the name of the last heir apparent to the Romanov throne. It’s a name fit for a prince (or king) that means “defender” and stems from Greek origins, though it’s widely used in Russia and Bulgaria. In Russia, boys named Aleksei are also sometimes known by the nickname of Alyosha.

Boris. It’s one of the first names that may come to mind when people think of Russian baby boy names — and for good reason. Meaning “battle” or “fight,” this powerful name of Slavic origin is consistently a top choice for parents looking to give their baby boy a traditional Russian name.

Dmitri. With roots planted in Greek origin, this sophisticated baby boy name is a popular choice in Russia. It symbolizes “devotion to” or “follower of” Demeter, the Greek goddess of agriculture (also known as “mother earth”). Boys named Dmitri can also go by the unique nickname Dima.

Grigoriy. You may be familiar with the American spelling of Gregory, but Grigoriy adds a Russian twist to this popular baby boy name. Grigoriy means “vigilant and watchful,” so it’s perfect for a future deep thinker. You can opt to shorten Grigoriy to the widely-used nickname Grisha.

Igor. This traditional Slavic name given to boys throughout Russia and neighboring countries means “protected,” and in some instances, “warrior of peace.” It’s a cherished and beloved Russian boy name that only grows more appealing with time.

Ilya. As the East Slavic form of the male Hebrew name Eliyahu, or Elijah, the simplified Ilya essentially means “the Lord is my God.” While the name may hold more religious meaning than some other names, it’s also used in neutral ways, making it a timeless Russian baby boy name.

Konstantin. Depending on where you look, you’ll find different variations of this baby boy name throughout European cultures — including in Russia. Meaning “firm” or “constant,” this unwavering name is popular in Russia, Bulgaria and Serbia. A common nickname for Konstantin is Kostya, pronounced with a long “o” — as in, kohst-ya .

Leonid. If you want a fearless name, there’s no better choice than Leonid. It symbolizes “lion strength.” While the name is of German origin, it’s a very popular Russian name too. Some nicknames for Leonid can include Leo, Lenya, or Lova (the last two of which are Russian).

Maksim. What’s a perfect choice for a boy born to be a star? Maksim, which stems from the Latin name Maximus, which means “the greatest.” Though Latin in origin, it’s a powerful Russian name that comes with a modern nickname: Max.

Mikhail. Like some of its counterparts, Mikhail is another regal name carried by Russian czars. The name is originally of Hebrew origin, translating to “who resembles God.” While Mikhail might be more formal, this name comes with an adorable Russian nickname: Misha (pronounced mee-sha), which can be gender-neutral.

Oleg. It’s a short name that packs a lot of meaning. This East Slavic name means “holy,” “sacred,” or “blessed,” and it’s one of the most common boys’ names in Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus. You may see different spellings of the name (including Oleh and Aleg), though pronunciation remains the same.

Vladimir. This classic Old Slavic name is a tried-and-true Russian title. Meaning “of great power” or “ruler of peace,” this timeless name also comes with a fresh nickname: Vova.

Yevgeniy. More commonly known as Eugene, the Russian variation of “Yevgeniy” quite literally means “well-born.” And if your baby boy is, well, born well, this Russian and Greek name is a perfect fit. If Yevgeniy feels a bit too long, you can shorten it to one of its popular nicknames: Genya or Yevgy.

Yuri. As a Russian version of the name George, Yuri means “farmer.” It’s one of the simpler selections for Russian baby boy names, but that doesn’t make it any less beautiful. A unique and classic choice, many parents throughout Russia opt to name their male children Yuri.

Searching for more baby name ideas? Find unique names (and their meanings) in the What to Expect app .

Ashley Zlatopolsky is a writer, editor and content strategist. She is a native Russian speaker and Detroit-based journalist. Zlatopolsky's work has been published in Rolling Stone , National Geographic , The Guardian , The Washington Post and more. Previously, she worked as a branded content strategist at USA TODAY. Zlatopolsky speaks Russian fluently and enjoys writing stories that connect to her culture and heritage.

Updates history

September 29, 2025

Editor: Lisa Lombardi/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,921 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Searching for a Dashing Baby Boy Name? These 15 British Boy Names Deliver Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

14 Baby Names That Mean Peace, Strength, and Wisdom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Oh Là Là! 16 French Baby Boy Names That Stylishly Cross Borders Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

18 Chinese Baby Boy Names With Poetic Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window