15 Thanksgiving Crafts to Inspire Gratitude in Your Kids

thanksgiving crafts, paper leaves on a green background

Your children will gobble these projects right up.

Little ones give us a whole lot to be thankful for, so come Thanksgiving time, it's nice to spend time creating lasting memories with them. These fall activities and crafts lend themselves to some special one-on-one time with toddlers or preschoolers. Plus, you can start a conversation about what they're grateful for (probably time spent with you!) while you're gluing and painting.

As an added bonus, you can feature a number of these Thanksgiving crafts — including napkin rings, centerpieces and table runners — on your dinner table on the big day. If only roasting a turkey were as easy as tracing one …

Construct themed napkin rings

thanksgiving toilet paper napkin ring craft

Who knew toilet paper rolls could look so chic as table decor? Help tots get into the Thanksgiving spirit by working on this easy project with them a few days beforehand.

Cut a toilet paper roll in half (so you have two smaller tubes) and draw on eyes with black marker. Let kids attach a paper beak and wattle using a glue stick. Real or faux leaves can make up the feathers (glued to the back to the roll), and voilà — you've got yourself cute napkin rings that kids can feel proud they helped out with.

Stamp a few feathers

thanksgiving turkey toilet paper roll painting craft

Here's another way to recycle toilet paper rolls while keeping your kids busy (and creating something pretty for your dinner table). Have kids use the rolls and washable paint to stamp a brown body and red, orange and yellow feathers onto a sheet of paper. To turn these tiny turkeys into place cards, cut around the edges and write each person's name inside one of the colorful feathers.

Produce pinecone turkeys

pinecone turkey craft

This two-part activity takes up plenty of time and gets kids outside. Have them head to the backyard or park to gather their supplies before starting. (If pinecones aren't native to your area, pick up a craft set online.)

Once your toddler has selected a favorite cone (which might take a while), help kids paint some of the prickles using washable paint . Offer a selection of fall hues, or have tots can go wild with neon colors — whatever their dream turkey looks like! Once they're done, glue a pom-pom , googly eyes and a paper beak and wattle to finish the adorable look.

Stamp a seasonal tablecloth

thanksgiving tablecloth craft

Little ones love having a job to do around the holidays, and this project will get them in the spirit and helping. Pick up some fall leaf stamps or make your own using potatoes, like Kristin St. Clair of Lemme Make It did. Have your little one dip the stamps in fabric paint and then onto a white tablecloth or kitchen towel. (Alternatively, you can use washable paint to stamp a paper tablecloth.) Once it's dry (per the instructions on the back of the bottles), show off their handiwork in the kitchen or dining room.

Make a hand turkey

thanksgiving hand turkey craft

Is there anything more classic than making a hand-shaped turkey? It's a craft you likely made yourself as a kid.

To prep, set up a paper plate with brown paint on the bottom for their palms, and assorted red, yellow, orange and green paints above it to serve as the feathers. Help kids dip their hands in and pat them down on paper — easy peasy.

Create a turkey with toes

thanksgiving turkey footprint craft

Alternatively, skip the handprints and have your kids take off their socks to make turkeys with their feet. This craft follows the same format as the last one, but once their footprint has dried, you can cut it out of the paper and attach some craft feathers and googly eyes .

Collage a side of corn

corn cob collage craft

This sweet project is ideal for a November rainy day. Print out an outline of corn on the cob and cut it out. (Alternatively, you can draw one on a piece of paper.) Then cut up little squares of construction paper in greens, yellows, reds and browns. Have kids use their handy-dandy glue sticks to add a collage of paper kernels.

Gobble up some toast

thankgiving turkey toast breakfast

Crafting isn't all about paint and markers — sometimes it's edible! Kids will love this Thanksgiving breakfast that doubles as an activity. Simply spread some peanut butter on toast and slice up a couple of "feathers." (Mini pretzel sticks can serve as legs.) Then give kids some toppings to decorate the turkey's plumage. Cheerios, mini chocolate chips, and raisins all work well here.

Play with your plates

thanksgiving turkey plate craft

These long-legged turkeys don't take a long time to make. Cut up a kitchen sponge so kids can dab paint all around a paper plate. (These stamps make for some funky feathers.) Then, help them glue on a brown construction paper body and long strips of paper to serve as the legs. Have tots fold them back and forth to get the wavy texture.

Finesse some feathers

thanksgiving feather craft

Here's an idea to keep the entire kids' table busy while you're finishing up your Thanksgiving prep. First, print or draw (go you!) a turkey. Then, cut out paper feathers and invite each child to decorate their own. They can use whatever you have on hand: markers, feathers , pom-poms , stickers, you name it! When everyone's done, add the feathers to the turkey. This makes for an amazing time capsule project that includes all of the little ones in your extended clan.

Make pretty pumpkins

thanksgiving pumpkin collage craft

You might have already gone pumpkin picking, but there's still plenty of time for pumpkin crafting! Draw or print an outline of a pumpkin on plain paper. (You can use a template from Teaching Pre-K to keep things simple.) Cut up scraps of orange paper, and let kids use glue sticks to collage some artsy gourds.

Put together some Picasso-esque birds

thanksgiving abstract turkey craft

Art is all about the process, right? Give kids two circular pieces of paper (to represent the turkey's body) and a whole bunch of little rectangles (i.e., feathers) and let them go wild creating an avant-garde bird.

Decorate sweet treats

thankgiving cereal craft activity

Dessert anyone? Have little ones help you make these colorful turkeys while practicing their fine motor skills . Put toothpicks in a glazed donut and ask kids to stack colorful Fruit Loops on each one. Stick on some candy eyes , and you'll have a sweet dessert and a very happy team of sous chefs.

Do some fall tie-dying

thanksgiving tie dye craft

Typically, paper towels help us clean up messes, but they can create some pretty beautiful ones too! Jamie at Play to Learn PS created this fun setup using cups of colored water and plastic eye droppers . Kids can use the droppers to make a pretty tie-dye inspired design on layers of paper towels.

Design a nature-inspired bird

thanksgiving craft turkey with leaves

Can you ever make enough cute turkey crafts? We didn't think so! This goofy gobbler is made up of scrap cardboard (for the body) plus some craft leaves and googly eyes . Glue a dowel to the back and it turns into a fun puppet or centerpiece.

Your Next Read

45 Hilarious Thanksgiving Jokes to Tell at the Dinner Table Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The Best Crafts for Toddlers Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Diwali Activities to Get Your Kids in on This Fun-Filled Celebration Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Best Thanksgiving Movies to Watch With the Fam Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

40 Hilarious Halloween Jokes That Will Tickle Your Toddler's Funny Bone Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Great Goodie Bag Ideas for Toddlers and Preschoolers That Aren't Junk Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Thanksgiving Pregnancy Announcements That All Parents-to-Be Will Fall For Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

50 Hilarious Fall Jokes That Will Crack Up Your Kids Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Toddler Dinner Ideas Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for 15-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

15 of Your Biggest Toddler Birthday Party Questions — Answered Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Age-Appropriate Chores for Kids: Teaching Your Toddler Responsibility Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Easy-to-Take Holiday Photos You’ll Cherish for Years to Come By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Best Activities for 3-Year-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window