16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

baby boy with Italian name

From trending names to tried-and-true monikers, these Italian boy names fit right in — whether you live in Italy or the U.S.

Our list of popular Italian baby boy names includes some that have been trending in Italy recently and others that are eternally popular. As with Italian baby girl names , we also like that many of these names have several variations.

Whether you name your baby boy after one of the great artists of the Renaissance or for your favorite soccer player, remember that in Italian, you pronounce every letter — though the pronunciations are often different than in English.

Want to explore more stylish baby names? You can find loads of amazing options for your bundle of joy in the What to Expect app .

Alessandro. This eternally popular baby boy name in Italy softens the “x” in Alexander, a name which means “protector of men.” Sandro is a common nickname, as is Ale (ah-lay). Alessio, Italian for Alex, is a popular derivative.

Angelo. The name means “messenger sent from God” — and naming your baby boy Angelo is certainly a nice way to give thanks for his arrival.

Dante. The author of The Divine Comedy died more than 700 years ago, but his name is still on trend. Dante is short for durante, the Italian word for “enduring” and once a common first name. It’s pronounced dahn-tay.

Domenico. Like Dominic or Dominick, Domenico has biblical origins, and means “of the lord” or “belonging to the lord.” And in Italy, there’s a cute, unusual nickname — Mimmo, pronounced mee-mo!

Giorgio. If you're drawn to the English name George, you may also love its Italian version, pronounced jor-joe. We also like the fun nickname, Gio, pronounced joe.

Giovanni. The Italian version of John has biblical origins, and John the Baptist (San Giovanni Battista) is a very important saint in Italy. Nicknames include Gianni (like Johnny) and Vanni. It’s pronounced joe-vanni.

Leonardo. The name means “strong like a lion” and is of course most associated with a certain Renaissance genius who painted the Mona Lisa. Note that in Italian, the first part is pronounced lay-o.

Lorenzo. Another name with ancient origins, Lorenzo was first associated with Laurentum, a region west of Rome. It’s the Italian version of Laurence or Lawrence — in Italy, Renzo is a popular nickname.

Luca. This baby boy's name has a lot of history behind it. Its origins in Italian are linked to the Lucani, an ancient tribe from southern Italy, but in Latin, it means “bringer of light.” It’s a cute alternative to Luke or Lucas.

Marco. This name’s origins refer to the Roman god of war, Mars. But Marco — Mark in Italian — is a common Italian name that also references San Marco (Saint Mark).

Massimo. Max, Massimiliano or Massimo — they all come from the Latin maximus, for “greatest.” What a way to start your baby boy off on the right track!

Matteo. For fans of Matthew, their English equivalent, the name Matteo has a fun Italian flair. Teo, pronounced tay-o, is a common nickname.

Michelangelo. Pronounced mee-kell-angelo, naming your baby boy after the brilliant painter, sculptor and architect might give him some big shoes to fill, but you can always call him Mickey for short! Michele, the Italian version of Michael, is a derivative.

Nicolo’. If you’re considering naming your baby boy Nicholas, consider one of the many Italian variations, each with a different pronunciation: Nicolo’ is nee-kol-O. Niccolo’ is nee-KOL-o. Nicola is nee-KOL-a. They’re all boys’ names (the feminine version is Nicoletta). For boys or girls, Niko (neek-o) is a fun nickname.

Paolo. In the 1960s and 70s in Italy, it seemed like every other baby boy born was named Paolo, for Paul. San Paolo, St. Paul, is one of Italy’s most important saints, pronounced pow-low.

Stefano. This popular Italian baby boy name is the equivalent of Stephen or Steven and is another name with likely Greek origins. It’s pronounced STE-fano, with the accent on the first syllable.

Elizabeth Heath is a travel and lifestyle writer and editor based in central Italy. She is fluent in Italian and has lived in Italy for 12 years. She lives on top of a hill with her husband, bilingual school-aged daughter, four dogs and a turtle. Heath's work appears in The Washington Post , Travel + Leisure , TravelingMom.com , FamilyHandyman.com and a number of other outlets. She is the author of The Architecture Lover's Guide to Rome . Heath grew up in Florida, where she earned a BFA in fine art from Ringling College of Art and Design, a MA in humanities from the University of South Florida, and completed doctoral studies in archaeology and anthropology.

Updates history

September 25, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,740 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

Oh Là Là! 16 French Baby Boy Names That Stylishly Cross Borders Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Searching for a Dashing Baby Boy Name? These 15 British Boy Names Deliver Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window