The 16 Most Surprising Things About Being a New Mom

First Time Mom Surprises

Motherhood is full of surprises. Especially if you've never done it before.

Most first-time moms go into motherhood with expectations. What they'll be like as a mom, how they'll feel and even what baby will be like. But your idea of parenthood and the reality being a parent will likely be two very different things. Baby cries won't bother you. Poop won't make you sick. The truth is in the first weeks you'll learn a lot about yourself and being a parent.

Take it from the moms in the WTE community ; they got to talking about the things they learned about their babies, themselves and the ways your idea of motherhood and even yourself can change once baby arrives.

1. You won't be as easily embarrassed

Feed Baby Wherever

"I have severe social anxiety, but when my boy is hungry that all goes away. I’ll whip my boob out and feed him in a store, restaurant, church. I don’t care." — emmariee

2. You won't mind diapers

Don't Mind Changing Diapers

"I didn't realize that I wouldn't mind changing his poopy diapers or how often babies ate ." — faerielan

3. You won't actually be trapped in the house

You Will Go Out

"How I manage to get out of the house and do things with him. While the first few times were hard, I’m getting the hang of it and noticing he really likes to get out and explore with me." — mags724

4. You will become a "baby person"

Your Baby Is Different

"I didn’t expect my mom instincts to kick in. I’ve never been a baby person, and honestly, I’m still not. But with my boy, it’s so different. I love everything about him, and I feel like it’s coming naturally." — emmariee

5. That baby snuggles are even better than you imagined

You'll Love Snuggles

"I didn’t know how much I would love baby cuddles. They’re the best. I can just hold him on my chest all day and be happy." — emmariee

6. That you'll still be the same person

You'll Still BE You

"I thought that I was magically going to turn into somebody else, and it was terrifying me. Nope. I'm still the same, just with an adorable little human that I love more than I thought possible." — MollyJackx

7. That they're noisy sleepers

Noisy Sleepers

"I couldn’t believe how much noise a newborn makes when he or she is sleeping. My baby girl snored worse than my grandpa." — Cristina74

8. That you'll feel protective

How Protective You'll Be

"I didn’t know how protective I would be. I hate when anyone besides me and my husband hold him. I just watch them like a hawk." — emmariee

9. That babies poop — a lot

How Much They Poop

"I didn’t expect him to poop so much. He’s breastfed and poops all day, every day." — emmariee

10. That life will change, but for the better

Life is Better

"I was SO AFRAID of what my life would be like once my son was here, and I was actually a tad depressed thinking about the changes. Now that he’s here, my life is immeasurably better." — hillarya92

11. That it can take time to fall in love

Three Weeks to Feel Love

"I was surprised that I didn't have this magical, lovey-dovey feeling for my daughter at birth. It's taken three weeks, but today, for the first time, I caught myself staring at her in wonder and with love." — Jlamillar

12. That the late night crying won't matter that much

Cries Don't Matter

"I’m surprised at the fact that he can be keeping us up all night but each time I look at him, I’m so happy to see him. I’m also surprised by how little the sound of his cries/screams bother me ... I never think about how unpleasant the actual sound is. I only just think about how good and strong his lungs are and how much I love his little voice." — bashleyb

13. That showers will get a new meaning

That Showers Will Gain New Meaning

"How sometimes just getting 30 minutes to shower can feel like a spa treatment." — Edkin75

14. That maternal instincts aren't what you think

Maternal Instincts

"I misunderstood what ‘mom instincts’ were. I assumed everything came naturally. But what I’ve actually discovered is that it doesn’t come naturally necessarily. You just learn incredibly quickly what does and doesn’t work." — ihillarya92

15. That baby's gender won't matter

Baby Gender

"I was team green and really wanted a baby girl! Now that I have my little boy, I couldn’t imagine anything different. His cuddles are my favorite and imagining the bond him and his dad will have makes me happy." — emmariee

16. That breastfeeding isn't just physical

Breastfeeding

"I was surprised by how emotionally hard and draining breastfeeding would be. Everyone says it’s hard, and I was expecting the physical side of it but not the emotional drain from the loneliness of spending all those hours doing it alone." — kaz86c

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

15 Moms Share What Breastfeeding Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

5 Things I Wish Other Moms Told Me About Postpartum Body Image Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Moms Share What Sex After Birth Feels Like Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

21 Moms Share the Most Ridiculous Reasons They Cried When They Were Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Tips for Breastfeeding a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Breastfeeding a Baby With a Toddler in the House Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Laughing, Crying, Cleaning the Window Sills? 11 Pregnancy Emotions You May Have When You're Expecting Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

15 Moms on What Labor Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window