16 Parents Share the One Thing They Wish They Had Known Before Choosing Their Baby's Name

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

Adult placing cut out letter in child's hand

Choosing the perfect baby name can feel all at once thrilling and intimidating. After all, the name you give your little one will be an everlasting part of your child’s identity that they’ll carry with them forever.

Although many parents have a good deal of confidence in their baby name choice, it’s possible to have second thoughts. In fact, a survey conducted by Mumsnet.com found that nearly one-fifth of parents in the U.K. would choose a different name for their child if they could. The reason: 25% regretted their child’s name because it was “too commonly used,” while 21% said the name “just didn’t feel right.”

Even parents who don’t necessarily regret the name they chose say they wish they had foresight around certain challenges or even surprisingly positive twists and turns.

Here, 17 parents get real about the thing they wish they had known before landing on their baby’s name.

1. "After my sons were born, I wished there was a way to see LIVE data on what every other mom was naming their kids. I didn’t want to name my boys something that all other boys around their age were being named." — Anna L., Mankato, MN

2. “I wish I had thought about the way kids' speech develops. At 3 1/2 years old, most kids pronounce my son's name [Axel] as ‘A*****e,’ since the 'X' sound isn't mastered yet. My son says it as ‘Axel,’ since he's had lots of practice with that sound, but his preschool teachers must be cracking up all day long as the other kids shout ‘A*****e! A*****e!’ to get his attention. I’d still pick it, but I just would have been more prepared for all the toddler cursing.” — Jennifer F., Silver Spring, MD

3. “I wish I knew how many people would have baby name ‘suggestions.’ I once was asked by a woman at work what names I was considering. Then she responded with, ‘Ew, no, you really should consider...,’ and then proceeded to tell all the names she loved. I also wish I knew how much people have a need to shorten/abbreviate names. My daughter's name is Gracelyn — which we LOVE for its uniqueness — and people always ask us what we call her. ‘Uhhh, Gracelyn’ is usually my response.” — Jessica B., Annapolis, MD

4. “Don’t tell a soul your name until after the baby is born. I tested my daughter’s name out on a co-worker I wasn’t super close with, and her facial expression made me doubt everything. The few friends of mine who have announced the name of the baby ahead of time all have stories of at least one person who tries to convince them otherwise or tell them why they don’t like the name. It’s just rude.” — Margot D., Boston, MA

5. “I wish I’d known that you can change your mind up until you sign paperwork when you leave the hospital. It doesn't matter how many people you tell. Wish I stuck to my second thought/name which only came after we announced to family [but] before we left the hospital. My husband didn’t think we should change it since we already told people. There still may come a day when I go to the social security office to change it!” — Carolyne R., Philadelphia, PA

6. “I wish I’d known that people would tell you you are pronouncing your own child’s name wrong. My daughter’s name is Vera. We pronounce it to rhyme with Sara. Even after I tell people how we pronounce it, they like to tell me I have it wrong. ‘It should be like Veera and is ‘veering’ off the road.’ I then ask how they pronounce ‘aloe vera,’ and they still argue. I understand there may be two ways, but don’t tell me I’m wrong.” — Nicki W., Baltimore, MD

7. “I wish I’d known that I would feel so much pressure in choosing a name. Pressure to get it right. Pressure to make sure they loved it when they were older. Pressure of knowing that with one little name I was already starting to shape who they would be.” — Alicia A., South Bend, IN

8. “This might be silly, but I regret wasting middle names. We picked fun first names and honored grandparents with middle names, but now I’m wishing I’d just saved those family names in case our third is also a boy. If we keep having the same gender, we may run out of names we like.” — Allie M., Nashville, TN

9. “It is okay to pick a different name when you see your child. We had a completely different name picked out and then she was born, and it didn't fit.” — Alexann D., Wauwatosa, WI

10. “I wish I’d known that just because you love a name doesn’t mean your significant other will. [And] just because a name isn’t currently popular doesn’t mean it won’t become popular the same year your baby is born, and that’s okay.” — Autumn D., Jacksonville, FL

11. “Don't let your husband talk you into a name while you're still being sewn up after a C-section and are kind of out of it. I would have gone with a different name. And on that note, don't let people rush you into a name! My oldest was born in the morning, and we didn't name him until the evening. Nurses and family wouldn't let it go that we hadn't decided on a name! It's a lifelong decision, so it's okay to meet your little one — if you're undecided — and then pick a name. And it's okay go with a different name even if you already have a name on the nursery wall and monogrammed onesies and blankets.” — Becky D., Clover, SC

12. “As an adoptive mom, I didn’t choose my daughter’s first name. Now, I can't think of a more beautiful word. Anyway, I guess I wish I knew how much I could love a name I didn’t even choose myself!” — Becky B., Phoenix, AZ

13. “My two daughters and their friend were enjoying a late summer day at the neighborhood pool and were writing their initials on their snack cups. When my daughter realized that her initials — TRD — 'sound' like 'turd' I realized that perhaps my husband and I were remiss in thoroughly analyzing all aspects of our second daughter’s initials prior to naming her... Moral of the story: think about what the initials ‘sound’ like before naming your child.” — Kari D., Lake Wylie, SC

14. “My kids' names are spelled really similarly, even though to me, they are really different names. It wasn't until I wrote out all our names together on a greeting card that I realized how similar they are — and I was like, ‘What was I thinking!?’ I really wasn't going for matching names. So, sometimes I wish I had chosen names that were more different for them. But I still really like both names.” — Elena M., Cornwall-on-Hudson, NY

15. “I wish I'd known how mad my kids would get at me, because they have never ever once found their names on a coffee mug, keychain, other souvenir. They think it's a huge injustice, and I should have thought of this. I wouldn't have changed their names because of this though — in fact, it's kind of a positive because then I don't have to deal with them collecting all that stuff!” — Julie E., Orlando, FL

16. “I wish I had thought through alternative or non-traditional nicknames derived from the formal name. Our son is named ‘Isaac.’ And I’m happy with calling him ‘Ike’ for short, but it was luck that a doctor suggested it after we had named him.” — Ben H., Cleveland, OH

Still hunting for the perfect baby name? Open the What to Expect app for the top 1,000 names (and plenty of unique ones, too) — plus get week-by-week updates on the tiny human you’re naming.

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

Updates history

September 28, 2025

Editors: Kathleen Felton/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,899 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Should You Keep Your Baby’s Name a Secret? Why Some Parents Wait — and Others Don’t Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

I Waited Until Birth to Find Out Boy or Girl — the Surprise Was Harder Than I Expected Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From One Child to Two: 23 Secrets of Second-Time Parents Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

What Moms Wish They’d Known Before Potty Training Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Traditional Baby Naming Ceremonies Are Getting a Modern Twist — Here's How to Plan Your Own Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

13 Times Moms Were Devastated by a Gender Reveal Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

I Wish I Never Told Anyone My Due Date — Here’s Why Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

The 10 Questions Experts Say Matter Most Before Deciding to Have Another Baby Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

Moms Reveal Exactly How They Decided Whether to Have Another Baby — or Not Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Not Sure If You’re Ready For a Baby? The Big Questions to Ask Before You Start Trying Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window