The Best Toddler Songs to Sing Together

toddler maracas

Singing with your child offers amazing benefits, plus it's a whole lotta fun. Here's some inspiration the next time you both feel like crooning a tune.

Kids learn a lot as they play — and when music is added into the mix, the fun and understanding increase in a big way. Whether you read sing-along stories, belt out a classic radio hit, demonstrate rhyming songs or offer a mini piano or drum set , music is an incredibly powerful and instructive tool.

Singing with your toddler can actually increase her brain's development, teach her new words and improve the bond you share. Music can also enhance creativity and build your tot's self-esteem. Lastly, music is soothing and calming for little kids, acting as a mood lifter when the day is long and nerves are frazzled. And it can serve as a fun workout when you add in a few toddler dance moves . So, what are you waiting for?

Here are 17 fun toddler songs to sing with your kid that'll leave you both laughing.

B-I-N-G-O

Songs like this one, with its repetitive refrain that spells out the farmer's dog's name, are especially tot-friendly. You can encourage your critter to pretend to be the pup in question, barking along to the tune, or get her to clap along with you as you spell out the name.

If You're Happy and You Know It

You know she'll be happy when she's singing this song! Clapping hands, stamping feet and shouting "Hurray" make this bouncy tune even more fun for little ones.

I'm a Little Teapot

Acting out a song is a jolly good time — and who doesn't want to be a pot with a spout? Leaning over and pretending to pour tea on the floor is even goofier.

Two Little Blackbirds

This adorable tune is made better when you put pieces of damp tissue on two fingers that stand in for the birds. And instead of Jack and Jill, use names your tot knows.

Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star

You can show your tot that the same tune can have different words by singing this classic, the alphabet song and "Baa, Baa, Black Sheep."

The Ants Go Marching

This is a fun counting song that starts off slow and then builds in speed. In fact, you'll both be breathless by the time it's over!

Baby Shark

This ditty seems to be everywhere, from birthday parties to sports stadiums and beyond. Teach it to your tot if she hasn't encountered it already.

You Are My Sunshine

Here's a gentle lullaby that also has lovely lyrics. Older toddlers can learn the melody while you sing the harmony above as an accompaniment.

We're Going on a Lion Hunt

It's scary when you're hunting big game, though diving under and over obstacles is an excellent distraction.

Do Your Ears Hang Low?

Why yes, they do hang low! And they wobble to and fro! Ask your tot which creatures actually have ears like this (elephants, donkeys, Basset hounds and more).

YMCA

Spelling out the letters in this classic song is a blast for little kids. Yours will love it even more if she hears it at a baseball game during the seventh inning stretch.

Hey, Diddle Diddle

Classic rhymes can be read aloud or sungm so check out a book of them at the library. Other similar ones include "Jack and Jill," "Little Miss Muffet" and "Pease Porridge Hot."

Hokey-Pokey

The arm-waggling, leg-shaking and circle-turning makes this song one of the best around. Add to the silliness by using toys as props: "You put your sock monkey in, you take your sock monkey out …" That really is what it's all about, right?

I'm Bringing Home a Baby Bumblebee

Bees can be scary to little kids, but this tune might help allay some fears. Add to the laughs by swapping in different creatures (dinosaur, anyone?).

There Were 10 in the Bed

How many fit in just one bed? This is a lively song for bedtime and it can seem long too, so feel free to reduce the number and start at five.

Where Is Thumbkin?

Finger songs are classics, of course, as you're teaching her the words as well as the hand motions. Fingers that climb, toes that wiggle and thumbs that hide add extra joy to singing.

This Old Man

A counting song with a goofy phrase? Sign us up! Knick-whack paddy whack is hilarious to say over and over out loud.