17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

baby boy with Greek name

Wondering what to name your precious little hero? Make sure he stands apart with one of these singularly Greek baby boy names, which are as meaningful as they are melodic.

While it's often common to name boys after their fathers in the U.S., in Greece, it has long been customary to honor grandfathers in this way. In recent years, however, Greek parents have increasingly tapped their ancient roots for names that carry a certain symbolism or fascinating backstory.

Here are a few of our favorite Greek baby boy names, many linked to mythical gods and heroes. (If you're not sure whether you're having a boy or girl, check out our favorite Greek baby girl names too.)

Adrianos. This powerful-sounding name (pronounced a-dri-a-NOS ) means "just" or "righteous." In the Latin tradition, it's written Hadrian, like the Roman. A superb name for a real idealistic truth-seeker.

Aegeas. Most Greeks will tell you the Aegean Sea was named after Athens' mythical king Aegeus ( eh-YE-as ), father of Theseus. Some historians argue its origin lies in the Homeric word aix , which means goat. The ancient Greeks thought the waves of the Aegean resembled leaping goats.

Andronikos. A compound name linking the words andros (meaning "of man") and nike (meaning "victory"), this baby boy name refers to a little boy destined to be serene and devoted to family. You might like to trim it to Nikos.

Apollonas. Son of Zeus and Leto, Apollonas is the Greco-Roman god of the sun, light, music, and knowledge, and was known for his honesty and integrity. You may prefer to call him Apollo.

Chrysanthos. Like a sunflower in bloom, this refined name literally translates as "golden flower" and can be shortened to Chris. Men with this name ( CHRIS-an-thos ) are thought to be exceedingly kind and sensitive.

Faidon. He's the light of your life, so why not give him a name which underscores the fact? Deriving from the word "fos," it refers to the "brightest of all." The philosopher Faidon (FEI-don), a student of Socrates, was an educated, worldly, and sociable man who made friends wherever he went.

Iraklis. If there was ever a name synonymous with big-heartedness and heroism, it's this. You'll know him as Hercules, Greco-Roman mythology's greatest and most beloved hero. Born to Zeus and mortal princess Alcmene, Iraklis courageously completed his 12 labors in order to achieve immortality.

Nikiforos. This strapping name (pronounced ni-ki-FO-ros) means "he who brings victory." In ancient times, the term was employed as an invocation to all-powerful Zeus and love goddess Aphrodite. Cultured and a little on the serious side, he prefers spiritual pursuits but also knows how to have fun. His alias could easily be Nick.

Nireas. If you and your partner spend more time on the water than on land, you might want to consider naming your son after the water deity Homer called "the old man of the sea." The son of Pontus and Gaea, Nireas was known for his wisdom and prophetic powers.

Leonidas. While King Leonidas and his 300 loyal Spartan warriors may have lost the 5th century B.C. Battle of Thermopylae, his fearlessness will forever be the stuff of legend. His name conveys bravery, but he's also a romantic at heart. Leo is the pared-down version.

Orestis. A mountain dweller, Orestis (pronounced OAR-es-tis) was the son of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra. His name evokes simplicity and modesty. Beloved among family and friends, he is the conciliatory type who always tries to make amends with others.

Orpheus. In antiquity, Orpheus was a mere mortal with musical skills comparative only to those of Apollo. He sang and played the lyre so beautifully that animals would pause to listen and trees would lean in closer to absorb his melodies.

Perseas. This classic name (pronounced per-SE-as) denotes exceptional intelligence. Perseas is the much-lauded Hellenic hero who, dressed in a cape rendering him invisible, managed to slay Gorgon Medusa with the clever use of his shield to avoid being turned to stone. You could call him Percy for short.

Paris. Here's a name for a heartbreaker. The son of King Priam of Troy and Queen Hecuba, Paris was drawn to physical beauty and the arts. His decision to name Aphrodite the most attractive of all goddesses in order to win the affections of mortal Helen triggered the Trojan War.

Theofanis. This is an ancient Greek name that means "he whom God discovers or makes apparent." He might be considered a chosen one, but that doesn't mean he doesn't get a kick out of playing light pranks on his friends. Theofanis, Theo for short, is very much invested in enjoying the good things in life.

Thiseas. An Athenian greatly admired for his success in doing away with all sorts of ancient monsters, Thiseas, or Theseus, was best known for defeating the half-bull, half-man Minotaur of King Minos on Crete.

Zissis. Not only do you give life to your son but he will undoubtedly gift you with a lifetime of precious memories. Zissis is an ideal and easily pronounceable Greek name (ZI-sis) denoting "life" or "lifetime." Your little one is likely to be the only Zissis, or simply Zi, in the playground.

Ready to track your pregnancy and discover the perfect name? Find week-by-week guidance, more baby name ideas, expert advice, and tips from other parents in the What to Expect app .

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Updates history

October 7, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,922 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

18 Chinese Baby Boy Names With Poetic Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Oh Là Là! 16 French Baby Boy Names That Stylishly Cross Borders Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

14 Baby Names That Mean Peace, Strength, and Wisdom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

120 Astrological Baby Names Inspired by Your Baby's Zodiac Sign Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Searching for a Dashing Baby Boy Name? These 15 British Boy Names Deliver Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window