Let these sweet designs add to the surprise (and your look!) at a gender reveal party.

If you want to nail your gender reveal party style, don’t forget your fingers! The unique design on your nail beds can tell a story about your upcoming celebration, whether or not you know the sex of your baby.

If you're concerned about the safety of painting your nails during pregnancy , know that it's generally safe to get manicures and pedicures while expecting. Here are a few things to keep in mind before you do:

Try to look for water-based and non-toxic nail polishes

Avoid acrylics if the smell irritates you

Wear gloves if you get a gel manicure, which uses UV light

Make sure the salon you visit is well-ventilated, or ask to sit near an open window

With these need-to-know pieces of information out of the way, let's get to the good stuff: Your gender reveal manicure. There are so many options to choose from when it comes to gender reveal nail designs, and we whittled it down to a few of our favorites.

Simple gender reveal nail ideas

You can DIY these easy designs, or bring them to your local salon as inspiration. Whichever one you choose, we guarantee you'll *nail* your look.

color blocked gender reveal nails

Take a fashion trend, and turn it into one of the most adorable gender reveal nail designs. Bonus: These bold colors will pop in any photos you take.

Gender reveal nails with hearts

gender reveal nails with hearts

For a more subtle look, these gender reveal nails have a neutral light pink base and delicate blue and pink hearts on every nail.

Gender reveal nails with an accent nail

gender reveal nails with accent nail

The accent nail is a perennial favorite, and we can see why. This is another neutral gender reveal nail idea, as it comes with a clear base and blue and pink hearts on the ring finger nail.

Gender reveal nails with polka dots and hearts

gender reveal nails with polka dots and hearts

Dotting tools and pink heart stickers are all you need to represent both Team Boy and Team Girl on your nails.

Gender reveal nails with sparkles

gender reveal nails with sparkles

If you want a design that won't require too much time at the salon, opt for a simple coat of sparkles. The blue and pink glitter nail polish on the middle fingers make this set stand out from the crowd.

Fun gender reveal nail ideas

Your nail technician will love painting these mini masterpieces ahead of your celebration.

Gender reveal nails with floral accents

gender reveal nails with floral accents

Is your blossoming babe a boy or girl? The left hand is showing a fun combination of pale and hot pink with white flowers, and the right is all about the blues.

Gender reveal nails with footprints

gender reveal nails with footprints

Before you can actually get to see your little one's footprint, you can envision it on your nails. This is a set that focuses on a unique design for each and every nail.

Gender reveal nails with gold tape

gender reveal nails with gold tape

Another one of our favorite trending gender reveal nail ideas is incorporating gold or silver tape. Four nails on each hand are the classic pink and blue, and then an arrow-like design combines the two colors with clean lines of gold nail tape.

Gender reveal nails with ombré

ombre gender reveal nails

These are the cotton candy nails of our wildest dreams. The perfect blend of pink and blue is achieved with an ombré finish.

Gender reveal nails with clouds

gender reveal nails with clouds

If your head is in the clouds about the upcoming arrival of your newborn, show it off with these cloud-covered press-on nails.

Cute gender reveal nail ideas

Rock these oh-so-sweet sets at your gender reveal — and maybe your baby shower too!

Gender reveal nails with flower stems

gender reveal nails with flowers

Plenty of parents-to-be love ornate gender reveal nail designs. With a white base and branching stems covered in teeny-tiny pink and blue flowers, this is one of the most sophisticated sets we've seen.

Gender reveal nails with swirls

gender reveal nails with swirls

Your head is probably swirling as you think about your baby's upcoming arrival, so why not reflect that feeling in your nails? This set comes with two blue, white and pink accent nails that make it totally Instagram-worthy.

Gender reveal nails with negative space

gender reveal nails with negative space

For a futuristic vibe, negative space gender reveal nails are a must. One hand is accented with baby blue, while the other features a bold bright pink. The result? Pure magic.

Gender reveal nails with French tips

gender reveal nails with French tips

Colorful French tips offset swirling accent nails with this special set. With more and more people opting for a modern twist on a classic favorite, these would make the most dreamy nails for your gender reveal party.

Gender reveal nails with moons and stars

gender reveal nails with moons and stars

Rather than adding both pink and blue to your nails, try mixing the two to create a beautiful shade of lavender. (Bonus points if you match your gender reveal dress with this set!) To tie it all together, there is a snoozing moon and a sprinkling of stars on two accent nails.

Gender reveal nails for a boy

gender reveal nails for a boy

Want to reveal your baby's sex through your nails? Try this all-blue design that boldly declares the news.

Gender reveal nails for a girl

gender reveal nails for a girl

And if you already know you're awaiting a baby girl, this set showcases a whole lot of pink.

WhatToExpect.com, Best Pregnancy-Safe Nail Polish for Expecting Moms , December 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Manicures and Pedicures During Pregnancy , March 2021.