17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

baby boy with Spanish name

From Alejandro to Tomas, these bold baby boy names are both historic and popular throughout Spanish-speaking countries.

As we all know, a child's moniker is many things. You want a name that sounds aesthetically pleasing, sets your child apart, portrays a positive image, works well with your last name, and shapes an identity (no pressure!).

Spanish boy names are incredibly popular, and many parents love that these strong and sophisticated monikers have historic roots. Hopefully you'll find a name that rings just right in our list of Spanish baby boy names. (And if you're not sure whether you're having a boy or a girl, check out our favorite Spanish baby girl names too.)

Alejandro. Of Spanish and Greek origin, Alejandro (pronouced aa-lai-hAAn-droh) means "man's defender" or "warrior." You might prefer to call your little soldier the shortened versions Ale or Alejo.

Benjamín. From the Hebrew name Binyamin, Benjamín means "son of the right hand" and has also been used to name the youngest son of a large family. Take your pick of cute nicknames: Ben, Benni, or Benja.

Cristian. If you're looking for a name that honors your cultural and religious roots, look no further: Cristian quite literally means "follower of Christ." You could, of course, always simply call him Cris.

Diego. This Spanish baby boy name has Greek, Hebrew, and Latin influences and means "didactical and educated" — an ideal title for your future scholar.

Guillermo. This Spanish equivalent of the English name William, pronounced gee-YEHR-moh, means "resolute protector."

Joaquín. A biblical moniker of Spanish origin, this willful baby boy name means "God will judge." Joaquin (pronounced wa-KEEN) is also a saint considered to be the Virgin Mary's father.

José. Of Hebrew origin, José is the Spanish and Portuguese version of Joseph, meaning "he shall add." This popular name is also used in many Spanish-speaking countries as a feminine second name (for example, María José).

Juan. In many Spanish-speaking countries, the name Juan precedes a second name. For example, Juan Manuel, Juan Pablo, Juan José. It means "God is gracious" and has been a popular name for centuries — a sure bet for your little man.

Manuel. The sweet nicknames for this moniker (pronounced mahn-WEHL) may be just as fitting for your little guy: Manny or Manu. From the Hebrew name Immanu'el, which means "God with us," this baby boy name was brought to Spain and Portugal in the 13th century as the Byzantine Empire expanded and has remained a popular name ever since.

Marcos. Drop the "s" and you have the Italian variant Marco. Marcos originates from the ancient Roman name Marcus, derived from Marticos — referring to Mars, the god of war. This strong baby boy name was very common in ancient Rome, as in the orator Marco Cicero from the 1st century BC and the 11th century emperor Marco Antonio (husband of Cleopatra).

Mateo. The Spanish version of the Hebrew name Matthew, meaning "gift of God," Mateo is one of the most important names in the sacred scriptures as the author of one of the four gospels. Your little guy can also go by the adorable nickname Teo, Mati, or Mat.

Miguel. The Spanish and Portuguese form of the Hebrew name Michael — meaning "who is like God" — Miguel was one of the archangels who stood close to God and carried out his judgments. That's one powerful name for one wise little man.

Nicolás. The classic Greek name Nicholas was derived from Nike, the goddess of victory. In Spanish, the "h" is dropped. Nicolas has been around since the 14th century, thanks to saints and clergy members with the name. You could, of course, just call him Nico or Nic.

Pablo. The Spanish equivalent of Paul, derived from the Latin word "paulus," this name means "small, humble." Don't be fooled by the modest roots: Pablo was also a brilliant and influential Spanish painter (as in Picasso).

Pedro. Pedro is the Spanish and Portuguese equivalent of Peter, derived from the Greek word "petros," meaning "rock." While the full name is always a solid choice, the nicknames Pepo and Pedri will make you melt.

Santiago. You might think of the capital city of Chile, but this baby boy name, meaning "supplanter," is a classic moniker derived from Spanish santo (saint) combined with Yago (an old Spanish form of James). You could also call your little guy Santi or Tiago for short.

Tomás. Tomas is a Spanish variant of the Aramaic name Thomas — and you might be surprised by its meaning: "twin"! The nicknames Tom or Tommi ring equally as nice.

Find more baby name ideas and pregnancy tips tailored just for you in the What to Expect app .

Vanessa Petit is a bilingual writer and translator. When she’s not writing, Petit is enjoying life with her two children and husband and planning their next family vacation adventure. Petit has over 20 years of experience creating content in English and Spanish for national and international newspapers, magazines and online platforms. She believes speaking two languages fluently is a superpower that allows her to communicate in two very different ways. She’s written extensively on education, parenting, women’s health, travel and beauty.

Updates history

October 7, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,922 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

Oh Là Là! 16 French Baby Boy Names That Stylishly Cross Borders Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Searching for a Dashing Baby Boy Name? These 15 British Boy Names Deliver Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

18 Chinese Baby Boy Names With Poetic Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

14 Baby Names That Mean Peace, Strength, and Wisdom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window