17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Yawning Baby Boy

You might be surprised how many of today’s trendy names have Welsh roots. Take some inspiration from these fresh, classic, and bold Welsh baby boy names.

Classic-sounding and easy to spell, these adorable Welsh monikers are short and sweet with cute meanings to boot.

Whether you like softer, trendier “-i” endings, bold single-syllable names, or solid and strong-sounding options with ancient roots, there’s surely a Welsh baby boy name to suit you and your soon-to-be-born son. (And if you're not sure whether you're having a boy or a girl, check out some of our favorite Welsh baby girl names too.)

Looking for more charming baby names? Explore the What to Expect app and find thousands of sweet options to browse, save, and share.

Aron. A variant of the Hebrew name Aaron, Aron is the Welsh spelling; it feels both modern and sophisticated. Music fans? It was also Elvis Presley’s middle name.

Bowen. Although it sounds contemporary, due to its growing popularity in the U.S., Bowen is actually an ancient Welsh name meaning “son of Owen.” Bowen can be shortened to the very adorable Bo.

Bryn. It's often used for both boys and girls in the U.S., but Bryn is usually a boy’s name in Wales that means “hill."

Cai. Here’s a multicultural option for you: Cai (or Kai or Caio) is a simple but trendy name that’s popular not only in Wales but also in China and parts of Europe — making it a fantastic option for families with roots around the world. In some countries, it’s considered more feminine than masculine.

Deri. Strong in both sound and meaning, Deri is the plural of the Welsh word for “oak tree.” Uncommon in Wales, Deri is a cute but underrated name.

Dylan. Popular across the British Isles — especially in Wales, where it originates — Dylan means “son of the sea” — ideal for water-loving parents and would-be water babies.

Elis. Unisex in other parts of the world, Elis is a boy’s name meaning “kind” in Wales. With a soft “s” ending and the popular letter “e” start, Elis is quite trendy right now.

Emyr . Delicate and lyrical, Emyr is the perfect name for your little “king” — one that’s relatively unheard of outside of Wales. Any little one would be lucky to get such a sweet and strong name.

Geraint. If you’re a fan of history and folklore, there are few better names than the bold and strong-sounding Geraint, a warrior-king in Arthurian legend.

Gethin. Gethin, meaning “dark and swarthy,” sounds soft and gentle thanks to that central “th.” If your baby boy is born with a dark head of hair, keep Gethin in mind!

Harri. Also popular in Finland, Harri is a cute variant of the popular and princely British name Harry — itself a nickname for Henry. Appropriately, it means “ruler.”

Huw. The Welsh version of Hugh, the classic yet modern boy’s name Huw is due for a comeback. Plus, it rather beautifully means “soul” or “intellect.”

Idris. Recently recognizable thanks to actor Idris Elba, classy Idris is both a Welsh and Arabic boy’s name that’s also the name of a Welsh mountain, Cadair Idris.

Morgan. More commonly a feminine name in the U.S., the unisex Morgan remains popular for Welsh boys. Possible meanings include “ruler of the sea” and “magic.”

Osian. Lyrical and soft, gentle Osian (pronounced osh-an) derives from the Irish poet-warrior Oisín and means “little deer.”

Rhys. Sometimes anglicized to Reece or Rees — or feminized to Reese — Rhys is a sweet and classic Welsh name that remains popular to this day.

Siôn. Both a first and surname — and the Welsh equivalent to the John (English) and Seán (Irish) — Siôn means “God is gracious.” The female version is Siân; both versions can be written with or without the circumflex.

Lauren Cocking is a Yorkshire-born, Mexico City-based writer, book reviewer and translator. She’s currently at work on her first literary translation and studying Welsh. Cocking has bylines at BBC Travel , CNN, Lonely Planet, National Geographic, OZY, LitHub, Teen Vogue, Al Jazeera and more . She writes about Latin American literature on her blog .

Updates history

September 29, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,921 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

Searching for a Dashing Baby Boy Name? These 15 British Boy Names Deliver Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Cute, Quirky, and Easy to Say: 19 Adorable Welsh Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

18 Chinese Baby Boy Names With Poetic Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Oh Là Là! 16 French Baby Boy Names That Stylishly Cross Borders Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

50 Vintage Baby Names That Are Making a Comeback Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window