17 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a large onion.

Dizziness during pregnancy often kicks in at around week 17 in the second trimester. Blame hormones, your growing uterus, and a rapidly expanding circulatory system.

Meanwhile, your little one is learning to suck and swallow, and is also starting to develop fingerprints.

Your Baby at Week 17

At a Glance

Getting ready to feed

Your little one is practicing sucking and swallowing as he gets ready for the real thing: a breast or bottle!

Baby will soon be able to hear you!

Baby's sense of hearing is making big strides this week. His ears are close to being fully formed and he's starting to be able to hear your voice.

Warming up

Fat stores are beginning to develop under your baby's skin. This provides energy and will help keep your little one warm (and cute) after birth.

17 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 17 weeks pregnant, you're in month 4 of your pregnancy. Only 5 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 17 weeks?

My, how your baby has grown! Your little one weighs about 5 or more ounces and is the size of your palm, or around 5 inches long. Body fat (baby's, that is) is beginning to form and will continue to accumulate through the end of your pregnancy — join the club, baby!

Baby's practicing sucking and swallowing

Since practice makes perfect, your baby is sharpening his sucking and swallowing skills in preparation for that first and second…and third suckle at your breast or the bottle.

In fact, most of the survival reflexes your baby will have at birth are being perfected in utero right now.

Fingerprints are forming

Here's some proof that your baby is truly one of a kind — as if you needed any! Within the next week or so, the pads on your baby's fingertips and toes will become adorned with completely individual swirls and creases, aka fingerprints.

Fetal cardiac activity is more regular

Baby's heart is now regulated by the brain, so no more random beats, and is churning out 140 to 150 beats per minute — about twice as fast as yours.

Your Body at Week 17

Here come the tummy touchers!

Now that you're starting to show, chances are that friends, coworkers, and even strangers may feel the urge to reach out and touch your tummy. If you don't mind, that's fine. But if you do, speak up kindly but firmly.

Your growing appetite

Remember when you were so queasy you could barely stomach ginger ale and a cracker? Happily, your toilet-hugging days and nights are probably over. These days, it's more likely that you can't get enough to eat.

For most women, the second trimester not only brings relief from morning sickness but also a hearty appetite. Don't be surprised if you suddenly feel hungry enough to polish off a sizable cut of steak or a whole tray of baked ziti at 17 weeks pregnant.

What's behind your increase in appetite? Simple — you're taking signals from your baby, who's getting bigger and hungrier. Not sure exactly how much weight you should gain during pregnancy ? Talk to your practitioner, who will be able to help you maintain a healthy weight gain. Your doctor or midwife can also help you play weight gain catch-up if you didn't gain enough or lost weight during the first trimester.

Stop snoring

One inexplicable pregnancy symptom ? Snoring! But take heart: The stuffiness that often triggers world-champion snoring is common — and temporary. That's right, even your nose is affected by pregnancy hormones!

Try putting a humidifier in your bedroom, using one of those nasal strips on your nose to open up your nasal passages, or sleeping on a couple of pillows to keep your head slightly elevated. And if your partner complains? Banish your sweetie to the sofa for the night — it's more important that you get a good night's sleep.

Heightened symptoms

More new developments with your body may be on tap this week: an increase in vaginal discharge (leukorrhea) and a greater sensitivity to allergens. Both are totally normal!

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 17

Backaches

Ease this common pregnancy symptom by making sure you have a supportive chair at work and a firm mattress at home. Otherwise, get a cushion for your chair to place behind your back so you can keep your posture in line and place a board underneath your mattress to firm it up.

Occasional headaches

Whether hormones, fatigue, tension, or some other culprit causes your headaches, it’s usually okay to take acetaminophen during pregnancy to alleviate the pain. But check with your practitioner first.

Increased appetite

Does your appetite seem insatiable these days? That’s because your growing baby is demanding more nourishment. Listen to your hunger pangs and eat when you need to; try to choose foods that fill you up and meet your nutrient needs, like high-fiber grains, produce, and lean protein.

Heartburn and indigestion

If you find yourself feeling the burn after a big meal, avoid lying down after eating to keep gastric juices in the stomach where they belong.

Faintness or dizziness

Dehydration can cause dizziness, so make sure you stay hydrated by drinking at least eight glasses of water a day — aim to drink more than that if you’ve been exercising.

Stretch marks

This badge of pregnancy is hereditary — so if you start finding some stretch marks on your body, it may be because your mother had them too. But if you gain weight at a steady rate instead of in big spurts, this may keep the stretching gradual and, as a result, less extreme.

Tips for You This Week

Choose soups

No matter the season, soups make a great midday meal. They can be as hearty as you want, pair well with others — we’re looking at you, sandwiches — and are often full of protein and fiber.

Eat em’ cold or eat em’ hot, and make a double batch of soup so you can freeze some for another time.

Stretch to prevent sciatica

The sciatic nerve, the largest in the body, starts in the lower back, runs down the buttocks, and branches down the back of the legs to the ankles and feet.

In most cases, sciatica — sharp, shooting pain, tingling or numbness that starts in the back or buttocks and radiates all the way down the legs — happens when this nerve gets compressed by bulging, slipped, or ruptured discs.

— sharp, shooting pain, tingling or numbness that starts in the back or buttocks and radiates all the way down the legs — happens when this nerve gets compressed by bulging, slipped, or ruptured discs.

Arthritis and a narrowing of the spinal canal, also called spinal stenosis, can also be culprits. Try a heating pad or back stretches to ease the pain.

Time for the Tooth Fairy again?

Have you noticed a mildly looser tooth that suddenly makes you feel like you’re back in elementary school?

Hormones can affect the gums, ligaments, and bones in your mouth, which in turn can slightly loosen the teeth, especially if you have more serious untreated conditions like gingivitis or periodontitis.

See the dentist as soon as possible if you notice a very loose tooth or have other significant dental issues. And be sure to keep up with twice-daily brushing, regular flossing, and other important oral hygiene practices during pregnancy .

Ease round ligament pain

Your uterus is supported by thick bands (called ligaments) that run from the groin up the side of the abdomen.

As your uterus grows during pregnancy, these bands stretch out to accommodate your growing bump — which can cause sharp pains and dull aches in the lower abdomen.

To relieve round ligament pain , make sure to spend time off your feet and decrease the intensity of your workouts. You can also consider wearing a belly band for a little extra support.

Stay out of the sun

Seeing spots — on your face? A line down your lower belly? Skin tags dotting your upper arms?

No need to dash to the dermatologist. These strange skin symptoms , including darkening moles and heat rashes, are all normal and temporary. As usual, hormones are to blame, but the sun can exacerbate these changes in your complexion.

No need to dash to the dermatologist. These

, including darkening moles and heat rashes, are all normal and temporary. As usual, hormones are to blame, but the sun can exacerbate these changes in your complexion.

So stay shaded whenever you can — now's the time to invest in a wide-brimmed hat — and apply a broad spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of 30 or higher when you venture out in the daylight. Sunscreen is safe and smart to use when you're expecting. Ask your doctor about anything you’re concerned about.

Don’t stand up too quickly

During pregnancy, progesterone increases the flow of blood to your baby, resulting in lower blood pressure and reduced blood flow to your brain — giving you that faint feeling all over.

To help stave off dizziness , always stand up from a sitting or lying position slowly.

Sensitive to dairy?

If milk or other dairy products aren't your thing, you'll have to cash in on calcium a different way. Luckily, dairy products aren't the only sources of calcium — they're just the most well-known.

If milk or other dairy products aren't your thing, you'll have to cash in on calcium a different way. Luckily, dairy products aren't the only

Calcium-fortified orange juice and other fruit juices can offer about as much of the vital nutrient as milk, cup for cup. For additional non-dairy dietary sources of calcium, turn to leafy green vegetables, sesame seeds, almonds, and calcium-fortified soy products like tofu.

Still concerned you're not getting enough? Ask your practitioner whether you should take a calcium supplement for extra insurance.