18 Chinese Baby Boy Names With Poetic Meaning

Minor copy updates.

chinese baby boy names

Looking for a Chinese baby boy name that’s zippy — or zen? Take your pick from these poetic names, many of which evoke stunning nature scenes.

While many baby names in the West have long-established familial traditions, Chinese names typically get much more creative. Most Chinese names are a poetic amalgam of words that evoke beautiful imagery or aspirational character traits, referencing symbols of strength and masculinity or evoking powerful scenes inspired by nature.

Whether you’re looking for a more sage, zen name or are a fan of the bright and bold, here are Chinese boy’s names for inspiration. (And if you're not sure whether you're having a boy or a girl, check out our favorite Chinese baby girl names , too.)

1. Fenhua. A unisex name, Fenhua means “youthful and energetic.”

2. Haoyu. Parents with a passion for the cosmos might consider this strong baby boy name, which means “vast universe.”

3. Haitao. Have a strong love of the sea — and hoping your little one will, too? Try the name Haitao, which means “a strong and powerful ocean wave.”

4. Junfeng. There’s nothing more satisfying than finishing a steep hike to behold the breath-taking views. That’s the picture that this name paints — a majestic mountain scape seen from the ideal vantage point.

5. Lixin. A great name for a bright and sunny boy, Lixin (pronounced lee-shin) means “a glorious and beautiful sunrise.”

6. Lingyun. "Ling" means “lofty,” or “high up,” while "yun" means “cloud.” Choose this imaginative name for a boy who’s sure to have exceptional aspirations.

7. Qianfan. A name that brings to mind nautical imagery, Qianfan (chee-an fan) means “a thousand sails.”

8. Shuchang. Shuchang is a great name if you’d like a gentleman with a happy demeanour. The name means “easy-going and blissful.”

9. Sile. Pronounced si-le, this name is for boys who are cheerful, optimistic, and always happy. What more could you want for your little one!

10. Sicong. Convinced your baby guy will be the next Bach or Einstein? Try out the name Sicong (pronounced si-ts-o-ng), which means “clever and original.”

11. Tianyu. You can’t go wrong with this very classic Chinese name, which means “heavenly jade.”

12. Xiyang. If Lixin doesn’t quite do it for you, maybe try Xiyang (shee yan-g), meaning “the evening sun” or “sunset.”

13. Xuesong. Another name for nature lovers, "xue" (pronounced shoo-ye) means “snow,” while song means “pine tree.” Together the name evokes pine trees covered in a fresh blanket of snow: A picturesque name for a winter baby.

14. Yangfang. Perfect for a family with nautical proclivities, this name elicits the image of grand and majestic sails catching wind. A great name for your bold and adventurous little boy!

15. Yufei. A tranquil yet strong name, Yufei (pronounced yu-fay) means “feather in flight.”

16. Yulong. Meaning “jade dragon,” this classic Chinese name is a beautiful pick for your little guy.

17. Yuze. Pronounced yu-ze, this evocative name means “a refreshing monsoon after a humid day.”

18. Zhiyuan. Pronounced jir-yu-wan, this name sets the path for your ambitious boy. It means “visionary” or a “go-getting dreamer.”

Pronounced jir-yu-wan, this name sets the path for your ambitious boy. It means “visionary” or a “go-getting dreamer.”

Still hunting for the perfect baby name? Open the What to Expect app for the top 1,000 names (and plenty of unique ones, too) — plus get week-by-week updates on the tiny human you’re naming.

Marina Wang is a freelance journalist living in Calgary, Canada. On her off days, she will gladly eschew all responsibilities to sing songs and dance with her baby niece. Wang has a special interest in science and travel and has written for publications such as Science Magazine , Atlas Obscura , Mental Floss , Canadian Geographic and the CBC. She is second-generation Chinese and a native Mandarin speaker. She holds a Bachelor of Science degree in zoology and a Master's in journalism from Carleton University.