18-Month-Old Child

Little ones start to understand limits around now — but that doesn’t mean they follow them.

Your 18-Month-Old Child

He’s only halfway to 2, but he seems far older than his 1½ years. By now, he probably has plenty of developmental tricks to show off, like walking , scribbling and climbing .

His sense of humor may also be blossoming — he may laugh when you catch him hiding under the table, or squeal with delight when he recognizes his reflection in the mirror.

Of course, he probably still has a stubborn streak — which can be just as maddening as it is maddeningly cute — but he may also surprise you by listening when you tell him not to touch something. Hooray for that!

Here’s what else your 18-month-old is up to.

Your 18-month-old child’s development

At a Glance

Sleeping basics

Toddlers need about 11 to 14 hours of sleep a day, including naptime. Around this time, many tots drop the morning nap and transition to one afternoon nap, sleeping for about one-and-a-half to two-and-a-half hours.

Feeding basics

Toddlers don’t need added sugars, so try to limit the intake of sweets whenever possible by opting for naturally sweet foods in the form of fruit smoothies or homemade frozen-fruit juice pops.

Did you know?

By this age, most toddlers tend to know what many household objects are and what they do — a hairbrush is for your hair, a shoe is worn on your foot, and so on.

Hallmarks of 18-month-old babies include impatience with, well, just about everything. Right now, it might be hard to talk on the phone or with a visitor — your toddler wants to be the center of attention, and he’s letting you know it loudly and clearly.

You may also encounter some toddler sleep problems in the form of a reluctance to nap , so it might be time to ditch that morning snooze . Or, the rebellion could occur at night (in which case, consider making his bedtime a little later) and result in a tendency to wake up too early in the morning .

Don’t be surprised if, despite his burgeoning independence, your child still has separation anxiety , like the dreaded drop-off at day care . Empathize with him — “I know it’s hard to say good-bye” — and be sure to pack a favorite furry friend in his bag. Just don’t feed his misery by getting upset yourself.

Speaking of misery, plenty of parents must cope with some serious stroller struggles these days, since some toddlers hate to be confined. Same goes for high chairs and car seats as well. Distraction may help, but ultimately your best bet is to stay cool and stand firm.

Finally, it’s not too soon to lay the groundwork for good manners by always setting a good example yourself and explaining why we say please and thank you — it’s as much about kindness as it is about courtesy!

Your 18-month-old child’s growth

Your toddler is halfway to 2 — and starting to look like it too! An 18-month girl will usually weigh between 17 ½ and 31 pounds and measure 29½ to 33 inches long. Boys tend to weigh 19½ to 30 pounds and measure 30 to 34½ inches tall.

One thing that all toddlers need to grow big: protein — although in smaller amounts than you might think. Between the ages of 1 and 2, two 8-ounce glasses of whole cow’s milk provide about all the protein your toddler needs in a day.

Of course, it’s a good idea to include more sources of protein in her diet than just milk. Toddlers who fill up on fluids might be skimping on solids, and missing out on important nutrients — like iron — in the process.

Try offering up other dairy sources, like yogurt and cheese, which can also help shore up her calcium intake. (If your child has a milk allergy, ask your doctor if you can serve her a dairy alternative, such as soy milk.) Other protein-rich foods include eggs, chicken, turkey or tofu.

Your 18-month-old child’s health & care

There’s a mid-year well visit on the schedule for this month, so be sure to ask your pediatricians any questions you have about your child’s development and milestones.

18-month well-child visit

Now that your little one is halfway through her second year, she has her last mid-year well-baby doctor’s appointment this month. And there will be plenty to talk about with your pediatrician. Odds are, you also have plenty of questions, so use the time to ask about your child’s eating habits and sleep patterns (like when to drop the morning nap).

Dog bites in children

To a dog, your child’s affectionate hug might seem more like a too-tight squeeze. If your toddler is on the receiving end of a canine’s canines, it’s important to know how to give first aid for dog bites. If you don’t know the dog that bit your child, call the doctor (there may be a shot required).

Toddler teething

Just when you thought teething was a thing of the past, your toddler may start cutting one of her first molars — which generally come in anytime between months 13 and 19. Thanks to their larger size, molars (lower and upper) can take discomfort to a whole new level. Ouch! Luckily there are some teething soothing tactics you can try.

Separation anxiety

Starting around the 18-month-mark, many toddlers start to cling even more closely to their parents. This is just one of the (many) stops along the road to adulthood, as they learn how to separate themselves from Mom or Dad. Not looking forward to the tears at day care drop-off or when you leave your little one with your nanny or babysitter? Try to focus your tot’s attention on all the fun things she’ll be doing that day.

Safe bedroom rules

Once your toddler is 18 months old, you can let her sleep with a thin blanket or a stuffed animal. Just stick to one or two small bedtime friends — if she has several, she could stack them and use them to climb out of the crib. Once your tot is 35 inches tall, you should move her to a toddler bed.

Toddler tips & info

Toddlers and TV

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that children under the age of 18 months steer clear of screens — phones, tablets, TVs — altogether (an exception is video chatting with a loved one).

But even after your child turns 1½, you should still keep your toddler’s screen time to short, supervised doses. Even educational shows or apps can’t give toddlers much of a brain boost — for that, they need to interact with the world around them, including the people in it.

to short, supervised doses. Even educational shows or apps can’t give toddlers much of a brain boost — for that, they need to interact with the world around them, including the people in it.

To kick off a healthy relationship with the TV (and the tablet, and the phone), be selective about what you show your toddler and when you show it to her. Choose short, gentle shows, watch them with your child whenever possible, keep the screens out of the bedroom and turn off the TV when no one is watching it.

Getting a start at art

Up until now, you’ve probably been hesitant to give your toddler a pencil or pen. And for good reason: They’ll be all over the wall (or in her mouth) within minutes.

At this age, many toddlers want to try a wobbly hand at scribbling. Give her some non-toxic, chunky crayons to hold and a large sheet of newsprint to draw on. You’ll have to point out that she has to draw on the paper — not on the books, walls or floor — but eventually, your little artist will get the hang of it.

The not-so “happy hour”

In the past, 5 o’clock may have been “happy hour.” Now, it’s more like the witching hour, as your toddler is more high-strung from her busy day than in the mood to relax.

If you work from home, try to unwind before you pick your toddler up from day care or walk through the front door. Listen to some music in the car or visualize some waves lapping on the beach.

If you’ve been at home with your toddler all day, unwind together by cuddling up with some nursery rhymes or listening to music. If your little one is hungry, feed her a healthy “appetizer” to tide her over until dinnertime.

When your tot wanders off

Not all toddlers who wander are lost, but they are at risk for an injury if they stray too far from you. If your tot’s idea of fun is playing catch-me-if-you-can on a crowded sidewalk or busy store, she may have to take a seat — in her stroller.

are lost, but they are at risk for an injury if they stray too far from you. If your tot’s idea of fun is playing catch-me-if-you-can on a crowded sidewalk or busy store, she may have to take a seat — in her stroller.

In less crowded areas, like the park, you can always let your toddler lead the way, and even stay a few paces behind. Just make sure she’s close by and within eyesight. All it takes is one second for her to dash off.

Toddler teeth-brushing

Cleaning a few baby teeth was no big deal. But now that your little one is sporting an almost-full set of toddler teeth, your brushing routine is more important than ever.

Start by brushing your tot’s teeth at least twice a day with a smear of fluoride toothpaste the size of a rice grain, ideally for two minutes at a time, after breakfast and in the evening after her evening snack. You can help pass the time by singing a song as you brush, like “Happy Birthday” or the “ABC Song.”

at least twice a day with a smear of fluoride toothpaste the size of a rice grain, ideally for two minutes at a time, after breakfast and in the evening after her evening snack. You can help pass the time by singing a song as you brush, like “Happy Birthday” or the “ABC Song.”

Although you’ll have to be the one wielding the toothbrush at this age — children lack the fine motor skills to go it alone until they’re between the ages of 5 and 8 — you can still teach your toddler the proper technique by having her face a mirror and brushing her teeth with your hand over hers.

Sleeping with a blanket

You have hand-stitched quilts and truck-themed blankets just waiting to be put to use. But does that mean you should put them in your toddler’s crib just yet? Not necessarily.

According to the AAP, there’s no official age at which it’s 100 percent safe to give a toddler a blanket , quilt or comforter. (Babies ages 12 months and under definitely shouldn’t sleep with anything in their crib, since it can pose a SIDS risk.)

, quilt or comforter. (Babies ages 12 months and under

That said, most medical professionals say that after the age of 18 months, the risk of soft bedding poses little danger to a child, so it’s likely okay to introduce a thin blanket or a special stuffed animal to her bedtime routine.

Should you give your toddler juice?

A glass of fruit juice may sound wholesome and nutritious, but all too often, these drinks are loaded with sugar, upping your tot’s risk of tooth decay.

While there’s nothing wrong with an occasional splash of the stuff, experts recommend that toddlers are limited to no more than 4 ounces of juice a day — about half the size of a standard juice box. Stick to 100 percent fruit juice and dilute it with water to lower the amount of sugar your child takes in.