18 Pregnancy Symptoms You Should Never Ignore

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

A woman looking at her phone

Wondering if and when to call your doctor? If in doubt, it's never a bad idea — though there are a few symptoms that always warrant talking to your practitioner.

Some pregnancy symptoms are uncomfortable but normal, while others can signal a serious problem that needs medical attention. Knowing when to call your health care provider and when to call 911 can help you get the care you need quickly.

Early in your pregnancy, talk with your practitioner about which symptoms warrant a call and which require immediate medical attention. Having a plan in place can give you peace of mind — and help you worry a little less when those inevitable "Is this normal?" questions pop up.

Here's how to recognize common pregnancy warning signs and what to do if they happen.

Key Takeaways

Call 911 for emergencies such as heavy bleeding, severe abdominal pain, chest pain, difficulty breathing, fainting, or seizures.

Contact your health care provider about symptoms like severe swelling, persistent headaches, fever, painful urination, decreased fetal movement, or severe nausea and vomiting.

If something doesn't feel right — even if your symptoms aren't on this list — trust your instincts and check in with your practitioner.

When should I call my doctor during pregnancy?

It can be hard to tell what's a normal pregnancy symptom, what warrants a call to your practitioner, and what's a true emergency. Here are the signs that mean it's time to call 911 or reach out to your health care provider.

When to call your health care provider

Here are symptoms you should call your practitioner about, but you may or may not need immediate care:

Sudden and severe swelling or puffiness of the hands, face and eyes Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsPreeclampsia and High Blood Pressure During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Vision disturbances like blurring, dimming, and double vision that persist for more than a few minutes

Severe headache, or a headache that lasts for more than two to three hours

Fainting or dizziness that's more than momentary

Severe nausea and vomiting (i.e., vomiting more often than two or three times a day in the first trimester, or vomiting later in pregnancy when you didn't earlier)

Fever over 101 degrees Fahrenheit

Sudden increase in thirst accompanied by reduced urination, or no urination at all for an entire day

Painful or burning urination

Blood in your urine or feces

Frequent (more than three times a day) diarrhea, especially if it's bloody or mucousy

Sudden and severe itchiness all over

Thoughts of harming yourself or the baby

If you're at least 28 weeks pregnant: Your baby is moving less than usual, or you feel fewer than 10 movements within two hours after having a snack or some fruit juice

Signs of labor , including water breaking and contractions

Here's what to do if you can't get a hold of your health care provider:

Leave a message with them explaining your symptoms.

If you don't get a call back within a few minutes, call again or call the nearest emergency room and tell the triage nurse what's going on.

If the nurse tells you to come in, head to the ER and leave word with your practitioner.

Call 911 if no one can take you to the ER.

Pregnancy comes with lots of questions. Download the What to Expect app for week-by-week updates, expert-backed guidance, and personalized tips — right when you need them most.

When to call 911

These are signs you're having a medical emergency and you should call 911 or go to the emergency room for immediate help: Trusted SourceKaiser PermanenteLearning About When to Call Your Doctor During Pregnancy (After 20 Weeks)See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceKaiser PermanenteLearning About When to Call Your Doctor During Pregnancy (After 20 Weeks)See All Sources

Heavy bleeding that isn't slowing down (i.e., you're soaking through one or more pads in an hour)

Sudden, severe cramping in your belly that doesn't go away

Chest pain or severe shortness of breath

Fainting or seizure

You think you're about to give birth and you can't make it to the hospital

What should I tell the health care provider?

When you talk to your pracitioner or ER nurse, be sure to mention any other symptoms you may be experiencing, no matter how unrelated they may seem to the immediate problem. And try to be specific, mentioning when you first noticed each symptom, how frequently it recurs, what seems to relieve or exacerbate it, and how severe it is.

Your practitioner may want you to call for different reasons or within parameters, so be sure to ask them what protocol you should follow if you experience any of these symptoms.

Keep in mind, too, that there might be some times when you have none of the symptoms listed here, but you feel not quite right. If a good night's sleep and some extra relaxation don't make you feel better, check in with your practitioner. If you ever are in doubt, just get checked out.

Chances are what you're feeling is par for the pregnancy course . But it's also possible that you've become anemic or are fighting an infection of some kind. Certain conditions — UTIs, for example — can do their dirty work without any clear-cut symptoms.