19 Gorgeous Chinese Baby Girl Names That Inspire

Minor copy updates.

chinese baby girl names

These graceful Chinese baby girl names evoke stunning imagery or have delightfully whimsical meanings.

Imagine flower petals blowing in the breeze or the glimmer of a firefly. Many Chinese baby girl names have enchantingly poetic meanings and evoke breathtaking imagery.

Some of these gorgeous names are inspired by nature, while others bestow inspirational character traits like elegance, wisdom, or grace. Whatever your fancy, take your pick from these Chinese baby girl names for your little gal. (And if you're not sure whether you're having a boy or a girl, check out our favorite Chinese baby boy names , too.)

1. Anhe. The word "an" is used to mean “calm and peaceful,” while "he" refers to a “water lily.” Think of a tranquil flower floating on a pond.

2. Baihe. Love lilies? Lily is a popular name in Chinese, too; in Mandarin, it’s Baihe.

3. Enya. This hip and modern Chinese baby girl name means “gracious and charming.” Bonus: it's easy to pronounce in both English and Mandarin.

4. Huanzhu. This ethereal name paints an image of a fantasy bamboo forest. "Huan" means “dreamy,” while "zhu" (pronounced joo) means “bamboo.”

5. Jingzhu. If you love Chinese landscapes, Jingzhu paints a pretty picture for your little girl: It means “peaceful bamboo.”

6. Manni. This easily pronounceable name means “a sweet and romantic girl.”

7. Meijuan. Pronounced may-joo-an, Meijuan is a poetic name. Mei refers to “plum blossoms,” while juan is “a lovely girl.”

8. Meilian. Meilian is a botanical name that celebrates one of the most beloved flowers in China — the “beautiful lotus.” You could also call your little gal Mei (pronounced may) for short, a common character in Chinese names that means beautiful.

9. Meilin. A classically Chinese name meaning “beautiful jade,” this is an elegant choice for your precious little lady.

10. Mengtao. Another name with gorgeous imagery, Mengtao means “elegant peach blossoms in a sunny garden.”

11. Peiling. Hoping for an athletic and determined little girl? "Pei" (pronounced pay) means “strong,” while "ling" means “smart and bright.”

12. Shanhu. If you love the ocean, you’ll get swept away by the baby girl name Shanhu — which is Mandarin for “coral.”

13. Shiyun. Poetic and abstract, "shi" (pronounced shir) means poem, while "yun" is “a cloud.” It’s a great name for a smart girl with lofty ambitions.

14. Yajin. If you’re looking for a strong and dignified name, Yajin is a sure bet: It means “wise and elegant.”

15. Yina. An adorable and minimalist name, Yina simply means “graceful girl.”

16. Yuechan. According to Chinese mythology, if you look closely at the moon, you can make out the shadow of a rabbit and a girl. Literally translated, Yuechan means “moon girl” — an homage to this Chinese legend.

17. Yujia. Yujia evokes “a fine and gentle rain.” A spritely choice for a spring baby!

18. Yuzhen. For your precious little treasure, the baby girl name Yuzhen means just that: “precious jade treasure.”

19. Zhuli. A great choice if you love classic names, Zhuli is pronounced joo-lee and means “pretty pearl.”

Still looking for the perfect baby name? Open the What to Expect app for the top 1,000 names — plus get week-by-week updates on the tiny human you’re naming.

Marina Wang is a freelance journalist living in Calgary, Canada. On her off days, she will gladly eschew all responsibilities to sing songs and dance with her baby niece. Wang has a special interest in science and travel and has written for publications such as Science Magazine , Atlas Obscura , Mental Floss , Canadian Geographic and the CBC. She is second-generation Chinese and a native Mandarin speaker. She holds a Bachelor of Science degree in zoology and a Master's in journalism from Carleton University.