19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

Uncommon baby names for boys and girls

Searching for a unique name that will help your little one stand out? Look no further: Here, some of our favorite uncommon baby names.

When choosing a name for your little one, sometimes you want to eschew tradition and opt for something a little more unique. Whether you prefer an uncommon baby name that has fallen out of favor or a truly new moniker, a rare baby name can give a bit of character to the person who carries it — and also guarantees your child will be the only one in her class with that name.

Here, some of our favorite uncommon names to choose from, all of which were not among the top 1,000 baby names according to the most recent Social Security Administration data from 2020 or later. Trusted SourceSocial Security AdministrationTop 10 Baby Names of 2024See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceSocial Security AdministrationTop 10 Baby Names of 2024See All Sources

Uncommon boy names

Crispin: Crispin means “curly haired” in Latin, and the name carries with it a saint (of shoemaking) along with a Harry Potter character.

Eames : This surname also makes a unique first name. There's also a design connection to the Eames Chair, popular in mid-century design.

Gable: Channeling Clark Gable, this name is French and references a “triangular feature in architecture.” With the recent rise of Old Hollywood-esque names, this one should be on your radar.

Poe: Poe means “peacock” and is the name of Oscar Isaac’s Star Wars character. It also has a literary reference to, of course, Edgar Allen Poe.

Rafferty: Of Irish origin meaning “floodtide, abundance, and prosperity,” this name was used by Jude Law for his son and has cute nickname possibilities, including Raff.

Sebbe: The Swedish variation of Sebastian, this name can stand alone or work as a nickname.

York: This one-syllable English name would also make for a great middle name.

Uncommon girl names

Ailsa: Very pretty-sounding, Ailsa is a Scottish name meaning “elf victory.”

Bee: The nursery theme picks itself. The name, which could be a nickname for Beatrice, means “she who brings happiness.”

Clove: The name of the spice brings to mind warmth and goodness, making this a great name choice.

Dot: A nickname for Dorothy, it means “gift from God,” and would also be a great middle or nickname option.

Lilo: Hawaiian and German by origin, it means “generous one” and was put on the radar by Disney’s Lilo and Stitch.

Reverie: Another name for a daydream or being in a dreamlike state, this word-turned-name is both feminine and dreamy.

Vita: Vita means “life” in Latin, and the name is lively in and of itself — perfect for a little one.

Xiamara: The name is pronounced “zee-oh-mara,” and means “joyful deer.” An X name would definitely help your little girl stand out.

Uncommon unisex names

Dublin: In general, place names are both uncommon and unisex. Dublin would be a great name for a baby with Irish ties.

Ellington: Bringing to mind jazz and Duke Ellington, this lively name could be shortened to Ellie.

Hodge: A variation of Hodgson, this name has a direct, singular sound and would also make for a great middle name.

Morocco: Both exotic and familiar, Morocco is a beautiful name for a little one. (Mike Tyson used it for his son.)

Weird places to find uncommon name inspiration

Still searching for your perfect unusual name? There are loads of places to turn to when you need a little inspiration. Here are seven unconventional places to look for rare baby names.

1. Movie/TV credits. Scroll past the big names and check out the first — and last! — names of the lighting people, the assistants, gaffers, etc.

2. Famous people's middle names. Rather steer clear of super popular celeb baby names because, despite being adorable and cool, so many people have gone that route already? Consider celebrity middle names. Kourtney Kardashian's son Mason Disick's middle name is Dash, which, some may say, is even better than his first.

3. Cities/towns/streets. Major cities like London, Paris, and Florence aside, get out a map and do a little snooping around. There are tons of small towns and cities you've never heard of — here and abroad. And if you really want to get into the nitty-gritty, check out street names (especially abroad). If you're pregnant and find yourself strolling around a new place on foot, it's almost impossible not to think of a baby name at each intersection.

4. Nature. Of course there are the flower names we all know and love, but get creative. Bust out a botanical dictionary and see if anything strikes your fancy. Who knows what you'll come up with after taking a gander.

5. Fairytales and other fiction books. We're not talking main characters here (see movies and TV credits), but there so many cool secondary, tertiary, and beyond characters with fantastic names, or names that may inspire something else. Even if you've read every book in your house cover-to-cover, that bookcase isn't just for show, you know. Get crackin'!

6. Cemeteries. Okay, so while it might be a little weird to take a leisurely stroll through a graveyard with a pen and paper, if you happen to be in a cemetery, a name may jump out at you.

7. Census records. Looking through old census records , you'll find a goldmine of gorgeous names. It's literally a list of names from years past. What more could an expecting mama who's stumped on what to name her baby want?

Still searching for the perfect baby name? Open the What to Expect app for even more name ideas for your little one, plus tips from parents who have navigated this big decision too.

Sources

Top 10 Baby Names of 2024

Show in the article