19 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a mango.

With 19 weeks down, you're entering pregnancy month 5.

Get ready for some exciting pregnancy milestones, like feeling baby's first kicks if you haven't already and the 20-week ultrasound where you'll get to meet your baby up close.

Your Baby at Week 19

At a Glance

Skin coating

Your baby's sensitive skin is now covered in vernix caseosa, a greasy, white, cheese-like coating that protects his skin from being wrinkled at birth.

Just breathe

Your baby's lungs are developing, with the main airways (called bronchioles) beginning to form this week.

Feel that kick?

You may be able to feel baby move for the first time this week, but don't panic if you don't. You will soon!

19 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 19 weeks pregnant, you're in month 5 of your pregnancy. Only 4 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 19 weeks?

Six inches long this week and just over a half pound in weight, your baby has gone through a bit of a growth spurt.

Vernix develops

Your little one may have a cheesy varnish this week.

Say what? You read that right — a protective substance called vernix caseosa (vernix is the Latin word for "varnish"; caseosa means "cheese") now covers your fetus' skin. It's greasy, white, and made up of that downy hair known as lanugo, oil from your baby's glands and dead skin cells.

This waxy "cheese" may not sound too appealing, but it's there for good reason: Vernix protects your baby's sensitive skin from the surrounding amniotic fluid. Without it, he'd look very wrinkled at birth — sort of what you'd look like if you soaked in a bath for nine months.

The vernix sheds as delivery approaches, though some babies — especially those born early — will still be covered with it at birth, so you might get a look at your baby's first anti-wrinkle cream.

Your Body at Week 19

Leg cramps

There's nothing like getting into bed at the end of a long, exhausting day — especially when you're pregnant. Aching for a good night's sleep — literally, if your back's been acting up again — you throw back the covers and prepare to happily drift into dreamland.

But if you're like many expecting moms, something may be keeping you awake tonight — besides what color to paint the nursery: leg cramps .

These painful spasms that radiate up and down your calves are very common during the second and third trimesters. While these cramps can occur during the day, you'll notice them — oh, baby, will you notice them! — more at night.

No one knows for sure what causes them, though there are plausible theories aplenty. It could be that your leg muscles are just fatigued from carrying around all the extra weight of pregnancy. Or that the vessels that carry blood to and from your legs are compressed by your growing uterus at 19 weeks pregnant.

There's also speculation that it may be somehow related to diet or not being fully hydrated, though this hunch hasn't been substantiated by studies.

Whatever the cause, you'll need a quick fix when a leg cramp does strike — especially when it's standing (or lying) between you and a good night's sleep. So here's one for you: Straighten your leg and gently flex your ankle and toes back toward your shins.

Feeling baby's kicks

Your sister said baby kicked by this point in pregnancy — and so did your best friend — but so far, you haven't felt a thing. Except those gas bubbles this morning … those were gas, weren't they?

Maybe, maybe not. Those first tiny kicks can be felt many different ways — generally starting between week 18 and week 22, though it can be a week or two later if this is your first pregnancy.

Sometimes you might feel like something is swimming inside you (which it is!), while other times those first fetal movements may feel more like butterflies in your tummy.

Once your baby grows bigger, you'll be able to easily tell what those little kicks feel like, so there won't be any mistaking them for something else. Learn more about fetal movement during pregnancy .

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 19

Backaches

As your uterus grows, you may find your center of gravity shifting forward, putting extra pressure on your lower back. Avoid straining your back further by letting others lift heavy loads for you. If you absolutely must lift something, stabilize yourself by assuming a wide stance, bend at the knees, not at the waist, and slowly lift with your arms and legs, not your back.

Constipation

If you can’t seem to get regular, take a look at your supplements and medications: Some of them, such as iron, can make constipation worse. Ask your practitioner to help you come up with some alternatives until your digestive system gets back on track.

Increased appetite

Having a hard time staying away from the fridge (and cupboards and pantry)? Keep tempting junk foods out of the house and instead fill your kitchen with nutritious goodies — but do occasionally allow yourself to indulge in some treats so that you don’t end up bingeing on them later on.

Stuffy nose

Is the swelling in your nasal passages making it hard for you to breathe? Here’s how to blow your nose without damaging nasal membranes and causing a nosebleed: Use your thumb to close one nostril and blow gently out the other side.

Faintness or dizziness

Your growing uterus may put pressure on your blood vessels — among other parts of your body — reducing blood flow to your brain and causing you to feel light-headed. Even though dizziness is common, don’t ignore it — take it easy and sit or lie down as soon as you start to feel woozy so that you don’t hurt yourself or the baby.

Stretch marks

It's estimated that about 90% of women develop stretch marks during pregnancy, so you’re not alone. While there is no proven cure, moisturizers such as cocoa butter can help ease the dryness and itching associated with stretched skin.

Tips for You This Week

Plump up your pillows

You may not have snored in the past, but now that you're pregnant, those nighttime sounds may have kicked up and could be getting in the way of a good night's sleep.

Usually, snoring during pregnancy is more annoying than serious (it's typically because of an uptick in nasal congestion, which can start around week 16), but occasionally, it can be caused by a chronic condition called obstructive sleep apnea . Ask your health care provider about it, and get tips on what to do for relief.

Do some hand stretches

If you work at a computer all day, now’s a good time to start taking some hand-stretching breaks. Carpal tunnel synrome — an uncomfortable burning or numbness in the wrists, hands, and fingers — can set in as early as the first trimester.

If you work at a computer all day, now’s a good time to start taking some hand-stretching breaks.

— an uncomfortable burning or numbness in the wrists, hands, and fingers — can set in as early as the first trimester.

You may also want to consider buying an ergonomic keyboard, which can help reduce the strain on your wrists, or invest in a wrist brace.

Ask about yeast infections

With so much going on down there already, the last thing you need is an itchy yeast infection when you're pregnant . Unfortunately, you're especially likely to get them during pregnancy, thanks in part to higher estrogen levels that cause an overgrowth of yeast.

. Unfortunately, you're especially likely to get them during pregnancy, thanks in part to higher estrogen levels that cause an overgrowth of yeast.

Yeast infections can be harder to control when you’re expecting (though not impossible!). Talk to your doctor about the best treatment.

Indulge in healthy cravings

What should you do when pregnancy cravings strike? That depends. Try to limit them if they're sending you to a box of glazed donuts or a bag of potato chips every time they come on (though it’s just fine to indulge here and there).

strike? That depends. Try to limit them if they're sending you to a box of glazed donuts or a bag of potato chips every time they come on (though it’s just fine to indulge here and there).

For a healthier alternative, try eating cereal topped with fresh fruit and a drizzle of honey, or dive into a bag of soy crisps, some of which are packed with protein. Vary things a bit if you can, but don't worry if your taste buds won't take the bait.

If your cravings are for foods to steer clear of when you’re expecting — like unpasteurized soft cheese or sashimi — sub something that comes as close as possible to the object of your affections, like pasteurized feta and teriyaki salmon.

of when you’re expecting — like unpasteurized soft cheese or sashimi — sub something that comes as close as possible to the object of your affections, like pasteurized feta and teriyaki salmon.

If you find yourself wanting to eat substances that aren't food, like clay, ashes, or laundry starch, contact your practitioner. Such cravings could indicate a condition called pica , which is triggered by a nutritional deficiency.

Strike a pose

Prenatal yoga is the perfect pregnancy exercise.

Not only can a yoga routine help you feel more relaxed and prepared for birth, but a once-a-week prenatal yoga session, when done for at least two months, is enough to reduce the risk of anxiety and depression. That, in turn, can lower the risk of premature birth and postpartum blues.

Just be sure you’re taking a class specifically designed for pregnant women or working with an instructor who’s certified to teach prenatal yoga.

Pamper yourself with a mani/pedi

Relax — it's perfectly safe to get a manicure or a pedicure during pregnancy . Take advantage now before baby’s arrival makes it trickier. A bonus? Pregnancy hormones can make your nails grow faster and stronger.

. Take advantage now before baby’s arrival makes it trickier. A bonus? Pregnancy hormones can make your

As for acrylics, there's no proof that the chemicals are harmful to you or your fetus, but to be absolutely safe, you might want to forgo those tips until your baby arrives.

Non-toxic and water-based ingredients in polish might also be a good idea, as is a well-ventilated salon (this is true whether you're pregnant or not).

If your hormones didn't get the memo and you find that your nails have become weak or brittle, try a clear nail hardener and reapply often (plus make sure you're getting enough calcium).

Keep things moving

Eight to 10 full glasses of fluids — water, vegetable or fruit juice, broth — each day will help keep solids moving through your digestive tract at an impressive rate and keep your stool soft and easier to pass.

— water, vegetable or fruit juice, broth — each day will help keep solids moving through your digestive tract at an impressive rate and keep your stool soft and easier to pass.

Prune juice is tops in the category since it's a mild laxative. Try to drink some when you're really clogged, and if you have trouble taking it straight, blend it with other fruits and juices into a smoothie.

Just don’t go overboard and talk to your doctor or midwife if you need some guidance.

Another time-honored way to get things moving: Turn to warm liquids including that health-spa staple, hot water and lemon. They can help stimulate peristalsis, those intestinal contractions that help you go.