Your 2-Year-Old's Developmental Milestones

2-year-old developmental milestones

With all the amazing developmental milestones your child is meeting, age 2 is much more terrific than terrible. Get ready for some exciting physical, emotional and cognitive achievements!

Break out those pointy hats and cupcakes — it’s party time! As your child approaches his second birthday, think about all the 2-year-old milestones he’s met this year, from walking to toddling to running like the wind (plus subtler new skills like pointing and pretending). Pretty amazing, right?

Your tot’s 2-year-old development achievements are sure signs of his growing strength, independence and understanding. Here, the milestones your 2-year-old will likely be mastering by his second birthday.

Here, the milestones your 2-year-old will likely be mastering by his second birthday.

Developmental milestones for 2-year-olds

Age 2 movement milestones

Physically, your child is growing by leaps and bounds — and fittingly, he’ll experience his fair share of few bumps and bruises as he tests the limits of his new-found strength and coordination.

Walks. While many 12-month-olds are ready to take a few steps with help, by 18 months, your toddler be walking more confidently and likely on his own.

Walks up stairs. He’ll still need supervision — and he may want to hold your hand — but expect him to start navigating all kinds of steps. By 18 months, he might walk up steps with some help, and by the 2-year mark, most toddlers can walk up and down stairs while holding on to a railing.

Pushes and pulls toys. Around 18 months, your playtime pal will be a pro with his trucks, wagon and buckets, tugging them along and emptying them out all over the room.

Uses cups and spoons. By 18 months, most little ones are able to eat with a spoon and drink from a cup (though your toddler may not relinquish his sippy cup easily!).

Undresses. Most toddlers will start to help undress themselves by 18 months and remove an article of clothing by 20 to 22 months, an accomplishment that showcases your toddler’s growing independence.

Runs and kicks. These exciting gross motor skills tend to develop between 18 and 24 months. By his second birthday, your tot will likely be running and kicking .

Climbs on furniture. Scaling furniture is a milestone that toddlers adore and parents fear. Be sure to secure your TV cabinet, dressers and any other pieces of furniture that might tip over to the wall. Then, watch your child like a hawk.

Jumps. Yup — he’s learning to launch himself into the air, and will show off his skills by leaping and jumping around age 2.

Age 2 cognitive milestones

Your toddler’s reasoning, learning and problem-solving skills are better developed now, so watch your budding Einstein for the following intellectual advances.

Points. Your child started pointing at things he was interested in around 9 months, but by the 18-month mark, he'll be pointing more and more, such as to get the attention of others and pointing to a part of his body.

Imitates behavior. Around 18 months, your toddler may pick up your smartphone or try to feed his stuffed lion, which means he’s watching and mimicking everyday tasks. You'll also likely notice him starting to play simple pretend games around his second birthday, an exciting step as he embarks on more imaginative play.

Follows commands. Your toddler is absorbing everything he hears, and he'll gradually understand directions and follow commands . By 18 months, he'll follow simple one-step commands ("Pick up your teddy"); by his second birthday, he'll follow two-step directions ("Pick up your shoes and put them in the basket").

Builds block towers. A budding engineer, your 2-year-old will be able to erect a castle made of four or more blocks.

Completes rhymes and stories. Got a favorite book? If so, your toddler might know all the words and even finish the lines before you get to them. At this age, tots start to name things on the pages they see (cat, ball, bird).

Demonstrates increased memory. Your toddler can now find things hidden under two blankets and an upturned box. And he’ll remember more of the people and places he encounters and the events he experiences — and tell you about them later.

Begins to sort shapes and colors. Blue goes in the round hole and the red shape fits in the slot. Your toddler is starting to gauge size and shape, and is learning the names of colors, too.

Age 2 language and communication milestones

Oh, the questions you’ll hear! And those adorable long “conversations,” just when you want to tuck your tot into bed. Your child’s language and communication milestones are exploding.

Says several words. One word was exciting (especially since the first one was probably "Mama" or "Dada"), but you'll surely be thrilled to hear your toddler's vocabulary expand. Most 18-month-olds can say several words, while most 2-year-olds have around 50 words and two- to four-word sentences.

Shakes head “no.” Is there any milestone more admired and dreaded than this one? Yes, it’s great that your child understands you, not so much when he’s refusing his dinner. You'll start to notice this behavior around 18 months.

Tries to imitate words. "Apple" may come out as "waba," but at least he’s trying! Look for a change in tone at this age too, with inflection that goes up or down.

Repeats overheard words. Time to watch what you say — 2-year-olds are rather good at mimicking what they hear in an adult conversation.

Knows people’s names and body parts. Familiar names and parts of the body (ear, nose, toes) should roll off your toddler’s tongue.

On the emotional horizon: tantrums, tears and triumphs galore. Here’s what you can expect from your 2-year-old, socially and emotionally.

Has temper tantrums. Meltdowns are a fact of life in the toddler years, and you may start witnessing your child's first temper tantrums around 18 months.

Prefers certain people and toys. Your toddler only wants you to help him with his jacket or give him a snack — grandparents just won’t do. Around this age, he'll also show more affection to familiar people.

Tests your responses. You'll start noticing more defiant behavior as your toddler approaches age 2. He wonders what you’ll do if he throws a toy across the room, especially if you've already told him not to — and he’s eager to see your reaction.

Shows some independence. You’ll hear a lot of “Me do it!” as your toddler strives to snap his pants and feed himself spaghetti.

Enjoys parallel playing — and chasing. Your toddler is now shifting away from parallel play to associative play — instead of ignoring his playmates, he begins to share stuff with them in a loosely organized way. Favorite games at this age: chasing!

Starts to play with others. You can expect a lot of excitement at playtime now that he can identify his friends by name. He may also may be more inclined (or even eager) to interact with them in a music class or playgroup.

When to talk to your doctor about your 2-year-old’s development

While every child develops at his own pace, some physical, cognitive and language delays may warrant a call to your child’s pediatrician. Here are a few to watch out for around the 2-year mark:

Doesn’t know how to use common objects like a spoon, fork, comb or phone

Doesn’t copy actions or words

Can’t follow simple instructions

Doesn’t form two-word phrases, like “up please”

Walks unsteadily

Loses skills he once mastered

The toddler years are full of major physical accomplishments, cognitive leaps and language milestones — so enjoy them!

More good news: In the coming year, there’ll be even more developmental achievements on the horizon — from physical feats like pedaling a tricycle, to language skills like carrying on a conversation — to make a parent’s heart burst with pride.

Frequently Asked Questions

What should a 2 year old be doing developmentally?

A 2-year-old may be walking confidently (and up and down stairs without help), running, kicking, jumping, climbing on furniture, pushing and pulling toys, using cups and spoons, and undressing on her own. She can probably follow two-step directions, sort shapes and colors, and start to play with friends.

Can a 2 year old talk?

Yes, 2-year-olds can talk. They'll know familiar names and parts of the body (ear, nose, toes), and be able to repeat words they hear. Most 18-month-olds can say several words, while most 2-year-olds have around 50 words.

What should a 2 year old toddler be learning?

The toddler years are full of major physical accomplishments, cognitive leaps and language milestones. While every child develops at his own pace, call your child's pediatrician if he:

Doesn't know how to use common objects like a spoon, fork, comb or phone

Doesn't copy actions or words

Can't follow simple instructions

Doesn't form two-word phrases, like "up please"

Walks unsteadily

Loses skills he once mastered

How many words should a 2 year old say?

A 2-year-old can usually say around 50 words, and speak using two- to four-word sentences.