20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning

Minor copy updates.

baby boy with Arabic names

In search of a bold-sounding baby boy name with a powerful meaning? Let these Arabic baby boy names inspire you.

Arabic culture strongly believes that each name has a bearing on the character of its holder, which helps explains why almost every Arab name has a deep and often positive meaning.

If you’re looking for a bold and beautiful name for your little bundle of joy, try on the following Arabic baby boy names for size. (And if you're not sure whether you're having a boy or a girl, check out our favorite Arabic baby girl names , too.)

1. Ali. This is one of the most common and timeless baby boy names in all Arab-speaking countries. Pronounced al-lee, the word ali literally means “high” or “elevated” — while the name itself means “noble, dignified, esteemed, well-respected.” Although it’s a strictly male name in the Arab world, Ali is a gender-neutral name in the U.S.

2. Amir. Meaning “prince,” Amir is a very common Arabic name that’s also widespread in the Hebrew and Persian languages — where it means “rich” or “prosperous.” Other Arabic meanings include “commander,” “chief,” and “powerful leader.”

3. Eisa. The Arabic version of Jesus, this name remains very a top pick among Arab Muslims and Christians alike. In the Arabic language, the word "eisa," pronounced ee-sa, comes from the word "eise," meaning “a white camel with some blond hair.” You can also spell your little guy’s name Issa or Eissa.

4. Faris. Meaning “knight,” this beautiful and prestigious name (pronounced fa-res), is gaining popularity among Arabs. Faris can also mean “warrior” and is used to refer to someone who is well-versed, knowledgeable and highly experienced — promising a bright future on your little man.

5. Hamza. Don’t be fooled by how adorable this name sounds: It actually means “strong, unwavering.” No wonder, then, that the popularity of Hamza (also spelled Hamzah) is on the rise.

6. Hazem. From the word "hazm," meaning “seriousness,” Hazem translates as “strict, decisive, strong-willed.” Despite its serious meaning, the name has a variety of playful nicknames, including Mizo, Zooma, and Zoomy.

7. Ibrahim. In Arabic, this name means “the merciful father” — the Arabic alternative of Abraham. You’ll find the name Ibrahim across the Arab world; Hima is its sweet and well-loved nickname.

8. Ismail. Often associated with hope and yearning, Ismail, pronounced es-ma-eil, literally translates to “God will listen.” And for good reason: The story behind this name dates back to Ibrahim (a prophet in the Islamic religion), who with his wife, Sarah, longed for a baby and prayed for years before they were given their son Ismail.

9. Karim. Derived from the word "karam," meaning “generosity,” Karim (also spelled Kareem) means “generous, noble, virtuous.” Since the spirit of giving and generosity are core values of many Arabic cultures, the name is widely adored among Arab parents.

10. Mourad. Meaning “the desired,” “wanted,” or “wished,” it’s no wonder this super trendy name has long been a favorite of parents across the Arab world.

11. Nadeem. While the word literally translates to “regretful,” this name actually means “close friend, companion, tactful, courteous.” The perfect name for your future bestie.

12. Nour. Choose this moniker if you’re looking for a gender-neutral name that works equally well for both baby boys and girls. Nour means “light” or “luminescence” — a timeless and short-and-sweet choice.

13. Omar. Originally derived from the word "omor," meaning “time,” “age,” or “life,” Omar means “someone who enjoys a long life.” Throughout the years, it’s been the choice of many Arab families who hope their little ones live long and blessed lives.

14. Ramy. This popular Arabic name, pronounced ra-me, has different meanings. It can mean “skilled at archery,” “determined,” or “pitcher.” The latter meaning is a home run if baseballers run in your family.

15. Selim. Pronounced and alternately spelled Saleem, this trendy baby boy name means “safe, sound, and in good health.” Its meaning extends to a profound aspect beyond physical safety: having an intact heart and intentions.

16. Yaseen. This classic name continues to be a parental favorite today. Its exact meaning isn’t known: In fact, it’s mentioned in the Muslim’s holy book of Quran as one of several combinations of letters with a meaning that only God knows.

17. Yunus. Also spelled (and pronounced) Younes, this gracious baby boy name is the Arabic form of Jonah. It’s derived from the Arabic verb "yu’nes," meaning “to keep someone company.”

18. Yusuf. The Arabic version of Joseph, this baby boy name (which is pronounced and also spelled as Yousef) means “to receive multiplication of blessings by God.” Just like Joseph, the most common nickname for Yusuf is, you guessed it, Joe.

19. Zain. This light and lovely name for your little guy means “beautiful, graceful.” When combined with another name, Zain means “best of.” The feminine form of the name is Zainah, making Zain (also spelled Zane or Zayn) a common gender-neutral name in Arabic countries including Saudi Arabia.

20. Ziyad. A beautiful and popular baby boy name that means “abundance, extra, increase,” Ziyad (pronounced zee-yad) has a number of cool nicknames, including Zee, Zizo, and Zed. Arab families often opt for this name as a token of growth, goodness, and abundance of health and wealth for their newborn boys.

A beautiful and popular baby boy name that means “abundance, extra, increase,” Ziyad (pronounced zee-yad) has a number of cool nicknames, including Zee, Zizo, and Zed. Arab families often opt for this name as a token of growth, goodness, and abundance of health and wealth for their newborn boys.

Still looking for a baby name? Open the What to Expect for more ideas — plus get week-by-week updates on the tiny human you’re naming.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Omnia Gohar is a freelance writer, science journalist and full-time creative Arabic copywriter based in Alexandria, Egypt. Gohar double majored in industrial microbiology and applied chemistry, but her love for writing, storytelling and communication has put her on her current career path. She continues to pursue her passion for science through a master's in biotechnology.