20 Beautiful Fall Baby Names for Your Little Pumpkin

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

mom holding baby with fall colors in background, fall baby names

These colorful autumn baby names are ideal if your little one is arriving in the fall.

Whether you're expecting your bundle to arrive this fall, hoping to get pregnant once the leaves change, or simply love the season, you're looking for autumn baby name inspiration. These fall names for baby boys and girls capture the senses and traditions of the season.

Ash. This sweet and simple name for a baby boy or girl has Hebrew and English origins and conjures images of the white ash tree, which turns a stunning blend of yellows, oranges, and reds in the fall.

Annona. Also spelled “Anona,” this Latin name means “honor” or "of the harvest" and is the name of the Roman goddess of the harvest … perfect for your fall baby girl.

Autumn. It's an obvious one, but clearly fitting for a fall baby girl; it's currently in the top 100 names for girls .

Bartlet. A variation of Barlett that's inspired by the pear in season in the fall, this English baby boy name is a form of the Hebrew name Bartholomew, which means "son of Talmai" or "son of the Earth" and was one of the Twelve Apostles. Cute nickname: Bart!

Birch. This rare English baby boy's name, after the tree, also means “white, shining.” The state tree of New Hampshire, the birch tree's rich wood is used for high-quality furniture, paper, and drums; its leaves become a spectacular bright yellow in autumn.

Ceres. The Roman goddess of agriculture and the fall harvest, this pretty Latin baby girl name is also a spirit in Shakespeare's play The Tempest. Fun fact: Ceres is a dwarf planet and the biggest object in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter.

Cormac. An Irish name meaning “raven's son,” this is a bird you'll often see hunting the corn fields in fall. It was the name of a revered third-century king of Ireland — and of talented writer Cormac McCarthy.

Gaia. Also spelled “Gaea,” this baby girl name is Greek for “planet Earth,” after the earth goddess. Actress Emma Thompson gave it to her baby girl, but it's still a relatively rare name today. It recalls the fall harvest, perfect for eco-minded families.

Hunter. This unisex baby name , the sport of the fall season, has long been popular for boys. It's also grown popular as a baby girl name in recent years.

Leif. It may remind you of leaves falling from trees, but Leif is actually a Scandinavian boy's name meaning "beloved" or "heir."

Find more baby name ideas you'll love in the What to Expect app .

Maple. Super popular in the early to middle 20th century, this tree-inspired baby girl name fits right in with all the Junipers, Oaks, and Pines these days — and has seen its own resurgence over the past few years.

Orla. Meaning “golden princess,” this baby girl name glows like autumn foliage. It was the name of an Irish king's daughter and sister in the Middle Ages, making it popular in the 12th century. It's come back into favor today among both the Irish and the Scots.

Pomona. Latin for “apple,” the fruit of the season, this baby girl name is the Roman goddess of fruit trees and a small town in Southern California.

Raven. This unisex name is also an intelligent black bird that scavenges the fall harvest and is revered as a spiritual figure in some cultures. It's the name of Jennifer Lawrence's character in the X-Men films and has been growing in popularity for baby girls.

Roux. An original French name for boys and girls, Roux literally translates to “redhead” or “red,” like those fiery leaves outside.

Rye. This grain used in cereal and whiskey calls to mind fall harvest. It's an English boy's name short for Richard or Ryder; in Gypsy, it means “gentleman.”

Scarlett. This vibrant English name for a baby girl , which means "red or scarlet," like fall leaves, has seen a resurgence in popularity in recent years thanks to actress Scarlett Johansson, though the name harks back to Gone With the Wind 's Scarlett O'Hara.

Sienna. Inspired by the colors of fall leaves and the Italian city, this name means "reddish brown" — a beautiful choice for a baby girl born as the leaves change. Actress Sienna Miller has helped popularize this baby girl's name.

Sorrell. Foodies will love this French baby name for a boy or girl, meaning “reddish brown" and a variant of "Sorrel," since it's also a perennial herb that's often added to soups, sauces, and salads.

Willow. This romantic baby girl name, after the tree, became more popular after Will Smith and Jada Pinkett Smith chose it for their daughter. Willows have appeared in a lot of literature, from the Harry Potter series to Shakespeare, as a plant possessing magical powers.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Ceres , 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. , July 2025.

Updates history

September 29, 2025

Editors: Colleen de Bellefonds/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,922 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

11 Fall Pregnancy Announcements That Are Pure Autumnal Bliss Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Gorgeous Chinese Baby Girl Names That Inspire Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

13 Fabulous Fall Maternity Photos to Honor a New Season of Your Life Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Throw a Fall-Themed Baby Shower for Your Little Pumpkin Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Halloween Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your New Boo Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window