How to Throw a Fall-Themed Baby Shower for Your Little Pumpkin

Minor copy changes.

fall baby shower ideas

Bring on the cider donuts and hay bales for an autumnal baby bash.

Do you have a little pumpkin on the way? A party is in order! Celebrate an autumnal due date with some Instagram-worthy baby shower ideas that'll mark this monumental moment in style.

"Fall is such a charming season that can lend itself to inspiring every one of your baby shower ideas , from the theme and color palette to the food and location," says party planning pro, DIY enthusiast and mom of three Jessica Grant of JessicaEtc.com . "Picture warm, earthy tones, comfort foods, pumpkin- or apple-spiced treats, and the beauty of a wooded or cozy cabin setting, and use those ideas as inspiration for guiding all of your party-planning picks."

Read on for all the best fall baby shower ideas and Grant's expert advice, from when to have a baby shower to avoid busy, back-to-school schedules to the cutest fall baby shower food ideas and everything in between.

Fall baby shower invitations

For baby shower invitations that stand out from the crowd, Grant says there are a few key things to keep in mind.

Choose your date wisely

fall baby shower invitation

"This time of year can be busy as families head back-to-school — weekends are full of fall events, and it marks the beginning of the holiday season," reminds Grant. "Keeping this in mind, I would aim to schedule your fall baby shower from mid-September to early October or in early November."

You could also consider hosting a baby shower the weekend of Halloween, and lean into a holiday-themed invite for your little "boo." (Check out these great pregnant Halloween costmes to show off your bump.) If you need to push it later than mid-November, hold off and plan a winter baby shower instead.

Send invites six to eight weeks in advance

halloween baby shower invitation

"Whatever date you choose, I would suggest sending invitations six to eight weeks in advance so that your guests have plenty of time to plan," says Grant. You can send invites through the mail or text a digital copy of it to friends — getting the timing right matters more than the delivery method.

Pick a theme — and commit to it!

pumpkin baby shower invitation

"I always like to think of the invitation as the first impression your guests will have of your baby shower," Grant says. "Beyond telling them the 'when' and 'where', you can also use the invitation to debut your theme!"

When it comes to creating a baby shower theme , start by choosing a seasonally-inspired color palette of two or three hues (such as orange, black and tan), then selecting a fall-themed tagline (like "a little boo") and related image (such as a pumpkin, hay bales or leaves), and incorporating them into your invite design.

Fall baby shower decoration ideas

From balloon displays to pumpkin accents, decorating is the easiest way to bring your fall baby shower theme to life.

Establish a focal point with hay bales

hay bale and pumpkin decorations at a fall baby shower

A few hay bales can make a big visual statement. "Creating a focal point will convey your theme and elevate your gathering," says Grant. "It anchors the party and ties together all of the smaller details."

Add statement-worthy balloons

fall baby shower balloon garland in blue and orange

"For major visual impact, consider decorating with a balloon garland in your color scheme," says Grant. Stick to just two or three colors, and use a mixture of larger and smaller balloons to create a layered effect.

Set up a "seat of honor" for mom-to-be

baby shower chair for mom

Have a designated spot for the guest of honor to perch while playing shower games or opening presents. It'll keep her comfortable while still looking chic, since it doubles as a picture-perfect backdrop for photo ops.

Create a fall-themed centerpiece

fall baby shower tablescape

"Consider fall floral centerpieces or a styled table runner accented with pumpkins and foliage to elevate your tablescape," says Grant. Even if you don’t go all out with your other fall baby shower decorations, a simple centerpiece will elevate the look and feel of your space immensely.

Incorporate natural accents

fall baby shower photo back drop with balloons and natural accents

Adding organic elements throughout your decor will give your fall baby shower decor the finishing touch it needs! Opt for dried flowers, leaves and grasses in neutral hues — like these dried hydrangeas and palm fronds — and weave them into balloon garlands, place settings and buffets. You can also incorporate your baby's birth flowers , which might be marigolds or chrysanthemums depending on your due date.

Fall baby shower food ideas

From a fabulous cake to savory snacks, serving the right baby shower food will take your party from sweet to sensational in no time.

Create a fall-themed cookie display

fall baby shower cookies

You can decorate or order sugar cookies in just about any shape, style or design to fit your fall baby shower theme. You can even get your party's tagline or your baby's name iced on them. (Still deciding? Don't miss these fall baby names for some extra inspiration.)

Go all in with pumpkin-themed foods

fall baby shower cupcakes

"Create a memorable fall baby shower by referring to your theme often," Grant says. "For example, a 'little pumpkin' theme can feature mini pumpkin place card holders, creamy pumpkin soup, pumpkin-flavored cupcakes and a spiced pumpkin punch signature drink."

Arrange a hay bale cupcake station

fall baby shower cupcake station with hay bales and pumpkins

Cupcakes are always tantalizing treats, but when served atop small tiers of mini hay bales, they become even more appealing by doubling as striking decor.

Serve fall-flavored donuts on a pegboard

fall baby shower donut pegboard

When it comes to your buffet station, more is more! Layering tons of multi-hued pumpkins and hay bales below (plus placing a charming banner above) will make your food station drool-worthy. A pegboard stocked with fall-inspired donuts is a nice touch, too.

Treat yourself to an over-the-top cake

fall baby shower cake

If you don't have the budget or energy to go all out with balloons and other decor, turn your baby shower cake into the party's focal point instead. Make it one to remember by going for multiple tiers with lots of fall-themed accents, like fondant pumpkins and lettering — even the leaves on this cake are edible, since they're made out of rice paper!

Fall baby shower game and favor ideas

Put the finishing touches on your fall baby shower by incorporating some creative baby shower games and memorable baby shower favors .

Set up a "well wishes" tree

baby shower well wishes tree

"Encourage each guest to write their well wishes for the baby on a paper leaf, and hang them all on a decorative branch," says Grant. Not only is it a nice, mini activity for guests to participate in during your shower, but you can also use it as sentimental decor for your nursery too.

Host a blindfolded diaper challenge

baby shower game blindfolded diaper change relay race

"Plan a combination of passive activities and group games, which can help make a baby shower more engaging and enjoyable," says Grant. A silly challenge, like changing diapers on dolls blindfolded, will get guests out of their seats and interacting with one another.

Play trivia games that spark conversation

baby shower trivia game

Choose printable baby shower games that complement your theme. "A group trivia game based on questions about the parents or even general baby knowledge is a fun conversation starter," Grant says. "Guests can choose to play throughout the baby shower before everyone comes together for the answers to be revealed."

Make gift time more fun for all

baby shower bingo game

Before present time, ask party-goers to write down gifts they think the mom-to-be will receive in each square of a printable bingo card. As she opens each item, guests can mark off their boards and have a more interactive experience. The first player to get five in a row wins!

Be prepared with prizes for game winners

baby shower favor personalized wine bottle

"Don't forget a small prize for baby shower game winners, like a bottle of wine," Grant says. It's a small gesture that makes participating a lot more fun for guests.

Say "thanks" with a fall-themed party favor

pumpkin shaped candles - baby shower favors

"Kindly thank your guests for attending your baby shower with a cute fall favor such as a small jar of preserves or syrup, satchels of fall-scented potpourri, or small pumpkins or pumpkin-shaped candles," Grant suggests.

WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a Baby Shower , December 2023. WhatToExpect.com, A Complete Guide to Baby Shower Etiquette , November 2023. Jessica Grant, Parenting & Party-Planning Expert, JessicaEtc.com .

Updates history

April 17, 2024

Editor: Caroline Picard

Made minor copy changes.

Fact-checked to ensure accuracy.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

How to Throw a Winter Wonderland Baby Shower for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Coed Baby Shower? Why They’re the New Thing — Plus Party Themes Guests Will Love Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Fall Pregnancy Announcements That Are Pure Autumnal Bliss Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan the Ultimate Gender Reveal Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Gender Reveal Themes to Inspire Your Special Celebration Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

When Is the Best Time to Have Your Baby Shower? Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Thanksgiving Pregnancy Announcements That All Parents-to-Be Will Fall For Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Halloween Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your New Boo Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window