20-Month-Old Child

Life can be pretty scary sometimes, especially for little ones. To the rescue: you!

Your 20-Month-Old Child

Toddlers gain intelligence at an amazing rate — but the fact is, getting smarter enables children to imagine all kinds of frightening scenarios. Phobias and fears become increasingly common around the 20-month mark, with some (fear of dogs, for example) more rational than others (the bathtub drain).

That ever-expanding imagination also allows your tot to dream up more pleasant scenarios, though. Around this age, she may start to play pretend games, like “feeding” a doll or “walking” a toy dog.

This type of play allows toddlers to build their creativity and curiosity, and experiment with social roles that they’ll take on in the future. Look how fast they grow up!

Here’s what else you can expect from your 20-month-old.

Your 20-month-old child’s development

At a Glance

Sleeping basics

Toddlers need about 11 to 14 hours of sleep a day, including naptime. Around this time, many tots drop the morning nap and transition to one afternoon nap, sleeping for about one-and-a-half to two-and-a-half hours.

Feeding basics

If at first you don’t succeed, serve it again. It often takes an average of 10 to 15 tries before toddlers will accept a new food.

Did you know?

Your toddler may be able to remove an article of clothing by herself now (or soon will be), a trick she’ll be able to show off again … and again … and again.

Some pretty irrational fears start to crop up around this month — of the vacuum cleaner, the toilet, the blender.

That’s because at this age, toddlers have learned a lot about the world around them. But right now, they’re not mature enough to sort out what’s possible from what’s not. Translation: You know the vacuum cleaner can’t suck your child up, but she doesn’t — and it may take some time before she realizes it.

There are plenty of ways to help your toddler cope with fear, the first of which is acknowledging that being scared is okay and that you’re afraid sometimes too.

Another hallmark of the approaching-2 set is aggressive behavior : i.e. hitting, biting and hair pulling , which is fueled by frustration (“I know what I want, but I don’t know how to get it!”), egocentricity and lack of impulse control. Dropping the morning nap — which often comes around the mid-year mark, give or take — isn’t likely to help matters.

Again, you are your child's ally and teacher when it comes to learning how to tame aggressive instincts: Try praising positive behavior, providing opportunities for venting, and keeping playdates brief and small.

And remember, your child’s temperament is neither her fault nor yours, and there are effective strategies to help both you and your toddler cope — support being key among them.

Your 20-month-old child’s growth

There’s no predicting your child’s appetite from day to day, but as long as she’s following her growth curve, she’s likely eating as much as she needs.

And speaking of growth, just look at how far your child has come since her first birthday: Most 20-month-old boys weigh about 20 to 31 pounds, and measure about 31 to 35½ inches tall. Most girls weigh about 18½ to 30 pounds and measure 30 to 35 inches tall.

Despite all this growth, mealtime may still seem like a struggle. Remember that your toddler’s diet is still a work in progress — not a finished masterpiece. When you serve up old favorites — mac and cheese, pasta with butter, PB&J — offer something new on the side, like a slice of avocado or a spoonful of hummus.

And don’t underestimate the power of plating: By changing up your tot's sandwich’s shape (cut into a heart instead of a square or sliced into pinwheels, for example), you might just entice her to take a bite.

Your 20-month-old child’s health & care

Your toddler loves to keep you guessing when it comes to her care and health — and guess you shall, about what’s in her diaper (“Is that green poop?”), what she put into her mouth (“Is that a leaf?”) and what she just dropped in the toilet (“Is that my phone?”).

Asthma in toddlers

Often triggered by allergens like dust or pollen, asthma is a condition that can cause shortness of breath, coughing or wheezing. It’s not easy to diagnose toddlers with asthma — sometimes, the only symptom is a recurring, hacking cough that gets worse when she’s active or at night.

Toddler pink eye

Pink eye is one of the most common eye infections in the U.S. The telltale symptom? You guessed it — a pink tinge or redness in the white part of the eye, along with itchiness. Call your pediatrician right away, as your toddler may need antibiotic eye drops and can’t go back to day care or playdates without them sometimes. Pink eye may also go away on its own, so be sure to check with your doctor about what to do. In the meantime, there are ways you can help ease your toddler’s discomfort.

Brushing your toddler’s hair

To de-tangle your child’s hair — while protecting that tender scalp — use a wide-tooth comb or a brush with round-tip bristles. Holding the hair at the roots when you comb out the ends can also prevent pulling.

Dry skin spells

Wondering where that baby-soft skin went? Some toddlers can be prone to dryness. You may want to cut bathtime short, since spending too long in the tub can strip the skin’s natural oils, and apply a water-and-oil-based moisturizer to the skin after toweling your tot off. Avoid overdoing cleansers and soaps, bubble baths, body washes and lotions, which can further dry sensitive toddler skin. Instead, use those bath products sparingly.

Toddler nosebleeds

A bump on the nose — or even mindless nose-picking — can cause a surprising amount of bleeding. To staunch the flow of a nosebleed, encourage your tot to lean forward slightly and pinch both nostrils gently between your thumb and index finger for about 10 minutes. If the bleeding doesn’t stop after you’ve tried this several times, call the doctor.

Toddler tips & info

Fear of dogs

A little bit of fear isn’t necessarily a bad thing. It’s the totally fearless tots you really have to watch. But when your child is afraid of dogs , it can make it a little hard to go for a walk — not to mention enjoy all the benefits of having a furry-footed companion.

A little bit of fear isn’t necessarily a bad thing. It’s the totally fearless tots you

have to watch. But when your child is

, it can make it a little hard to go for a walk — not to mention enjoy all the benefits of having a furry-footed companion.

Spend some time acclimating your tot to some less-scary canines in the form of stuffed dogs or push-pull toys, which won’t bark or wag their tails. Or read her books about dogs, which depict furry friends as playmates and helpers.

Getting a pet

Speaking of furry additions to your family, are you wondering whether now is the time to take the plunge and get a pet ? Like toddlers, pets are cute and cuddly. Also like toddlers, they’re a big responsibility.

? Like toddlers, pets are cute and cuddly. Also like toddlers, they’re a big responsibility.

Before you swing by your local pet store or shelter, ask yourself a few questions. Is your toddler comfortable around animals? Some tots are afraid of animals, particularly large ones, while others take to four-legged friends easily.

If your toddler seems to like critters of various kinds, consider whether you have enough room in your home, time in your schedule, and money in the bank for both a pet and a child. Both will likely need plenty of space to roam around in, and they’ll have to play nicely together.

You may set the rules in your house, but that doesn’t mean you can’t give in to your toddler every once in a while. That doesn’t mean caving to her every demand, but it might mean letting her have the occasional victory .

You may set the rules in your house, but that doesn’t mean you can’t give in to your toddler every once in a while. That doesn’t mean caving to her every demand, but it might mean letting her have

If, for example, you’ve been running errands all day and your toddler — who’s hungry, cranky and fed up — suddenly puts down her tiny foot and yells, “No!” there’s nothing wrong with letting her have her way.

Not only are you avoiding an evitable public meltdown, but you’re also teaching your tot a valuable lesson: Sometimes you win, sometimes you lose.

Keeping a straight face

As amusing as it may be to see your toddler stick her finger in your nose, try to resist the urge to giggle. Laughing at your child’s antics only sends the message that you approve of the behavior — which will make the habit that much harder (and more confusing) to break later on.

Why timers work for toddlers

At this age, children don’t have a great understanding of time — and all too often, telling your toddler to “wait” falls on deaf ears. That’s where a timer can come in handy.

If you need another five minutes on the computer, for example, set a timer — either a physical timer or a timing app on your phone — and let your tot watch it until it goes off. This can help make an abstract concept a little more concrete.

Rare is the toddler who willingly sits in his car seat (or any seat). But riding unbuckled isn’t an option, so sit in his car seat he must.

First, check to see if the straps are too tight or twisted. Your toddler may be protesting because she’s uncomfortable. If the problem is confinement , try distracting your tot right before you put her in the seat: “Look up at the sky” or “Where’s your nose?”

First, check to see if the straps are too tight or twisted. Your toddler may be protesting because she’s uncomfortable. If the

If all else fails, blow a raspberry on her belly or tickle her midsection. That should loosen an arching back, allowing you the chance to buckle your little one in place.

Prevent tick bites in toddlers

Going for a walk in the woods? Make sure you dress your toddler in a long-sleeved shirt and tuck her pants into her socks. Ticks — which can transmit diseases like Lyme disease — love to hang out in the tall grass and brushy, wooded areas, where they can crawl up your tot’s legs.

Going for a walk in the woods? Make sure you dress your toddler in a long-sleeved shirt and tuck her pants into her socks. Ticks — which can transmit diseases like

— love to hang out in the tall grass and brushy, wooded areas, where they can crawl up your tot’s legs.

You can also treat your little one’s clothing with permethrin, a type of insect repellent , as well as apply a repellent that contains between 10 and 30 percent DEET on any skin that isn’t irritated or cut.

, as well as apply a repellent that contains between 10 and 30 percent DEET on any skin that isn’t irritated or cut.

At home, do a total-body scan for ticks and toss the clothes in a dryer on high heat for about 10 minutes to ensure a stowaway doesn’t sneak into your home.