20 Tips for Being a Pregnant Bridesmaid, According to Moms-to-Be Who Have Been There

Pregnant bridesmaid

From surviving the bachelorette party to finding a bridesmaid dress that *actually* fits.

You agreed to stand by your BFF on her wedding day — but didn't realize the date would fall months (or even weeks — yikes!) away from a pretty big day of your own.

As excited as you surely are for your friend's wedding, being a pregnant bridesmaid can come with its own set of challenges, from finding a dress that fits your growing bump to getting through the bachelorette party booze-free (even more difficult if you haven't yet gone public with your news!).

First of all, don't stress: Many moms-to-be have been there, and most agree that being pregnant doesn't have to prohibit you from enjoying the celebration. Although dress fittings can certainly be tricky and 4-inch heels are probably a no-go for you on that grassy lawn, celebrating your friend's important milestone during such a special time in your own life can be fun and memorable. Not to mention, you'll get some pretty glamorous photos of your bump at the end of it.

But if you've decided that the commitment is just too much, that's okay, too. Whether your due date is close to the wedding, you aren't able to travel to the destination or you're just concerned about how comfortable you'll be at that stage of pregnancy (all valid reasons to take a pass!), sit down with your friend to explain the situation.

Prefer to stay in the bridal party, bump in tow? Below, moms-to-be in the What to Expect community share their tips for acing your role as pregnant bridesmaid.

Telling the bride

"When you are ready to tell the bride, you might ask her what her preference would be (stay in the wedding as a bridesmaid or have an alternate duty)." — staci929

"I was in a Catholic wedding when I was about 35 weeks pregnant with my first. I talked with the bride before we let everyone know we were expecting. I told her that I would be honored and thrilled to stand with her at [her] wedding, but I would totally understood if she would rather I sit in a pew instead. I gave her the control and she, without hesitation, responded that I was in." — ksree

"Two of my eight bridesmaids were pregnant. They were afraid to tell me because they didn't want to ruin the wedding. But once they did, I was overjoyed for them! I let them know that if they wanted to back out it was fine, but that regardless, I wanted them and those baby bumps there." — cbs2013

"My best friend and bridesmaid ... told me in the bridal dress shop right after I had picked my perfect dress. I couldn't have been happier for her and it made that day so much more exciting and special. Her due date was the same weekend as my out-of-town wedding, so obviously there was a HUGE chance she wouldn't be there, but we planned on her being in the wedding anyway." — kdmoravek

"One of my bridesmaids was pregnant (due three days after my wedding and still came even though I told her not to feel like she had to!), and I was thrilled for her. At the end of the day, a new life is 10,000,000 times more important than a single wedding ... Her baby was a girl so I call her my seventh little bridesmaid!" — AliBee623

Finding a bridesmaid dress

"Evaluate the dress [the bride] chooses. Is it form-fitting? Or more flowy? If it is not maternity-specific, I would suggest [you] buy a few sizes bigger and then tailor it down in the areas that aren’t your bump. Then it will fit you and you won’t feel like you’re being squeezed into anything." — RS0042

"My sister was 8 months pregnant at my wedding this past August. She was able to try on a dress at the bridal shop with a fake belly to get an estimate of what size she would need. Then they had her order up a size just to be safe since it is easier to make a dress smaller than it is to make it bigger. We also found a seamstress who was willing to do the alterations just one week before the wedding. It worked out perfectly and she looked great!" — Elizabeth8684

"Let the dress shop know [you are pregnant]. They should be able to help you select an appropriate-sized dress. I was a bridesmaid in my best friend’s wedding shortly after I gave birth and I had to order the dress several months in advance. The woman at the dress shop helped me pick out the perfect size. I didn’t even need it tailored." — kgracyalny

"If the dresses are short, you might want to either order one with extra length or order some extra material for alterations. Most bridesmaid dress designers/shops will offer both. And order at least two sizes up from your pre-pregnancy size." — ladygryphon33

Getting through the bachelorette party

"I just came home from a bachelorette weekend ... I still did everything and had so much fun going out and dancing. Do whatever you're comfortable doing. You can still go and have fun! It's slightly more relaxed than straight partying for days — and no hangover!" — cherylcj

"Be the bartender and make yourself a virgin version of whatever you make for everyone else ... If that isn't possible, discretely tell the waitress that you need a virgin cocktail and to just keep them coming. If anyone offers to buy you another round, the waitress is already in the loop." — Sharook

"With my first, I went to my best friend's [bachelorette] party that I planned four hours away. We went in January and I was due in early April. We went out dancing, we did pole dancing and I was actually pretty good ... I would say go because you never know how you will feel when you're out around friends doing new things. If you really do feel sick or tired, then opt out and go back to rest." — charalson1

"I had my bachelorette party in February and two of my bridesmaids were pregnant. How they felt helped determine how adventurous we were, but it also made it so nobody felt like they were being distant or uninvolved. I know one of the girls was having a really rough time, so she did not come until the second day. Be open; I am sure [the bride] will be understanding." — Alavoie17

"I had bars make me virgin cocktails ... For shots, I drank Coke." — arielledavidson

Attending the ceremony and reception

"I couldn't wear 4.5-inch heels [as a pregnant bridesmaid] but at 39.5 weeks, I could get a chair and stand/sit up there for my friend. You will be fine. Just present the options to your friend. I am sure she will understand. An alternative, walk down the aisle and then sit in the front row. My sister-in-law with two kids under 4 did this for me and it worked out great!" — lalagirl12

"Talk to the bride about you being able to wear flats or some sort of comfortable shoes so that it's easier on your feet if you'll be standing for a long time." — whithightower

"I was recently maid of honor to a friend. I was worried because I had become very bloated and I wasn't even 12 weeks pregnant. My dress felt tight (however, looking back on photos now, you couldn't see anything) [and] everyone questioned why I wasn't drinking . I thought I'd struggle being part of the bridal party — it's draining on anyone, let alone [someone who's] pregnant — but I was enjoying the day so much. I didn't feel tired once, and before I knew it the evening party had started." — lbrown55

"I suggest as low a heel as you can get and bring flip-flops for as soon as you can take the heels off." — snowboardin.mama

"It's definitely harder to sober dance, but then I see how goofy everyone else is and I don't care! I just made sure to be drinking water all night!" — littlemama1111

"I took the day after the wedding off, which is the best thing I did since I just needed to lay down." — marmar91

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Getting Married as a Pregnant Bride , May 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Fatigue During Pregnancy , November 2020. WhatToExpect.com, Edema (Swelling of the Ankles and Feet) During Pregnancy , October 2020. WhatToExpect.com, What to Do About Bloating During Pregnancy , April 2020. WhatToExpect.com, Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy , April 2020.

Your Next Read

Saying “I Do” While Expecting: Having a Comfortable Wedding When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

I Survived 3 Weddings Newly Postpartum. Here Are My Hacks to Actually Enjoy the Night By Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

5 Things Every Partner Should Do for a Mom-to-Be Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Why Pregnancy Changes Your Friendships — and How to Stay Connected Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

Your Guide to a Calmer, Cozier Holiday Season During Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Planning a Baby Shower? Smart Etiquette Tips to Make The Day Run Smoother Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Picture-Perfect Maternity Photo Ideas for Every Parent-to-Be Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Support Your Partner During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Pregnant and Single? Here’s How to Get the Support You Need Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Hot Days, Cool Mocktails, and a Baby Bump: What Summer Pregnancies Really Feel Like Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Working While Pregnant: Your Rights, Safety Steps, and Comfort Hacks Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window