20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

winter baby names

Looking for a winter-themed name for your baby boy or girl? Check out these beautiful baby names inspired by snow, evergreen forests, and other seasonal motifs.

If your winter due date is fast approaching — or you just love the cheer of the season — a winter-inspired baby names will evoke the coziest time of year. Check out these winter names for your bundled-up bundle of joy.

Aspen. Like the wintry Aspen tree and the posh Colorado ski resort, this English baby name works equally well for boys and girls.

Branch. A Latin boy’s name for paw, claw, or tree branch — all reminiscent of a stroll through a wintry forest. And if you're a Trolls movie buff, you have another reason to choose this one!

Clark. As in Griswald from the movie Christmas Vacation ! Clark is a gorgeous, unisex baby name choice that means “cleric or scholar" in the French tradition.

Eira. This pretty Welsh name for "snow" makes the perfect short-and-sweet choice for your little girl.

Elsa. Meaning “noble” in German, this name is short for Elizabeth, or “consecrated to God,” in Hebrew. If you’re a Frozen fan, this is a gorgeous moniker for your little snow queen.

Ember. This one conjures up images of a warm and toasty fire and is a unique choice for a fiery little girl. It's the French version of the English name Amber.

Farr. We love this modern, jet-setter English boy’s name that means “traveler,” just like the three wise men. For a more formal-sounding variation, try Farren or Farron.

Fraser. As in the fir tree, Fraser is a lovely baby name for a boy born in the winter months. You'll love the meaning even more: "strawberry" in French (“fraise”) or “curly-haired” in the English tradition.

Holly. Nothing says holiday cheer like the name Holly. For a boy, try Hollis, which is an English name meaning "near the holly bushes."

January. Actress January Jones may have made it famous, but it's still unique enough not to be too trendy.

Izar. A one-of-a-kind Basque girl's name meaning “star,” like the Star of Bethlehem leading the three wise men. You might also like the variations Izarra or Izarre.

Browse baby names by style and origin with the What to Expect app .

Lumi. A good choice for your little boy or girl that's the literal translation for “snow” in Finnish.

Mac. The baby name Mac pays homage to the Maccabees, Jewish rebels celebrated each year at Hanukkah; Mac is also a Scottish name meaning "son."

Nicholas. Jolly old St. Nick, the patron saint of kids, inspires this baby name. It means "victorious people" in the Greek tradition.

Neva. A baby girl name in the Spanish tradition for snow (nieve) — or “new” in English — this is also a river in Russia near St. Petersburg.

Noel. Another holiday-inspired moniker, this French baby girl and boy name (often spelled "Noelle" for a girl) means "day of Christ’s birth."

Olwen. This pretty Welsh baby girl’s name means “white footprint” — a lovely image for a snowy winter day.

Vale. Although Vail is the name of the popular winter skiing destination, this alternate gender-neutral spelling English name also brings to mind wintry scenes and means "valley."

Wynter. This super cool baby name, meaning “winter” in the English tradition, works equally well for a little boy or girl snow bunny. Cute nickname: Wynn!

Yule. If you love Christmas-sounding names, "yule" love this unique unisex name. It’s English for "born at Christmas.”

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Updates history

September 29, 2025

Editor: Colleen de Bellefonds/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,898 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Gorgeous Chinese Baby Girl Names That Inspire Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

120 Astrological Baby Names Inspired by Your Baby's Zodiac Sign Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

How to Throw a Winter Wonderland Baby Shower for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window