20 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a sweet potato.

You're 20 weeks along, which means you're already halfway through your pregnancy!

Take a deep breath — if you can, that is, since congestion during pregnancy is very common.

Meanwhile, baby's lungs are developing more this week.

Your Baby at Week 20

At a Glance

Your little ... thumbsucker?

Your little one is still working hard on those sucking reflexes and may even use a thumb for practice.

Gender reveal

Boy or girl? Your ultrasound this week should be able to detect what you're having if you want to know!

The big week?

If you didn't start feeling your baby-to-be's punches and kicks last week, you may this week — and it's the best! But it could take a little longer.

20 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 20 weeks pregnant, you're in month 5 of your pregnancy. Only 4 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 20 weeks?

You've got a heavyweight in your belly at 20 weeks pregnant (well, in baby terms, anyway). Your little champ weighs about 10 ounces and has a height, crown to rump, of about 6½ inches.

While your baby is definitely getting bigger, there's still plenty of growing room in there, which allows him to twist and turn (and allows you to feel his acrobatics!).

Boy or girl?

Curious about whether that melon-sized belly has a boy or a girl inside? Now's your chance to take a peek!

Though the external genitals in both male and female fetuses still have a way to grow, you'll be able to find out your baby's sex via the second trimester ultrasound, also known as the anatomy scan , usually scheduled for anytime between 18 and 22 weeks.

You'll also get a detailed sneak peek at baby's other major organs and measurements and make sure your little one is developing normally.

This exam, which is much longer than the routine ultrasounds you get at your doctor's office, gives your practitioner a chance to see how things are going in there — and wow, are they going!

If you're carrying a girl, your baby's uterus is fully formed this week and the vaginal canal is starting its development. Your little girl also has primitive eggs in tiny ovaries now, about 7 million of them. By birth, that number will be down to 1 or 2 million.

If your fetus is a boy, the testicles are beginning their descent soon, though they're still in the abdomen waiting for the scrotum to finish growing so they'll have a place to go in a few weeks.

Your Body at Week 20

Halfway there!

Now that you’re at the midpoint of your pregnancy (20 weeks down, 20 more to go!), that little sweet potato you're carrying is becoming more of a reality as you feel his movements and draw smiles from passersby who see your baby bump.

Your 20 weeks pregnant belly

Now that you’re at the midpoint of pregnancy, your 20-weeks-pregnant belly is probably really taking shape as an adorable baby bump by now.

Your appetite is likely pretty hearty, and chances are you’ve popped enough that people know you’re pregnant and you can wear those cute maternity clothes to accentuate your bump. Plus, around now is when you may be starting to feel baby kicking , so it’s all becoming more real!

But there’s still a wide range of normal when it comes to baby bump size, even at 20 weeks. So don’t be concerned if your bump is bigger or smaller than the bump next door. Just remember that other factors, like your size and shape, whether this is your debut pregnancy or you’ve already got one or more under your belt, and even genetics can dictate what your 20-weeks-pregnant belly looks like and how you’re carrying.

As always, check in with your doctor if you’re really worried, but try not to over-scrutinize. All bumps are beautiful and normal, no matter how big or small.

Hair and nail growth

You might also be noticing that your nails are stronger and your hair is growing faster than usual , and feeling thicker and fuller. You can thank pregnancy hormones again, which trigger a surge in circulation that brings extra nutrients to hair and nail cells.

But even though your nails might be long, they can also turn dry and brittle . And though you may love your lavish locks now, don't get too attached: Your good-hair-day run ends with delivery, when the normal daily hair loss that's suppressed during pregnancy (thus the thicker mane) picks up where it left off and then some.

Feeding your growing appetite

Are you in the Hunger Zone? With weeks of nausea and food aversions behind you, you may be more than ready to make up for lost eating time — move over crackers, hello four-course meals!

But before you dig into that all-you-can-eat buffet at lunchtime, here's something you might want to consider. The grazing approach that was your mealtime MO during those queasy months is still the best way to feed yourself and your baby now that food's no longer a four-letter word.

Not only does it help fend off pesky second-trimester tummy troubles, like the heartburn and indigestion that are sure to set in by your second trip to the buffet, but it also ensures that baby's getting a steady supply of calories when she needs it the most.

In fact, studies show that moms who eat at least five small meals and snacks a day are more likely to carry to term. So bring on the grub when pregnancy hunger hits, and lots of it — just bring it on a little at a time.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 20

Occasional headaches

Do you find that your headaches crop up when you’re overheated in windowless, stuffy spaces or under fluorescent lighting? Be sure to take fresh-air breaks outside a few times a day and dress in layers to avoid getting too hot, which could trigger a headache.

Heartburn and indigestion

If you’re looking for a simple heartburn fix, try chewing a piece of sugarless gum after meals. The increased saliva it produces neutralizes gastric acids and helps force fluids back into the stomach.

Faintness or dizziness

Stuffy, hot rooms can be the cause of more than just headaches. They can also cause light-headedness, especially when your body is already generating lots of heat with that little bun you’re cooking in your oven. Stay cool by taking frequent breaks for fresh air and wearing loose-fitting clothes.

Leg cramps

Experts aren’t clear on what causes leg cramps during pregnancy, but one theory is that they’re triggered by compressed blood vessels in the legs, a consequence of extra weight and swelling. Help the blood circulate throughout your body more easily — and minimize cramping — by putting your feet up when you can and drinking plenty of fluids.

Your innie becoming an outie

Your cute little innie belly button may suddenly morph into an outie as your uterus pushes your abdomen forward. If you don’t like the new look, don’t worry — your navel will go back to the way it was after delivery.

Edema (swelling in feet and ankles)

If water retention in your ankles and feet is causing you pain, be sure to wear comfy (not tight!) shoes while you’re out and switch into slippers when you get home. Also, avoid tight socks or pantyhose that can cut off blood flow (not including support hose, which can be helpful) — you want to keep fluids flowing freely to minimize swelling in your lower extremities.

Tips for You This Week

Girl, boy, or surprise?

If you don’t want to wait 'til birth day to find out if you’re having a boy or a girl, now’s the time to ask your doctor or ultrasound tech to share the news. Unsure if you want to find out baby’s sex ?

If you don’t want to wait 'til birth day to find out if you’re having a boy or a girl, now’s the time to ask your doctor or ultrasound tech to share the news. Unsure if you want to

Remember that there is no right or wrong decision. It's completely personal — up to you (and your partner if you have one).

Also remember that even if you do find out the sex of the baby during your ultrasound , sonographers have been known to be wrong — so you'll still need to be at least a little bit prepared for a surprise.

Time to register!

Haven't started your baby registry yet? Whether you're having a baby shower or shopping for yourself, a registry will help you keep track of all the gear you need before your little one arrives .

Most stores offer freebies, discounts and other perks when you register, so many parents-to-be sign up for multiple registries. Keep track of all your registries in one place with What to Expect's baby registry.

Get ready for the anatomy scan

Hoping to learn the sex of your baby? You’ll find out that — and much more — during the 20-week anatomy scan .

Hoping to learn the sex of your baby? You’ll find out that — and much more — during the

During this ultrasound, the sonographer will measure your baby’s size, check all the major organs, and estimate the amount of amniotic fluid in your uterus.

All said, the scan takes about 30 to 45 minutes from beginning to end — and unlike the first trimester ultrasound (which can look a little fuzzy), there’s lots to see this time around. You may even catch a glimpse of your baby sucking a thumb!

Are those tummy bubbles or baby kicks?

First-time parent? You've probably started to feel your baby's very first movements , and if you haven’t already, you will soon.

First-time parent? You've probably started to feel your

, and if you haven’t already, you will soon.

You may think the subtle motions are butterflies, gas or a grumbling tummy, however. Ask your practitioner how to tell the difference if you’re not sure.

Stretch but don't overstretch

One of the many pregnancy symptoms is the stretching out of muscles and loosening of ligaments, which means they’re also more prone to injury.

Remember that when you're exercising, and stretch safely but don't overstretch. If a movement hurts, stop. And even if it doesn't hurt, now's not the time to see if you can still do a split.

Choose oil-free skin care

Look for the words "non-comedogenic," "unscented," and "oil-free" when buying makeup and skin care products . They'll be less likely to add excess oils and clog up pores — good if your skin is on the oilier side to begin with. But if your skin is dry, you'll do best to choose moisturizing products.

Go nuts for nuts

Love nuts? Keep eating them! Enjoying nuts while pregnant doesn't put your unborn child at risk of nut allergies — it may actually lower baby's risk.

doesn't put your unborn child at risk of nut allergies — it may actually lower baby's risk.

Nuts are chock-full of vitamin E, protein, and important minerals like copper, manganese, magnesium, selenium, zinc, potassium, and even calcium.

And even though they're high in fat, it's mainly the good-for-you kind — especially baby-brain boosting AHA. So in a nutshell, go nuts — within reason, of course.