21 Moms Share the Most Ridiculous Reasons They Cried When They Were Pregnant

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

woman crying

Hormones got you weeping at cats, camels, or cookie aisles? You're not alone.

Pregnant or not, sometimes you just need a good cry. For moms-to-be, though, tears may occur more frequently — and for unexpected reasons — thanks to your body's increased hormones.

If this sounds familiar, know that you're far from alone. Parents in the What to Expect community shared the funniest and strangest reasons they cried during their pregnancies, from a sweet movie to a very particular food craving . Read their stories below.

"I broke down in Walmart, sitting on the floor, tears running down my face, you name it. There were too many Oreo flavors to choose from. I had no idea they made so many." — Bbbc2016

"I cried because I felt our dog had a great day." — APEDD0824

"I watched a UFC fight last Sunday and when the fight finished I was crying because the fighters respected each other and hugged in the end. I thought it was so considerate and kind." — kamiss

"I called the wrong number. It took me days to recover from that and to try the right number." — MamaG1216

"I cried because I was still hungry after eating two bowls of soup." — pbwithoutthej

"My [dear husband] and I were having a lazy Saturday watching TV on the couch. A pizza commercial came on and I started crying. [He] asked me what was wrong and all I could say back was, 'I just really want pizza!' He suggested we order some, but I knew it would take too long so he said he would go pick it up for me. I didn't think about the fact that he was on crutches at the time, so when he came back he was trying to juggle carrying the pizza with crutches. Then I cried again because I felt bad for making him do that." — light_blue

"When I was pregnant, I used to cry when my husband would fall asleep before me because I would feel lonely. Yeah, I don't get it either." — Yellowdaisy2

"We were watching a movie about a young girl crossing the desert via camels. During the movie one of the camels gave birth. I full-on had a meltdown because it was so beautiful and the baby camel was so cute." — jcrider

"I cried because a man on Wheel of Fortune won $100,000 and he was so happy and his mom ran on stage and they were jumping up and down and crying happy tears ... So I cried happy tears with them." — Cmarie6187

"'Landslide' by Fleetwood Mac started playing." — soccergirl1414

"So far I've burst into tears because my cat wouldn't let me touch his fluffy belly, and because I realized a lovely obstetrician in a show I was watching wasn't real and could never be my real obstetrician." — AngelaS19

"My husband cut my peanut butter and jelly sandwich in rectangles instead of triangles." — BeeS-

"I cried because my cat isn't as fat as my sister's cat. It was ridiculous." — mamastrat2019

"There was a time my partner was driving on our street and there was a bird bathing in a puddle, so when my partner was close to the puddle the bird flew away and I got sad because we interrupted it." — kamiss

"My husband wouldn't go buy me shrimp at 3 a.m." — techpanda

"I cried once because I told my husband I wanted French fries while we were driving home. I thought he was going to go to the local restaurant across the street and was so excited. My mouth literally started watering for those specific fries. Instead he turned and said 'I think there's a Burger King down here ...' I bawled." — herecomesbaby3

"The reason I knew I had to be pregnant …. watched Step Brothers and got emotional at the scene of Brennan singing at the Catalina Wine Mixer hahahaha." — Mamadrama101

"During Christmas, I cried listening to Rudolph the Red Nose Reindeer." — jacquelynalyssa

"I cried because I hit every red light on my way to work. Like hard enough for my makeup to run." — Danielle340

"Cried because my husband of 10 years has exes and cried because SPOILER Moana died." — Antgirl23

"Saw a dead bumblebee in the planter at my job. Knew it had died because the boss had recently had the outdoor area sprayed with weed killer. I cried rivers and I took its little body to be buried in my lily garden at home, which caused me to cry again. The entire time my husband is standing there giving a sermon over the bee like, 'Mr. Bumbles will live on in all his buzzing ghostly glory, blessing this garden for years to come because a crazy pregnant lady decided to empathize with his little fuzzy soul.' Which made me laugh, then cry harder." — Mamasauroso3

From happy tears to random meltdown moments, pregnancy is full of surprises. Get support, tips, and stories from other parents-to-be in the What to Expect app — your pregnancy sidekick for every emotion.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Your Guide to Pregnancy Hormones , November 2022.

Updates history

November 13, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Laughing, Crying, Cleaning the Window Sills? 11 Pregnancy Emotions You May Have When You're Expecting Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Want a Good Laugh? Moms Share 17 Hilarious (and Slightly Cringey) Pregnancy Moments Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

13 Times Moms Were Devastated by a Gender Reveal Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Surprise Pregnancy Announcements to Drop Your Unexpected Baby News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Moms Are Sharing Their Craziest Pregnancy Symptoms, and Some of Them Are Truly Wild Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Moms on What Labor Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Funny Pregnancy Announcements That Are Sure to Amuse Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Why Pregnancy Mood Swings Happen and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

I'm Struggling With Separation Anxiety During My Pregnancy. It Turns Out I'm Not the Only One Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Hope, Heartbreak … Then Joy: The Emotional Moments IVF Moms Will Never Forget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window