23-Month-Old Child

Where do you think you’re going? That may be the message your toddler sends (loudly and/or tearfully) every time you try to leave his side.

Your 23-Month-Old Child

Your toddler is growing more confident and able by the day — so why does he refuse to leave your side? Separation anxiety comes and goes many times during a child’s life (remember when he was a 9-month-old?), but the period around the second birthday is often the toughest of all.

Your tot may also be more irritable than normal, particularly around “transition times,” like when you come home for work. You won’t be able to give him all your attention all the time, but spending 10 toddler-focused minutes now may make all the difference in your little one’s mood.

Here’s what else you can expect from your 23-month-old.

Your 23-month-old child’s development

At a Glance

Sleeping basics

Toddlers need about 11 to 14 hours of sleep a day, including an afternoon nap that lasts for about one-and-a-half to two-and-a-half hours.

Feeding basics

Toddlers should aim to get about 15 milligrams of vitamin C per day, which you can find in a few servings of strawberries, orange or red pepper slices.

Did you know?

Some toddlers show signs of potty training readiness by this age, although most aren’t really up for it until after they turn 2.

Separation anxiety often peaks around the 2-year-mark. There are plenty of potential culprits, such as stress over a new sibling or new babysitter, or even the thought that he’ll miss out on something fun. Whatever the cause, it’s best to make partings short and sweet — just don’t sneak off without a goodbye.

More must-learn lessons include how to behave in public, like on shopping trips or when visiting a restaurant. Don’t expect too much too soon, but do explain (gently yet firmly) what’s appropriate when your toddler’s out and about. At this age, shopping and dining out will be more efficient — not to mention enjoyable for you — if he stays home.

Your toddler may also get frazzled at certain times of the day, like after he gets back from day care or when you come home from work. Try to take a time-out together before you dive into dinner prep and devote your full attention to a game or story.

In other news, teeth-brushing battles may be raging in your bathroom — so try letting your toddler choose a colorful toothbrush and perform a preliminary brushing before you finish up.

A similar strategy works for hair-brushing , another potential grooming minefield.

You may also encounter some resistance when it comes to putting on your toddler’s clothes and shoes (not to mention coat, hat and mittens). Provide choices, distractions and a good dose of humor, and things should go more smoothly.

Your 23-month-old child’s growth

All that effort you’ve put into mealtimes is likely paying off. Your toddler has grown a lot over the past almost-one year.

A 23-month-old boy will weigh about 21 to 33 pounds and measure 32 to 36½ inches tall, whereas a girl will weigh about 19½ to 32 pounds and measure 31 to 36½ inches tall.

Your toddler’s abilities, too, are on the upswing, so it’s no surprise he’s more confident than ever. Given that, your tot may also be more likely to exert his will over what he does (and doesn’t) eat. Just when you thought you could count on PB&J, he suddenly rejects it — along with many of his other once-favorite foods.

Sometimes, this is an attempt to gain control over his environment. Other times, it’s just plain boredom. Whatever the reason, try not to make a big deal about it. Instead, use it as an opportunity to introduce something new. When you do reintroduce his once-beloved sandwich, serve it up with a different spin — think: cashew butter instead of peanut butter.

Your 23-month-old child’s health & care

You’re one month away from the 2-year well-child visit, but there’s still lots going on with your toddler’s health and care right now.

Pet allergies in toddlers

If furry friends tend to leave your little one wheezing and sneezing, he likely has a pet allergy. But that doesn’t mean all cats and dogs are necessarily off-limits. One of the most common causes of pet allergies is dander (the dead skin cells that pets shed), and some breeds produce less dander than others.

When an object is stuck in the nose

Your adventurous toddler is off exploring his world — including the inside of his nose. It happens more often than you’d think, and there are ways to try to extract the object yourself. Still, if you can’t get it out after one try, your best bet is to take your child to the doctor.

What to do about whining

Ah, whining — the habit that, for some toddlers, might just turn a “no” into a “yes”. Or that’s the idea, anyway. As a general rule of thumb, try to discourage this behavior: The more often your tot gets his way after whining, the more likely he is to try it again.

Alternative medicine for toddlers

Looking for a way to soothe a sore throat or tummy? Look no further than your kitchen. Complementary and alternative (CAM) medicine — including aloe vera and chamomile tea — is popular even among parents of the toddler set. Be sure to call your pediatrician before you give your child any herbal remedies, though.

Dealing with head lice

Discovering that your child has lice can be, well, lousy. But alas, these tiny critters spread easily among day care, preschool and school-aged children, and getting them is no reflection of your child's (or your family’s) hygiene. With a little bit of patience — and a fine-toothed comb, medicated shampoo, and a washer and dryer — you’ll get through it.

Toddler tips & info

Play the food name game

A food by any other name tastes… sweeter, actually. Just like you’d rather have a Niçoise salad than “pile of lettuce,” your toddler may be more tempted to take a bite of “egg sand” rather than egg salad — especially if it’s scooped up with a “shovel” cracker.

A food by any other name tastes… sweeter, actually. Just like you’d rather have a

salad than “pile of lettuce,” your toddler may be more tempted to take a bite of “egg sand” rather than egg salad — especially if it’s scooped up with a “shovel” cracker.

Or, maybe your child would prefer meatloaf if it were baked in a muffin tin (“meat muffin,” anyone?). What sounds unappealing to you might just sound tantalizing to him.

Take turns taking turns

Toddlers are naturally egocentric — and let’s face it, at this age, the world really does revolve around them. It won’t be until they get older that they realize that other people have feelings too — and it’ll be much later still until they learn to empathize with those feelings.

revolve around them. It won’t be until they get older that they realize that other people have feelings too — and it’ll be much later still until they learn to empathize with those feelings.

In the meantime, you can try teaching your toddler the fine art of taking turns . When you’re eating dinner, take turns biting into your sandwiches or sipping your drinks. Keep the practice sessions fun, and he’ll get the hang of it … eventually.

Nightmares … or night terrors?

Your toddler woke up in the middle of the night with a shriek — so was it a bad dream or a night terror? Around the age of 2, both types of episodes can appear, and unless you know the differences between the two, it may be hard to identify which one it was.

Nightmares are realistic, bad dreams that happen during REM sleep (which is lighter), but your child won’t really start panicking or crying until he wakes up. When you go into his room, he’s likely to cling to you, and (if he’s talking) try to describe what happened.

are realistic, bad dreams that happen during REM sleep (which is lighter), but your child won’t really start panicking or crying until he wakes up. When you go into his room, he’s likely to cling to you, and (if he’s talking) try to describe what happened.

During a night terror, a child will be fully asleep (i.e. in the deep sleep, non-REM phase), but will look as if he’s awake: His eyes may be open and he may scream, cry or even walk around. Essentially, part of the brain is trying to wake up while the other part stays asleep.

a child will be fully asleep (i.e. in the deep sleep, non-REM phase), but will look as if he’s awake: His eyes may be open and he may scream, cry or even walk around. Essentially, part of the brain is trying to wake up while the other part stays asleep.

While nightmares are usually brief and wake the child, night terrors can last 10 to 30 minutes and children often sleep through them. Don’t attempt to wake your tot up or hold him during a night terror, as most kids settle back down, stay asleep and won’t remember having one the next morning.

While both nightmares and night terrors seem — and look — scary, they’re common ways toddlers process emotions. There’s not a lot you can do to prevent them, but just know that most children eventually grow out of them.

Finding meat alternatives

Many toddlers are natural vegetarians: bigger on carbs than they are on meat. The good news: Just because meat is off the menu (voluntarily or involuntarily) doesn’t necessarily mean your child is missing out on any nutrients.

Toddlers who eat dairy products and eggs should meet their daily requirements for protein , no problem. Vegans might have a harder time hitting their quota, however, so offer up protein-rich complex carbs such as quinoa and soy products like tofu and edamame.

Congratulations may be in order, but chances are, your toddler won’t get the memo. At this age, most children won’t understand what you’re talking about when you tell them you’re pregnant with a new baby (“How can a baby live in a tummy?”) — and even if your tot can, he’s more likely to experience mixed emotions than positive ones.

Not sure how to break the baby news to your toddler ? Try reading your little one an age-appropriate picture book, like Before You Were Born: The Inside Story! , which will help illustrate the concept more than your words can. To demonstrate what his soon-to-be sibling will look like, give your child a baby doll to play with.

Encouraging independent play

You may be your toddler’s best playmate, but that doesn’t mean you have to play with him every second of the day. In fact, round-the-clock attention may keep your child from learning how to entertain himself.

You may be your toddler’s best playmate, but that doesn’t mean you have to play with him every second of the day. In fact, round-the-clock attention may keep your child from

To kickstart your toddler’s independence, try demonstrating ways to use his toys — how to make a block tower or use the shape sorter. Or, get your little one started with an activity (pushing a toy car across the table) before backing off. His streaks of self-sufficiency won’t last very long at first, but with time, they’ll grow longer — or at least, long enough for you to do a load of laundry.

Potty training prep

Your toddler probably won’t be ready for potty training until after the age of 2. Still, it never hurts to start laying the groundwork early on. Here are a few ways to introduce the idea of potty training.

Your toddler probably won’t be ready for potty training until after the age of 2. Still, it never hurts to start laying the groundwork early on. Here are a few ways to

Pick out a potty. Choose a kid-size potty or seat that attaches to your toilet, and point out what the potty is for when you pass it.

Model the behavior. You could tell your toddler how to use the toilet, but you may just want to bring him into the bathroom and give him a demonstration if you’re comfortable with that.

Read about it. Read a potty-training book like Once Upon a Potty or A Potty for Me! , which will help teach your tot what to do once he’s on the toilet.