23 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a carrot.

Get ready for a major growth spurt — beginning this week, your baby will likely double in size over the next month or so.

And with those pregnancy hormones on overdrive, you may start noticing that foggy, hazy feeling known as "pregnancy brain."

One solution? Make post-it notes your friend and stick little reminders where you'll see them around the house.

Your Baby at Week 23

At a Glance

Are you blushing?

Baby's skin is a bit saggy (but won't be for long as fat begins forming) and has a pinkish-red hue (this is true in all skin colors), thanks to the developing veins and arteries right underneath.

Packing a punch

Those little arms and legs are packing more of a punch these days ... you might even see them poke through from the outside!

The power of the placenta

The placenta — baby’s recently completed life-support system — transfers oxygen and nutrients to baby and removes waste products.

23 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 23 weeks pregnant, you're in month 6 of your pregnancy. Only 3 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 23 weeks?

At around 11 inches long and just over a pound, this week marks the beginning of some serious weight gain.

Your baby should double his weight over the next four weeks alone — and you may feel as though you do too.

Baby's skin and organs

Baby's skin is a bit saggy since it grows a lot faster than fat, but soon he’ll start to fit his frame as fat deposits fill things out.

By the time your baby is born, he will be pleasantly plump and filled out, from chubby cheeks to chubby toes.

And although at 23 weeks, your baby's organs and bones are visible through his skin, he'll become less transparent once those fat deposits settle in.

You may be able to hear your baby’s heartbeat through a stethoscope

You’ve probably heard your developing baby's heartbeat through a Doppler a number of times already, though you never get tired of hearing it. But by now, you or your doctor might also be able to hear it through a standard stethoscope (though sometimes, it can be tricky to find). What a heartthrob!

Your Body at Week 23

New symptoms start

Yes, the baby you're expecting is cozily ensconced in your abdomen, but by now you've probably noticed that pregnancy affects you from head to toe — and pretty much everywhere in between.

At 23 weeks pregnant, your back may be aching even more, your mind may be fuzzy (this is your brain … this is your brain on progesterone), and your feet could be growing. The palms of your hands and soles of your feet might be red , and you might be more prone to heat rash and skin tags.

Stretch marks are blooming in vibrant shades of pink, red, purple, reddish-brown, or dark brown on pretty much every available surface of skin and … wait! What's that funky dark line running down the center of your belly?

Skin discoloration

Believe it or not, it's called the "dark line" — or linea nigra . A common emblem of pregnancy that may be more noticeable in darker-skinned women, the linea nigra runs between your belly button and your pubic area. It's caused by the same pregnancy hormones responsible for all the skin discolorations you might be seeing, like the darker shade of your areolas and the deeper tone of the freckles on your arms and legs.

Some women (again, usually those with darker skin) notice discoloration on the face too, especially in the area around the nose, forehead, cheeks, and eyes. It's called the mask of pregnancy (or melasma) because it appears as a mask-like configuration on the face.

Rest assured, you won't be playing masquerade for much longer. All these skin changes will fade within a few months after delivery. In the meantime, bring on the concealer — though not the bleaching creams, which won't work anyway.

Learning to relax

Is your growing bundle of joy making you a quivering bundle of nerves? Breathe, baby, breathe!

Now's a great time to learn some soothing relaxation techniques — and not just because they can help you cope with pregnancy worries and, soon, labor contractions. They'll also come in handy during those new-parent moments when baby won't stop crying, the phone is ringing, and it's just you (and your little one) in the house.

Yoga is a fabulous de-stresser, if you have time to take a class. But here's a pregnancy meditation technique you can use just about anywhere, anytime, to soothe your soul:

1. Sit with your eyes closed and imagine a relaxing, peaceful scene, like a sunset over your favorite beach, waves gently lapping the shore or a serene mountain vista with a babbling brook.

2. Working your way up from your toes to your face, concentrate on relaxing every muscle one-by-one. Breathe deeply through your nose, exhaling through your mouth, and aim for 10 to 20 minutes if you can swing it.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 23

Bloating

If you can’t seem to shake that ate-too-much feeling, you’re experiencing the effects of progesterone. The hormone causes the gastrointestinal tract to relax and slow down digestion, so nutrients have more time to enter your bloodstream and reach your baby. Drink more water to help keep things moving.

Back pain

Oh, your aching back! Here's what causes stiffness and back pain during pregnancy, and how you can cope with it during pregnancy.

Hearty appetite

It’s perfectly normal to find yourself wanting to devour the contents of your kitchen cabinets and fridge — after all, you have a growing baby to feed! So try to stock your home with healthy snacks such as fruit, cut-up veggies, nuts, and whole wheat crackers.

Tingling hands

Swelling during pregnancy can put pressure on nerves in the wrists and cause the aching and tingling associated with carpal tunnel syndrome. If you work at a computer, take frequent hand-stretching breaks and make sure your wrists are straight and elbows aren’t higher than your hands when you’re at your desk.

Bleeding gums

Reduce irritation to your gums, which are swelling more than usual these days due to hormones, by avoiding chewy sweets, brushing and flossing regularly, and visiting the dentist at least once while you’re expecting.

Fetal activity

You may be getting used to feeling your baby’s movements in the womb. Cherish these light kicks now before they get more powerful, pronounced, and sometimes painful — like when baby kicks you in the ribs, abdomen, or cervix so hard it hurts!

Snoring

This common-but-annoying pregnancy symptom can disrupt your sleep and your partner’s. Partly due to nasal congestion caused by extra weight and swollen mucus membranes in your nose, snoring can be alleviated by wearing a nasal strip at bedtime and running a warm-mist humidifier in your bedroom.

Tips for You This Week

The secret to a good night's sleep?

It can be almost as hard to get a good night's sleep when you're pregnant as it is when you're a new parent. In fact, according to one study, a whopping 78% of women experience sleep problems at some point, or many points, during pregnancy.

It can be almost as hard to get a good night's sleep when you're pregnant as it is when you're a new parent. In fact, according to one study, a whopping 78% of women experience

at some point, or many points, during pregnancy.

With all that’s going on in your body — and brain — it’s no wonder that a full night’s rest can be so elusive. If you find it hard to get comfortable, try sliding a pregnancy pillow between your legs and resting with your knees bent.

Ask about leave

While you’re weeks away from meeting your baby, it’s time to start thinking about leave. Mothers usually take maternity leave from work to be with their new baby, and fathers are increasingly taking advantage of paternity leave to do the same.

While you’re weeks away from meeting your baby, it’s time to start thinking about leave. Mothers usually take

For parents who identify as LGBTQ+, navigating parental leave can be more complex. Connect with both HR and your supervisor to make sure you’re all on the same page and you’re familiar with the details.

Stock up on breast pads

Though you might not be thinking too much about breastfeeding yet, you could need nursing pads sooner than you think.

During pregnancy (usually around the third trimester , if at all), your breasts may leak a thin, yellowish fluid called colostrum — the nutritious pre-milk that will be your baby’s first food if you’re nursing — before your little bundle arrives.

— the nutritious pre-milk that will be your baby’s first food if you’re nursing — before your little bundle arrives.

Colostrum contains more protein but less fat and sugar than more mature breast milk, making it easier for baby to digest in the first few days after birth.

But nature gets a head start on milk production during pregnancy, which is why that pesky symptom might crop up in the coming weeks and months. Best to be prepared and stock up now so you're ready. If you don't need them while you're still expecting, you'll be all set once baby is born!

Take steps to prevent UTIs

Now that it's being squished by your growing uterus, your bladder makes the perfect breeding ground for bacteria — and that can lead to a urinary tract infection (UTI) . Luckily, there are plenty of ways you can reduce your chances of developing a UTI during pregnancy.

. Luckily, there are plenty of ways you can reduce your chances of developing a UTI during pregnancy.

Drink lots of water and cranberry juice (though the second remedy has mixed results), ideally one that doesn't contain added sugar.

Check your urine color — if it's dark, not straw-colored, you're not getting enough fluids and could be setting yourself up for a UTI.

Other tips: Don't hold it in — pee as soon as you feel the urge and can find a bathroom. Concentrate on completely emptying your bladder when you go to the bathroom, and try leaning forward when you pee. Wipe from front to back.

Lastly, clean your genitals and the areas surrounding them, particularly after having sex . Wear all-cotton underwear and take showers rather than baths whenever possible.

Tread lightly with hair treatments

Now that you've passed your first trimester , are you thinking about getting your hair straightened or curled at the salon? You might want to proceed with some caution, especially with certain hair treatments during pregnancy.

There is the possibility that your hormone-infused locks will respond oddly to the chemicals — for example, you might end up with a ball of frizz instead of a crown of ringlets. There's also a slight chance that the substances can be absorbed through the scalp and into your bloodstream.

Highlights are considered safe by most practitioners, however, since the color isn’t applied as close to the scalp. So are milder treatments like all-vegetable dyes or ammonia-free blends, so chances are you’ll be able to create those auburn or gold tones with no problem.

by most practitioners, however, since the color isn’t applied as close to the scalp. So are milder treatments like all-vegetable dyes or ammonia-free blends, so chances are you’ll be able to create those auburn or gold tones with no problem.

But ask. An ultra-cautious practitioner or stylist may recommend against any chemical processing until after your baby is born.

Consider buying organic

You can't go wrong by filling your plate with fresh fruits and vegetables — whether they're organic or not.

Still, organic foods may have a few benefits, including fewer pesticides in organic produce than conventional fruits and vegetables (if there's any at all).

may have a few benefits, including fewer pesticides in organic produce than conventional fruits and vegetables (if there's any at all).

Organic foods are also free of artificial colorings, flavorings, and preservatives. Organic produce does tend to be more expensive than conventional fruits and vegetables, and can have a shorter shelf-life.

Remember, what's most important is choosing a wide variety of nutritious foods and fresh, ripe fruits and veggies in a range of colors. And no matter what kind of fruits and veggies you buy — conventional or organic — you'll need to wash your produce meticulously in cold water before eating it.

Try Pilates

Everybody (and their pregnant neighbor) is doing it — but is Pilates the right exercise for you? Absolutely — and it's not a stretch !

This mind-body discipline focuses on strengthening your core and elongating your muscles, increasing tone, strength, and flexibility — just what you need when you're exercising for two.

Just be sure not to try any of the moves on your own if you’re a novice. Best to practice them with a Pilates instructor, preferably one who specializes in prenatal exercises.