24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

mom holding baby girl unique baby girl names

Searching for a cute and unique baby girl name? Look no further. From Cassia to Inez, you'll find the perfect name for your little girl on this list.

Want to find a truly unique baby name that your little girl won't share with any other kids in her playgroup? These one-of-a-kind baby girl names deserve your consideration.

1. Amelie. Though it might remind you of the whimsical French film Amelie , this is an original (French) take on the name Amelia, meaning "hard-working."

2. Aria. A strong name for a strong little girl, this is the Italian form of Ariel, meaning "lioness of God."

3. Bette. Calling to mind the actresses Bette Midler and Bette Davis, this is one of a number of unique midcentury names that's sure to come back in vogue. It's the French version of Betty, meaning "consecrated to God."

4. Calla. You'll be reminded of the pretty lily so often seen at weddings. Or go a little Greek with the unusual name Calliope, the muse of epic poetry also meaning "beautiful voice."

5. Cassia. For your feisty girl, this Greek name is a cinnamon-like spice.

6. Clementine. This sweet fruit also means "merciful" in Latin. You could call her Clem for short.

7. Effie. This Greek name means something we all hope for in our kids: "well spoken of." It can also be short for Alfreda or Euphemia.

8. Eva. This name was popular back in the 1890s. It's short for Evangelina (Greek), "bearer of good news," or a variation on Eve (Hebrew), meaning "life."

9. Greta. The 1920s actress Greta Garbo probably comes to mind; this name is actually short for Gretchen — a German form of Margaret.

10. Harlow. A play on the popular last name trend (think gorgeous blond star Jean Harlow of the 1930s), this name means "protector of the people."

11. Inez. A Spanish twist on Agnes — a trendy name 100 years ago — this baby girl's name is Greek for "pure."

12. Kaia. This short and sweet name means "earth" in Greek.

13. Luella. A familiar form of Louise, this powerful twist on the English moniker means "famous warrior."

14. Mae . A variation on "May" that's not seen so often these days, this name hit the top 100 around the early 1900s. (And Mae Jemison was the first African American woman in space!)

15. Melina. This Greek name means "honey."

16. Naya. This airy little girl's name could be short for the Basque name Nayara, meaning "swallow."

17. Poppy. A punchy yet pretty little girl's name with character, this flower name has lots of cute variations — Popee, Popi, Poppie, Poppea.

18. Quinn. Another take on the last name trend (think comedian Colin Quinn), this powerful, gender-neutral name means "queen" in German and English.

19. Sia. This unique little girl's name is so powerful, the Australian singer goes by it alone. It could also be short for the Irish name Sianna ("God is gracious").

20. Vega. Popular in Scandinavia, this unique gender-neutral name means "falling star."

21. Vera. The designer Vera Wang commonly pops up as inspiration for this girl name. Meaning "true" or "faith" and short for Elvera and Veronica in in Latin and Slavic, Vera was actually among the SSA's top 100 in the 1920s.

22. Zinnia. This cousin to the sunflower has bright fuchsia, yellow, red, and orange flowers as vibrant as your little girl.

23. Zosia. If you're a fan of the TV show Girls , you probably think of Zosia Mamet when you hear this baby name. It's also a close neighbor to the equally stunning Zósima, Greek for "vital, vigorous."

24. Zuri. Swahili for "beautiful," this is a gorgeous and unique baby girl name.

Choosing “the one” is no small feat. Find more names you’ll love in the What to Expect app — plus get week-by-week updates on the tiny human who’ll soon wear that name proudly.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Updates history

September 28, 2025

Editors: Kathleen Felton/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,926 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

Cute, Quirky, and Easy to Say: 19 Adorable Welsh Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Fierce and Fearless: 9 Baby Names for Girls With Superhero Energy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window