24 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as an ear of corn.

That face! At 24 weeks pregnant, your baby's facial features are becoming more defined. At this rate, your little one will be ready for all those photos you'll snap after you give birth!

On the symptoms front, around now is the time your belly button may have "popped." It will go back to normal after delivery.

Your Baby at Week 24

At a Glance

Bulking up

Your little bean is putting on more and more weight, much of it coming from accumulating baby fat along with growing muscles, organs, and bones.

Rock-a-bye, baby

Baby's auditory system is rapidly advancing, which means if she frequently hears a certain song now, she's likely to recognize it and feel calmed by it when she's born.

White-haired baby

Your baby is still sporting white eyelashes, eyebrows, and hair, all of which have yet to acquire pigment.

24 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 24 weeks pregnant, you're in month 6 of your pregnancy. Only 3 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 24 weeks?

Your baby is about 11½ inches long and weighs 1 pound, gaining steadily at a rate of about 6 ounces per week. Much of that weight comes from growing organs, bones, muscle, and accumulating baby fat.

Baby’s face is formed

Wondering what (and who) your baby will look like? If you had a baby cam at 24 weeks pregnant, you'd almost be able to tell by now. That beautiful face, though still tiny, is almost fully formed, complete with eyelashes, eyebrows, and hair .

Will your baby have brown, black, blond, or red hair — or something in between? Actually, right now her locks are white, since there's no pigment yet. The fat that will be piled on under baby's skin is also missing from the picture right now.

Until those fat deposits are made, that very tender skin is still very transparent, which means a close look would let you see clear through to all the organs, bones, and blood vessels. Fortunately, that see-through look won't last much longer.

Fetal hearing

What's been playing on your little rocker's stereo system these days? All kinds of sounds can be heard by your baby in your womb: air exhaling from your lungs — deep breath now — those gastric gurgles produced by your stomach and intestines, your voice and your partner's, which your baby will be able to recognize at birth, and even very loud sounds such as honking horns, barking dogs, or a wailing fire truck.

Your Body at Week 24

Belly button changes

If your former innie is now an outie, welcome to the club. Almost every expectant mom's pregnant belly button pops at some point as that swelling uterus pushes on everything in its path.

Things should return to normal after delivery, though your navel and some other parts of your body might look a bit, well, stretched. Just think of it as one more badge of honor that only moms get to wear.

Carpal tunnel syndrome

What other pregnancy woe is pushing your buttons when you’re 24 weeks pregnant? Well, probably your uncomfortably numb wrists and fingers. Chances are it could be carpal tunnel syndrome .

That tingling and numbness you notice in your wrists and fingers is usually associated with work that requires repetitive motion, such as typing, but carpal tunnel strikes pregnant women for a different reason — though repetitive motion can definitely contribute.

The swelling that's so common during pregnancy causes fluids to accumulate in your lower extremities during the day, which are redistributed to the rest of your body, including your hands, when you're lying down — putting pressure on the nerve that runs through your wrist. That causes numbness, tingling, pain, or a dull ache in the fingers, hand, or wrist.

Get relief by avoiding sleeping on your hands and propping your arms up with a pillow at night. Shaking your hands and wrists might also help. Be sure that if you're doing repetitive motions like typing or playing the piano, which can aggravate your symptoms, you take frequent hand-stretching breaks.

If you're in a lot of pain, a wrist brace might be just the ticket to comfort. Luckily, when the regular swelling of pregnancy stops after delivery, the carpal tunnel symptoms go away too.

Soothing red, itchy palms

Sure, you'd heard that pregnancy comes with a variety of symptoms, most of them not very pleasant — actually, none of them very pleasant, unless you count fast-growing hair, nails, and breasts. But maybe you didn't expect so many seemingly random symptoms — such as the red, itchy palms that have nothing to do with the amount of dishwashing you're doing. The red may spread to the soles of your feet too, though you're less likely to notice that once your feet become more difficult to see.

Though this is a relatively normal symptom, especially this far into pregnancy, be sure to mention it to your doctor — there's a chance it could indicate a rare complication called cholestasis of pregnancy, though this is more common in the third trimester.

You can blame those pesky hormones for this one too — along with virtually all the other strange symptoms you'll have as the months go by, like the metallic taste in your mouth, skin tags appearing out of nowhere, bigger feet , increased saliva , and vision changes , to name a few.

As for getting the red out, there are no sure solutions ... besides delivery. Until then, avoid anything that makes the red redder, such as becoming overheated , taking long, hot baths or showers, or wearing too-warm or too-tight gloves or socks.

Some women find relief by soaking their hands and feet in cold water or applying an ice pack for a few minutes a couple times a day. You might even try going on a dishwashing strike while you're expecting — just tell your spouse it's doctor's orders!

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 24

Constipation

Constipated? Pregnancy hormones cause intestinal muscles to relax in order to keep food in your digestive system longer, so you and your baby can absorb more nutrients. But just because it's for a good cause doesn’t make it pleasant. Drink lots of water and juice to get things moving faster through your system and soften your stool so it's easier to pass.

Lower abdominal achiness

As your uterus continues to expand, the ligaments that support it stretch, which may cause some pain. Occasional lower abdominal achiness is normal, but if the discomfort is accompanied by symptoms such as fever, chills, or bleeding, see your practitioner.

Leg cramps

When leg cramps start to cramp your style, try straightening your leg and gently flexing your ankle and toes up toward your shins several times. This can stop the spasm.

Swollen feet and ankles

Don’t be alarmed if the swelling in your feet has caused you to “grow” out of your favorite shoes. Just do what you can to avoid letting fluid, which you’re more likely to retain during pregnancy, pool in your legs — which means elevating your legs when you’re sitting.

Migraines

If you find your headaches last for days, are severe, and are sometimes accompanied by nausea or vision changes, they might be migraines. Let your practitioner know and keep a journal of what you ate, where you were, and what you were doing before you experienced each migraine so you can pinpoint the triggers — and start to avoid them.

Blurred vision

Are your contact lenses bothering you lately — or is your vision sometimes blurry? Pregnancy hormones can decrease tear production, causing eye irritation, and increase fluid buildup in the eye, temporarily altering your vision. This should pass shortly after delivery, so don’t go out and get any new eyeglass or contact-lens prescriptions while you’re expecting.

Tips for You This Week

Get ready for the glucose screening

Your doctor will give you the glucose screening between 24 and 28 weeks. If your blood sugar levels show that you have gestational diabetes — a temporary condition that appears during pregnancy — you'll likely have to modify your diet, monitor your blood sugar at home, and possibly increase your activity levels.

between 24 and 28 weeks. If your blood sugar levels show that you have

— a temporary condition that appears during pregnancy — you'll likely have to modify your diet, monitor your blood sugar at home, and possibly increase your activity levels.

While researchers aren't certain why some women get gestational diabetes while others don’t, they do know that you may be at an increased risk if you are overweight, are older, are pregnant with multiples, have a higher level of abdominal fat, or have a family history of diabetes .

Streamline your showers

Suffering from dry skin during pregnancy ? As luxurious as they are, too many long showers or baths can be part of the problem and strip your skin of some of its moisture.

? As luxurious as they are, too many long showers or baths can be part of the problem and strip your skin of some of its moisture.

Though you should still indulge in a nice, long bath or shower here and there, stick to shorter ones at least some of the time — good training for actual motherhood! — in warm, not hot, water, and use a mild cleanser. For very dry skin, try a moisturizer or put a warm-mist humidifier in your room.

Have you considered hiring a doula to help with delivery and early baby care? A doula’s duty is to be your head cheerleader during delivery. Unlike an OB/GYN or midwife, doulas do not have medical training — instead, they’re there to support you emotionally.

to help with delivery and early baby care? A doula’s duty is to be your head cheerleader during delivery. Unlike an OB/GYN or midwife, doulas do not have medical training — instead, they’re there to support you emotionally.

Some studies show that moms with doulas are less likely to require C-sections , inductions , and pain relief, while births may be shorter with a lower rate of complications.

Recruit some help with meal prep

Your freezer is your friend. Ask your partner, family, and even other children (if this isn’t your first and the others are old enough) to help you cook a batch of meals so you can have nutritious leftovers for days to come. Bonus: It makes your life a lot easier!

Make a large tray of lasagna by layering defrosted frozen spinach or broccoli on top of the pasta along with some shredded cheese, good-quality jarred tomato sauce, and lean ground beef or turkey. Slice the leftovers into individual portions and then freeze to reheat and feast another day.

The same goes for soups and stews — make a vat and freeze into single-serve containers, then reheat them later as a nourishing snack. Ditto mini meatloaves and muffins.

For the fridge, boil a dozen eggs at a time: Mash half into egg salad for lunch today and tomorrow, and keep the rest intact for snacks on the run — or snacks to keep you going while you make dinner.

Cut up enough fruit salad or veggies to keep you happily and healthily munching for days. And instead of grilling one chicken breast for dinner, grill four or more; the rest will make delicious sandwiches, salad toppings for dinner, or fajita fillings for the rest of the week.

Ease the sting of hemorrhoids

Pregnancy can put a lot of pressure on you — including on the veins in the rectal area, which can swell and bulge. Hemorrhoids are extremely common when you’re pregnant, but take some comfort (if you can get comfortable, that is) in the fact that they're perfectly harmless.

Pregnancy can put a lot of pressure on you — including on the veins in the rectal area, which can swell and bulge.

are extremely common when you’re pregnant, but take some comfort (if you can get comfortable, that is) in the fact that they're perfectly harmless.

Keep it clean down there by using warm water and white two-ply toilet paper after a bowel movement. Don't wipe too hard (that just makes it worse) or linger on the toilet. If TP is too harsh, switch to wipes (preferably those made with plain water or designed for sensitive skin) instead.

To ease the discomfort , try soaking in a warm (not hot) bath.

Interview pediatricians

Now’s a great time in your pregnancy to interview potential pediatricians . After all, there’s a good chance that the doctor will first see your baby within 24 hours of your little one’s birth.

. After all, there’s a good chance that the doctor will first see your baby within 24 hours of your little one’s birth.

So ask a lot of questions before you make your selection and broach topics like appointment availability, hospital affiliations, vaccines , and circumcision.

Remember to floss

Want to increase your odds of delivering a full-term baby? Put your dental floss where your mouth is. Surprisingly, research links good dental health and oral hygiene to longer pregnancies. Sounds crazy — but it's true.

Something as simple as brushing your teeth at least twice a day and flossing regularly can reduce the risk of gingivitis — a common condition in which your gums become inflamed and red, and may even begin to bleed.

Untreated gingivitis (that's where the regular dental checkups come in) can progress to periodontitis — a more serious infection of the teeth — which has been linked to premature birth and even an increased risk of preeclampsia .

Keep on top of your teeth, and that old (untrue) wives' tale — the one that claims a woman loses a tooth with each pregnancy — can finally be put to rest.