25 Best Snacks for Breastfeeding That'll Keep Your Energy and Supply Up

breastfeeding snacks, black mom wearing glasses in a home kitchen sipping a pink smoothie through a straw

Stock up on these healthy homemade and store-bought options, all approved by registered dietitians, when you're nursing.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

As a registered dietitian, I know that the foods we eat can make all the difference in our mood, energy and health at any phase of life, but especially postpartum .

Breastfeeding moms need nourishing snacks that are simple and satisfying enough to help them through the whirlwind that is the fourth trimester . And if that nosh only requires one hand, well, all the better.

Here are the 25 best breastfeeding snacks that support steady energy levels and an ample milk supply that registered dietitians like myself love.

What makes a good breastfeeding snack?

The most important thing breastfeeding moms can do is eat enough. "In the postpartum period, many women are depleted in various vitamins and minerals, and require higher nutrient needs to support their recovery, healing, mood and overall well-being," says Amanda Wahlstedt, R.D., C.L.C.

Indeed, moms who exclusively breastfeed can require up to 500 extra calories daily, even more than is needed during pregnancy. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBreastfeeding Your BabySee All Sources [1] Luckily, this is easy to accomplish with two to three balanced snacks a day in addition to your regular meals.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBreastfeeding Your BabySee All Sources

As for what you should snack on, a healthy breastfeeding diet delivers a mix of protein, fats and energizing carbohydrates. Nutrients like choline, iodine and vitamin D that are critical during pregnancy remain so during lactation, so you'll want to make sure you're snacking on foods rich in these vitamins and minerals as well.

Best homemade breastfeeding snacks

1. Banana and nut butter

It's a classic for a reason. This low-effort combo is a "quick and easy source of healthy fats, protein and fiber that supports sustained energy and satiety," Wahlstedt says. Pairing fruit with healthy fats and protein (both found in nut butter) ensures that you won't experience a blood sugar crash after enjoying this snack.

2. Brown rice cake and cottage cheese

Cottage cheese is an excellent source of calcium and protein. Just a half cup of cottage cheese provides nearly one third of your daily calcium needs and an impressive 12 grams of protein. Trusted SourceFoodData CentralCheese, Cottage, Lowfat, 2% MilkfatSee All Sources [2] Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthCalcium Fact Sheet for Health ProfessionalsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceFoodData CentralCheese, Cottage, Lowfat, 2% MilkfatSee All Sources

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthCalcium Fact Sheet for Health ProfessionalsSee All Sources

Top a brown rice cake with cottage cheese and your condiment of choice. Cinnamon, olive oil or balsamic glaze are all tasty options.

3. Smoothie

If you're breastfeeding, then you know the value of a snack that you can consume one-handed. Try blending up a smoothie between feedings so you can sip on a filling beverage whenever hunger strikes next.

Wahlstedt recommends making a smoothie with avocado and frozen banana. "It's quick and easy for breastfeeding mothers and it's rich in fiber, B vitamins and minerals," she says.

Add a source of protein — like protein powder, hemp seeds or plain Greek yogurt — to your smoothies for lasting fullness. Greek yogurt in particular is a good source of iodine, an important nutrient for your baby's neurodevelopment. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicPregnant? Iodine Is Essential for Your Baby's Developing BrainSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicPregnant? Iodine Is Essential for Your Baby's Developing BrainSee All Sources

4. Turkey roll-ups

Speaking of snacks that you can enjoy one-handed, turkey roll-ups fit the bill. Add hummus or cheese on top of turkey slices, then roll them up for easy snacking. You'll get high-quality protein no matter which combo you choose.

Eating enough protein not only helps you feel fuller for longer, but it also supports healing and recovery after labor .

5. Homemade egg bites

Mini frittatas (aka egg bites ) are a fun alternative to hard-boiled eggs, and they provide an opportunity to sneak in extra veggies (like bell pepper, spinach and tomatoes) at snacktime.

Egg yolks contain vitamin D and are among the richest sources of choline, a nutrient that supports healthy growth and brain development in little ones. Trusted SourceWomen, Infants, and Children Works Resource SystemEye on Nutrition: CholineSee All Sources [5] Most breastfeeding women don't meet their daily choline needs, which are even higher than during pregnancy at 550 milligrams per day. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthCholine Fact Sheet for Health ProfessionalsSee All Sources [6] Luckily, two whole eggs supply more than 50% of a breastfeeding mom's daily choline quota.

Trusted SourceWomen, Infants, and Children Works Resource SystemEye on Nutrition: CholineSee All Sources

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthCholine Fact Sheet for Health ProfessionalsSee All Sources

Wahlstedt says eating eggs can potentially help prevent clogged milk ducts , as well.

6. Veggie sticks, crackers and olives

If you prefer savory snacks, nosh on fresh veggies like carrots, celery or radishes along with seedy crackers and olives.

The vegetables and crackers will provide energizing carbohydrates, while the olives are a great source of healthy unsaturated fats. Fats also take longer to digest than carbohydrates and proteins, so they're more likely to keep you feeling fuller for longer.

7. Stuffed dates

Dried dates are a good source of energizing carbs as well as minerals like potassium and magnesium. Stuff a couple of naturally sweet dates with a spoonful of peanut or almond butter (or a whole walnut) and a few chocolate chips. This balanced treat takes less than a minute to prepare — and you can eat it mid-feed.

8. Smoked salmon roll-ups

Research shows that the fat content of breast milk reflects the fat content of a mom's diet. In other words, eating meals and snacks high in anti-inflammatory omega-3s will result in breast milk that's higher in these key fats, as well. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthDietary Patterns of Breastfeeding Mothers and Human Milk Composition: Data from the Italian MEDIDIET Study, May 2021See All Sources [7]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthDietary Patterns of Breastfeeding Mothers and Human Milk Composition: Data from the Italian MEDIDIET Study, May 2021See All Sources

Roll up a few slices of omega-3-rich smoked salmon with cream cheese for a high-protein snack that's full of the essential fats that your baby's brain needs.

9. Lactation cookies and bites

Lactation cookies or bites are a popular snack for moms focused on maintaining their milk supply. One mom from the What to Expect (WTE) Community shared an easy option on a recent discussion board :

"I make large batches of protein/lactation bites — similar to the cookies, but no bake, and I keep them in the fridge for an easy-to-grab, filling snack: oats, peanut butter, honey, chocolate chips rolled into balls and set in the fridge." Genius!

10. String cheese and fruit

If zero-prep snacks are your style, pair string cheese with an orange or apple. Don't hesitate to reach for two sticks of string cheese for adequate calories, protein and calcium.

11. Chia seed pudding

Made from just two ingredients, chia seed pudding is easy to prepare ahead of time. Combine chia seeds and your milk of choice along with flavor boosters like cinnamon and frozen fruit; then let them thicken up in the fridge for an hour or overnight.

Chia seed pudding is packed with fiber and omega-3 fats, but you can also add yogurt or protein powder to turn this into a high-protein snack.

12. Homemade trail mix

A tried-and-true staple, trail mix is a favorite among the What to Expect Community. One WTE mom says she stashes homemade trail mix made from almonds, cashews, peanuts, raisins and M&M's in her purse for easy fuel on the go.

Bump up the nutritional value even further by adding in high-fiber additions like crispy chickpeas or dry roasted edamame.

13. Oatmeal or overnight oats

Wahlstedt recommends choosing oatmeal and overnight oats for quality carbs when breastfeeding. Add chia seeds and berries to your bowl so it's "rich in fiber and carbs to support energy production, with a boost of omega-3s from the chia seeds."

14. Greek yogurt dip

Mix iodine-rich Greek yogurt with a couple spoonfuls of your favorite nut butter or tahini to create a high protein dip for sliced pears or apples. Feel free to add a dash of cinnamon or a teaspoon of maple syrup to sweeten this snack.

15. Blender muffins

Whip up a batch of blender muffins during naptime so you can snack on them throughout the week. This recipe includes the perfect combo of oats, Greek yogurt and peanut butter for all three macronutrients: carbohydrates, protein and fat.

16. Toast

Snacking on a slice of toast provides your body with a source of all-important carbs when breastfeeding.

"Carbohydrate intake seems to play a role in milk supply," Wahlstedt explains. "For example, when breastfeeding women suddenly restrict carbohydrates, it can lead to a drop in milk supply. Low-carb diets can make it difficult to meet calorie needs, and also impact hydration and electrolyte status, which in turn can impact breast milk production."

Top your carb-rich toast with butter, cream cheese, avocado or peanut butter so that it fills you up further.

Best store-bought breastfeeding snacks

17. Jerky

"Jerky is a convenient source of protein and iron, which are essential for maintaining energy levels and supporting postpartum recovery," Wahlstedt says. Animal proteins are also the only foods that naturally contain vitamin B12, a nutrient that's needed for proper growth, brain function and motor development in infants. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionVitamin B12 and BreastfeedingSee All Sources [8]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionVitamin B12 and BreastfeedingSee All Sources

Choose a jerky that excludes added sugars, such as Chomps Jerky Sticks or Krave's Zero Sugar line. Both options provide non-perishable protein in a pinch.

18. Energy bites

If making your own lactation bites feels like a heavy lift, buy pre-made bites instead. "These often contain oats, nuts and seeds, providing a balanced mix of carbs, healthy fats and protein," Wahlstedt says.

What to Expect moms love Bobo's Oat Bites and Heavenly Hunks .

19. Protein shakes

The brands Koia and OWYN offer pre-made protein shakes that are the perfect sweet treat for breastfeeding moms. Both provide a whopping 20 grams of protein per serving and OWYN's offerings are free from all major allergens.

20. Bone broth

"Bone broth is rich in collagen, glycine and electrolytes that help support protein and fluid stores," Wahlstedt says. Collagen may also be helpful for healing after labor.

Try sipping on Kettle & Fire's Organic Chicken Bone Broth , which supplies 17 grams of protein per serving.

21. Nut butter packets

Pop a few peanut butter packets in your diaper bag to pair with fruit on the go. "They're a quick and easy source of healthy fats, protein and fiber that support sustained energy and satiety," Wahlstedt says.

Once Again's Nut Butter is a favorite since it's made from just one whole food ingredient: organic peanuts.

22. Dry roasted edamame

Soybeans are full of healthy fiber and plant-based protein. While fresh edamame is equally nutritious, this dry roasted option from The Only Bean is non-perishable, so it's easy to stash near your nursing chair or bring on a grocery run.

23. Protein bars

Save protein bars for moments when fresh snacks like plain Greek yogurt aren't feasible. Choose a bar that provides more grams of protein than it does grams of added sugars. A few good options include: RX Bars , Perfect Bars , IQ Bars and 88 Acres Bars .

24. Protein pancakes

Prep a batch of pancakes when you have a bit of downtime so you can snack on them throughout the week. Use a pre-made pancake mix that's high in protein, such as Kodiak Cakes or Bob's Red Mill .

And don't hesitate to top your pancake with a pat of butter or ghee for an easy boost of vitamin A, which supports immune system development in infants. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthVitamin A Fact Sheet for Health ProfessionalsSee All Sources [9]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthVitamin A Fact Sheet for Health ProfessionalsSee All Sources

Vitamin A needs are actually higher during lactation than pregnancy, and maternal vitamin A levels directly impact a baby's vitamin A status, Wahlstedt says.

25. Cheese and crackers

Sometimes you just need to keep it simple with cheese and crackers. Opt for crackers made with nourishing fats like nuts or seeds. Back to Nature's Multigrain Flatbreads and Flackers both contain flax seeds, which may help promote milk production in breastfeeding moms.

FAQ

What snacks are good for breast milk supply?

Along with drinking ample water, getting enough carbohydrates is key when breastfeeding. Choose breastfeeding snacks that provide quality carbohydrates, like overnight oats, unsweetened dried fruit and homemade pancakes.

Are galactogogues a real thing?

The research is mixed on whether galactogogues (i.e., foods that increase milk supply) truly exist, but there's little risk to incorporating supposed galactagogues like fenugreek, oats, brewer's yeast and flax seeds into your diet.

What can I eat to stay full while breastfeeding?

Healthy fats and protein are essential for satiety when breastfeeding. Emphasize heart-healthy fats like those in nuts, seeds and avocados, along with animal proteins, Greek yogurt and legumes that provide filling protein.

What breastfeeding snacks can I make ahead?

Homemade egg bites, trail mix, high-protein pancakes and energy bites are great make-ahead breastfeeding snacks.