25 Best Outdoor Toys for Toddlers, Vetted by Pediatricians and a Mom of 2

Best Outdoor Toys for Toddlers

QUICK SUMMARY

The best outdoor toys for toddlers provide endless entertainment for kids between 1 and 5, are built to last for years and easy to assemble.

As the weather gets warmer, I’m planning on getting outside with my two sons as often as possible. I mean, what better way to tire out two toddlers than letting them run wild in nature? But running around can get boring after a while, which is why I always make sure to have a few outdoor toddler toys at the ready.

During the toddler period, which is typically between 1 and 5 years of age, your child goes through a lot of exciting developments. “They become a lot more mobile as they learn to walk, run, and even climb, which leads to them actively exploring their surroundings,” says Christina Johns , M.D., MEd, FAAP, a pediatrician, pediatric emergency physician, and spokesperson for the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) based in Annapolis, Maryland. “The toddler stage is all about exploration, so the more new and interesting things they get to discover, the better.”

But outdoor play isn’t only great for exploration and fun: It can also help stimulate a toddler’s physical and emotional development, says Katie Lockwood , M.D., a pediatrician at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. “Outdoor play offers more opportunities for gross motor skills like running, climbing, kicking and throwing that would [not] be feasible in most indoor environments,” she says.

Playing outside also allows toddlers more freedom to be in nature and use their imagination.“Children are innate scientists and love to experience the sights, scents, sounds, and textures of the outdoors,” adds Claire Goss, a childhood development expert and Senior Manager of Family and Client Support at Bright Horizons in Newton, Massachusetts. “Nature provides countless opportunities for discovery, creativity, and problem-solving.”

Although your child can experience all the benefits of outdoor play without a toy, the best outdoor toys for toddlers can help encourage physical activity and help get your kid’s energy out – away from the couch and screens.

How we chose the best outdoor toys for toddlers

Dr. Johns, Dr. Lockwood and Goss all agree that the best outdoor toddler toys are age appropriate and align with the milestones your child will reach during this two-year phase. Based on this guidance, I only selected toys in which the minimum age fell between 1 and 3 years old.

An outdoor toddler toy also has to be fun, and you really won’t know it’s fun until you open the box and play with it. I own plenty of outdoor toys for toddlers thanks to my two sons; I know which toys get played with daily and which ones collect dust in the closet. So I leaned heavily on my experience, but also relied on feedback and recommendations from What to Expect community members. All of the toys featured below received rave reviews for their ease of assembly (if it’s required), versatility and longevity — all of which contribute to a great outdoor toy for toddlers.

Best Sandbox for Toddlers

Little Tikes Turtle Sandbox

Lid included

Built-in seats

Small enough to use indoors in winter

Small for bigger kids

Age range : 1 to 6 years

Material : Plastic

Size : 38 x 34 x 10.5 inches

Why We Love It

This Little Tikes turtle sandbox is a classic for a reason. It’s an affordable, well-made sandbox that will be used for years. It can easily accommodate four toddlers for group play, and the turtle’s “legs” double as seats for the adults. It’s also light enough (when not full) to move into a garage for storage, and can easily be used for indoor play during cooler seasons.

But the true winning feature is that this sandbox comes with a lid, which the American Academy of Pediatrics says is best to keep your sandbox free from bugs, animals and the elements. I splurged on a more expensive, larger wood sandbox for my boys that didn’t come with a cover, and the makeshift one we used left the sand wet and gross. My kids barely looked at it all season. Needless to say I’ll be upgrading to the Little Tikes Turtle Sandbox this year.

Community Reviews

jlynnhub1 "I have the small turtle sandbox with the lid. Currently it’s in the garage for winter. He plays in it in there for now lol but I haven’t had a problem with bugs when it’s outside. We keep the lid on when not in use. It’s small but a great size for one kid!"

Best Digger for Toddlers

The Big Dig Sandbox Digger

Can be used year-round

Sturdy

Assembly required

Age range : 3 and up

Material : Metal

Size : 21.5 x 19.3 x 5.2 inches

Why We Love It

Your construction-obsessed child will love this ride-on sandbox digger that looks — and works — like a real machine. Though it may look complex, parents say the two-handed controls are easy for tiny hands to operate and that their children mastered the digger relatively quickly. The result: Hours of digging and dumping sand, dirt and even snow, all while building fine motor skills and hand-eye coordination.

Your construction-obsessed child will love this ride-on sandbox digger that looks — and works — like a real machine. Though it may look complex, parents say the

mastered the digger relatively quickly. The result:

building fine motor skills and hand-eye coordination.

Made of robust metal, the digger is built to last for years, making it well worth the money. Parents say the assembly is easy, which is a plus since you’ll have to unassemble it for storage.

Best Sidewalk Chalk for Toddlers

Crayola Ultimate Washable Sidewalk Chalk

Easy to hold

Nontoxic and washable

Storage container included

Some chalk may arrive broken from online delivery

Age range : 4 and up

Why We Love It

Yes, you can unlock your child’s creativity during outdoor play. Just give them some chalk and watch them go! Although there are plenty of chalk buckets available, many other parents and myself like this option from Crayola best. To start, the pieces of chalk are thick and just the right length, making them easier for toddler hands to hold. Additionally, the chalk is square as oppose to circular to keep pieces from rolling away. Then there’s the amount of chalk you get — 64 pieces!

Best Sprinkler for Toddler

Melissa & Doug Pretty Petals Sprinkler

Easy to set up

Affordable

Uses a lot of water

Age range : 3 and up

Materials : Plastic

Size : 7 x 6 x 8 inches

Why We Love It

If you don’t have the room for a kiddie pool, or just want something that’s easier to set up, look no further than the Melissa & Doug Pretty Petals Sprinkler. One of the more popular water toys among What to Expect community members, this sprinkler comes ready to use. All you have to do is attach it to your garden hose. And, as a proud owner of the Pretty Petals Sprinkler, I promise you don’t need to turn the water up very high for powerful sprinkler actions.

If you don’t have the room for a kiddie pool, or just want something that’s easier to set up, look no further than the Melissa & Doug Pretty Petals Sprinkler. One of the more popular

among What to Expect community members, this sprinkler comes ready to use. All you have to do is attach it to your garden hose. And, as a proud owner of the Pretty Petals Sprinkler, I promise you don’t need to turn the water up very high for powerful sprinkler actions.

My boys enjoy running through this very sprinkler, filling up buckets with the water, and trying to get everyone around them wet. And because the sprinkler is compact, it’s easy for use to bring on family trips or to a playdate. compact enough to take with you on a family trip or on a playdate.

Best Splash Pad for Toddlers

Little Tikes Splash Beach

Easy to clean and store

Accessories included

Sprinkler can be turned off while in use

More expensive than other splash pads

Age range : 2 to 4 years

Material : Plastic

Size : 54.50 x 32.30 x 15.25 inches

Why We Love It

This isn’t your typical splash pad; the Little Tikes Splash Beach is in a category all of its own. To start, the rectangular “pad” comes with multiple accessories — a mini slide for toys, a scoop-and-pour cup, and sailboat, to name a few — that your child can play with once they get bored splishing and splashing. A real step up from other splash pads that only offer a sprinkler for entertainment. Speaking of sprinklers, you can attach a hose to the side of the pad to utilize its sprinkler function. Or, if your child prefers to treat this like a kiddie pool, you can simply fill it with water.

Parents appreciate that this is easier to clean: Traditional splash pads require wiping and air drying before they can be stored away, but with the Little Tikes Splash Beach, you can simply dump out the water and wipe it dry. They also love how easy the splash pad is to store, as it folds into the shape of a suitcase.

Whether you use this as a splash pad or kiddie pool, Dr. Johns reminds parents to always keep your toddler within arm's reach, even in shallow water, to prevent drowning .

Whether you use this as a splash pad or kiddie pool, Dr. Johns reminds parents to

Community Reviews

gmurray29 "You guys - this is the perfect little splash pad!!! It’s a couple inches deep so perfect to sit in without worrying too much! Could easily fit 2 small toddlers! You can turn on the sprinkler area or turn it off. 10/10 - best birthday present my little received!"

Best Water Table

Step2 Waterfall Discovery Wall

Sturdy

double-sided

doesn’t take up lots of room

Parents say that the low water pressure can be frustrating

Age range: 18 months and up

Weight: 12 pounds

Dimensions: 33.25 x 28 x 16.25 inches

Why We Love It

When searching for a toddler-friendly water table , Dr. Johns says it’s key to “look for features such as wide bases, sturdy legs, and secure fittings to ensure the table remains stable even when toddlers lean or apply pressure.” Step2 Waterfall Discovery Wall checks all those boxes, plus it's super compact . Made of a durable plastic, the double-sided water table has a flat bases to ensure it stays standing even against the strongest toddler.

, Dr. Johns says it’s key to “look for features such as wide bases, sturdy legs, and secure fittings to ensure the table remains stable even when toddlers lean or apply pressure.” Step2 Waterfall Discovery Wall checks all those boxes, plus it's super compact

Made of a durable plastic, the double-sided water table has a flat bases to ensure it stays standing even against the strongest toddler.

Of course, you also want your water table to have fun features, and Step2 delivers on that front as well, with a 13-piece accessory set that ensures a unique play experience every time.

Best Kiddie Pool for Toddlers

Intex Dinoland Play Center

Good quality

Multiple ways to play

Large age range

Multiple kids can play

Requires pump to inflate

Assembly may be time consuming

Age range: 2 and up

Material: Plastic

Size : 11 feet x 7.5 feet x 44 inches

Why We Love It

There’s nothing like taking a dip in the pool when the temperatures start rising. Fortunately, toddlers don’t need an Olympic size pool to reap the benefits; any kiddie pool will do. But if you want an inflatable pool that they’ll enjoy for a few years, Intex inflatable pools come highly recommended by parents.

In addition to a wading pool where younger kids can splish and splash, this dino version has a mini water slide and a water sprayer to maximize the fun. There’s even a ring toss game that’s sure to entertain kids and adults alike.

In addition to a wading pool where younger kids can splish and splash, this dino version has a mini water slide and a water sprayer to maximize the fun. There’s even a

ring toss game that’s sure to entertain kids and adults alike.

With this many features, Intex’s pool does take up more space than other kiddie pools. It also requires more effort to assemble; you have to use a pump to inflate each element. If you’re short on space (or patience), this may not be the pool for you.

Regardless of what kiddie pool you get, Dr. Johns reminds parents to always keep your toddler within arm's reach, even in shallow water, to prevent drowning .

Community Reviews

Goldfish105 We are using our Intex for a second year right now. It was even stored pretty sloppily on the floor of our shed and made it through nicely.

Best Water Blasters for Toddlers

Animal Water Blasters

Easy to hold

Lightweight

Fun for the whole family

May be smaller than expected

Age range : 2 and up

Material : Foam and plastic

Size : 14.57 x 6.81 x 3.7 inches

Why We Love It

If you were to ask my sons, they’d tell you these animal water blasters are the best water toys. And, having used them in many family water fights, I’d have to agree.

The thick tubes are light — even when filled with water — making them easier for toddler hands to grasp. Additionally, each handle is soft and shaped in a way that caters to toddler dexterity. They’re made of a durable, non-toxic foam that will be able to withstand a few summer’s worth of water fights. (Though you will have to store them properly to ensure they don’t get scratched.)

And, as an added bonus, your toddler will be able to practice their aim and hand-eye coordination while staying cool. A true win-win! They’re super easy to hold, not too heavy (even when filled with water), and can help your little one practice their aim while staying cool.

Best Gardening Set for Toddlers

Little Gardener Tool Set

Multi-purpose

Quality material. Affordable

No watering can

Age range : 3 and up

Material : Plastic

Size : 9.45 x 7.1 x 6.7 inches

Why We Love It

Sure, you can find bigger, more elaborate gardening sets on the market. But trust me: your toddler is going to spend the most time with the rake and the spray bottle. With that in mind, the Melissa & Doug Giddy Buggy Tote Set is perfect. Spray bottle? Check. Rake? Check. Shovel and bonus tote bag to carry all the gardening gear around? Check and check. And, as with all Melissa & Doug toys, every component is made from durable material that is sure to withstand years of outdoor play.

These tools are also functional, meaning your child can help pull weeds, plant flowers and pick veggies from the garden. This gives you some extra help and, as Dr. Johns says, “provides your child with a sense of accomplishment as well as help with fine motor skills.” But even if this gardening set isn’t put to actual use, it’s sure to encourage imaginative play and outdoor adventures, which offer their own benefits and fun.

Best Lawn Mower Toy for Toddlers

Husqvarna Toy Lawn Mower

Well-made

Realistic sounds and lights

Batteries required (3AA)

Age range : 2 and up

Material: Plastic

Size : 22 x 15 x 16 inches

Why We Love It

If you’ve got a kiddo who loves realistic-looking construction and gardening toys, or just loves to have miniature versions of the real thing like their grown-ups, then the Husqvarna toy lawn mower is a must-have.

My older son, now 5, had the entire Husqvarna toy lineup as a toddler: Leaf blower, chain saw, and lawn trimmer. So, naturally, we needed the lawn mower. And I’m happy to say it didn’t disappoint. Like Husqvarna’s other toys, the lawnmower looks like a miniature version of the grown up machine. There are even different sound and light options that mimic a full-size lawn mower, though some children might find that overwhelming. Fortunately, you can turn the lawn mower off and it will still operate without the added elements. It’s made of durable material to withstand years of play, ensuring you get your money’s worth.

Best Outdoor Craft Set for Toddlers

Hearthsong Double-Sided Inflatable Kids Art Easel

Good for multiple kids

Includes paint accessories

Easy cleanup

Not as sturdy as a regular easel

Age range : 3 and up

Material : Vinyl

Size: 29 x 24 x 8 inches

Why We Love It

For kids who like to get creative, Dr. Johns suggests setting up outdoor art stations to “engage and develop” your child’s interest. Although you can take a page from her book and let your child “paint” on the driveway with brushes and water, you can also let them paint with HeathSong’s inflatable easel.

At roughly 3 feet tall and 2 feet wide, this inflatable easel provides plenty of room for your child to get creative. In fact, the canvas is actually double sided so two kids can explore their artistic side. The easel comes with four shaped sponges, one paintbrush and four 1-ounce tubes of washable paint, all of which can be placed in the attached tray as your child works on their masterpiece.

At roughly 3 feet tall and 2 feet wide, this inflatable easel provides plenty of room for your child to get creative. In fact, the canvas is actually double sided so two kids can explore their artistic side. The easel comes with

four shaped sponges, one paintbrush and four 1-ounce tubes of washable paint, all of which can be placed in the attached tray as your child works on their masterpiece.

Cleaning couldn’t be easier: Simply spray the easel with a hose or wipe with a wet cloth. Some parents have found that the included paint doesn’t completely wash off, though the company has recently reformulated the paint to prevent staining the easel. If you’re concerned, you can always purchase washable paint separately.

Best Bubble Wand for Toddlers

Fubbles Bubbles No-Spill Bubbles Tumbler

Easy-to-hold wand and tumbler

Designed to minimize mess

Promotes independence

Not completely leak-proof

Age range : 18 months and up

Material : Plastic

Size : 5.3 x 3.3 x 9 inches

Why We Love It

“Bubbles are a fun, easy, and low-cost way to get your toddler moving,” says Goss. “They work big muscles by chasing bubbles. As their fine motor skills strengthen, they can try to catch or pop individual bubbles.”

There’s no shortage of bubble wands out there, but my family loves the Fubbles Bubbles tumbler. Both the wand and tumbler are wide and shaped in ways that make it easier for toddlers to grasp. And you don’t have to worry about your toddler dropping the tumbler and losing all of the bubble solution. As the name suggests, the container is designed to prevent spills from happening. It’s not completely leak-free (there will be some spillage if you or your child turn it upside down), but you’ll be dealing with much less of a mess and a whole lot more fun.

Community Reviews

upschic "Bubbles are a huge hit here…she has a bubble lawn mower and fubbles have a nice container they can use that doesn’t spill."

Best Bubble Machine for Toddlers

Fubbles No-Spill Funfiniti Bubble Machine

Makes lots of bubbles

Portable

Lasts up to an hour before needing a refill

Batteries required (4 AA)

Can be noisy

Age range : 3 and up

Material : Plastic

Size : 6 x 8.8 x 8 inches

Why We Love It

“Bubble play provides sensory stimulation through tactile and visual experiences, as toddlers track moving bubbles,” says Dr. Johns. “It helps develop fine motor skills when kids reach out to touch, grasp, and pop bubbles, contributing to hand-eye coordination and finger dexterity. Chasing and popping bubbles promotes gross motor skills development, encouraging toddlers to move, run, and jump, enhancing balance, coordination, and spatial awareness.”

Take your bubble play to the next level with Fubbles’s bubble machine. Great for playdates or parties, the battery-operated machine makes thousands of bubbles for kids to chase and pop. All you have to do is pour the bubble solution into the base, screw on the top, and press a button. The machine holds 20 oz. of bubble solution so refills are less frequent, and the machine runs for up to an hour without requiring new batteries. (Four AA batteries, in case you want to stock up now.)

bubble machine. Great for playdates or parties, the battery-operated machine makes thousands of bubbles for kids to chase and pop. All you have to do is pour the bubble solution into the base, screw on the top, and press a button. The machine holds 20 oz. of bubble solution so refills are less frequent, and the machine runs for up to an hour without requiring new batteries. (Four AA batteries, in case you want to stock up now.)

And, as with the Fubble bubble tumbler, this machine is designed to prevent spillage if the machine gets knocked over; Something that’s bound to happen when you have little kids chasing bubbles.

Best Outdoor Toddler Toy for Small Spaces

National Geographic Stepping Stones

Stackable for easy storage

Non-slip rubber base for added safety

Can be used indoors or outdoors

May be small for older kids

Age range : 3 and up

Material: Plastic

Why We Love It

Gross says toddlers love to experiment physically, and activities like climbing small boulders or stepping from rock to rock allow them to experiment while building physical coordination and muscle strength. But your yard may not have boulders and rocks, which is where these National Geographic Stepping Stones come in handy. Each of the six brightly colored stones is made of sturdy material and has a textured surface to help your child grip the stone and reduce the risk of slipping. Additionally, the bottom of each stone has a non-slip rubber base to keep them in place, should your child err on the wild side.

Gross says toddlers love to experiment physically, and activities like climbing small boulders or stepping from rock to rock allow them to experiment while building physical coordination and muscle strength. But your yard may not have boulders and rocks, which is where these National Geographic Stepping Stones come in handy. Each of the six brightly colored stones is made of sturdy material and

has a textured surface to help your child grip the stone and reduce the risk of slipping. Additionally, the bottom of each stone has a non-slip rubber base to keep them in place, should your child err on the wild side.

Since hopping between stones can lose its wonder after a while, the set also includes a spinner that turns the rocks into a game that’ll help toddlers practice their colors and balance at the same time.

Best Travel-Friendly Outdoor Toy

Joyin Collapsible Sand Buckets

Lightweight

Multi-purpose

Shovels and mesh bag included

Some find the material flimsy

Age range : 1 and up

Material : Plastic

Why We Love It

If you’re going on a vacation and need some outdoor entertainment, Joyin’s collapsible sand buckets are a must-buy. As the name suggests, these flexible buckets collapse into a flat circle that can be stored in any bag without taking up too much real estate. In addition to a bucket, you’ll get three shovels and a mesh bag to carry everything while getting rid of unwanted sand.

Bonus: The buckets and shovels are made of BPA-free material. So you don’t have to stress if your child decides they double as teething toys.

Community Reviews

2021mama2022 "If you haven’t traveled with baby yet a few of my favorites are a travel bottle washing kit, collapsible bucket, stroller fan, blanket and jacket for plane, car seat backpack if taking car seat, suction spinner toys for plane, cup for water, hat, sunglasses, lots of babies favorite snacks. Have so much fun!"

cinquieme "For toys I’d bring a few things along but don’t go crazy. Maybe a coloring book or water painting. Whatever sort of small packable toys they’re into (cars, animals, or action figures) and then a small amount of beach toys (collapsible bucket, shovel, etc), a pool swim float that’s appropriate for their age."

Best Outdoor Game for Toddlers

Melissa & Doug Sunny Patch Dilly Dally Target Game

Helps develop hand-eye coordination and gross motor skills

Can be used indoors

Not ideal for older kids

Age range : 3 and up

Material : Polyester and velcro

Size : 5.5 x 22.5 x 12 inches

Why We Love It

Part bean bag toss, part target game, Melissa & Doug’s Sunny Patch Dilly Dally is perfecting for helping kids reach various milestones. For toddlers, the tossing and the bean bag hones their gross motor skills and hand-eye coordination, while older kids can work on their counting and adding with an easy-to-follow scoring system.

It can also help kids, particularly toddlers, learn to share. “One social skill that toddlers are working hard on is learning how to take turns,” “This is a shaky skill through preschool, and toddlers can benefit from lots of practice,” says Goss. “You can play ‘stop and go’ games outside, which gives your child the opportunity to practice waiting and is great for boosting self-control.”

Aside from the toy’s many developmental benefits, Melissa & Doug’s bean bag toss is a quality toy. The turtle target has a durable, non-wobbly base to withstand the hardest throws. The bean bags are super lightweight, so even younger toddlers will be able to handle them.

Best T-Ball Set for Toddlers

Little Tikes TotSports T-Ball Set

Easy to assemble

Good quality bat

Stand may fall over when child hits the ball

Age range : 18 months and up

Material : Plastic

Size : ‎12 x 11 x 22 inches

Why We Love It

The Little Tikes t-ball set is a classic toy that can be used for years, starting when your child is 18 months old . Complete with two balls and an oversized bat that’s perfect for small hands, your little one can practice their swing while improving their hand-eye coordination. And, because the tee is easy to adjust, the toy can grow with your child.

Despite being lightweight and easy to move, the stand is relatively sturdy. That said, if your toddler shows signs of playing in the MLB, parents recommend weighing the base down with sand bags. The set also comes apart easily, making it easy to store. In fact, the bat and tee can slide into the base, which can then be hung on the wall for more compact storage.

Best Soccer Net for Toddlers

Franklin Sports Kids Mini Soccer Goal Set

Portable

Ball and pump included

Ball may be small for older kids

Age range : 2 and up

Material : Plastic

Size : 36 x 24 x 24 inches

Why We Love It

For kids just starting soccer, the Franklin Sports mini goal and ball set is perfect for indoors or outdoors play. At 5 inches, the ball is just right for tiny feet. As your child grows both in size and skill, you can easily swap it for a bigger ball. As for the net, it’s a lightweight but durable option that can be folded when not in use — perfect for storing or transporting to the park.

outdoors play. At 5 inches, the ball is just right for tiny feet. As your child grows both in size and skill, you can easily swap it for a bigger ball. As for the net, it’s a lightweight but durable option that can be folded when not in use — perfect for storing or transporting to the park.

Even if your child doesn’t show signs of being a soccer star, Dr. Johns says this type of toy can teach your child the crucial skill of playing with others. “Activities that involve taking turns or sharing, like kicking a soccer ball back and forth, can help children sharpen their consideration and communication skills,” she says.

Best Balance Bike for Toddlers

woom 1

Will grow with your child

Lightweight

Easy to assemble

Promotes independence

Expensive

Age range : 2 and up

Material : Aluminum

Size : 28 x 13 x 8 inches

Why We Love It

Balance bikes encourage kids to use their core and maintain the posture needed to transition to a traditional bike . And What to Expect parents highly recommend on the woom 1 to introduce your child to two-wheeling, so to speak.

. And What to Expect parents highly recommend on the woom 1 to introduce your child to two-wheeling, so to speak.

The bike is light enough for toddlers to easily manipulate, but still sturdy enough to hold kids up to 110 pounds. The high weight limit combined with the quality material means this is a bike that’s built to last, making the high price worth it.

Unlike most balance bikes, the woom 1 has a hand-brake system for a little extra security. There’s also a steering limiter to prevent the front wheel from overturning, which can cause the bike to tip over. Parents appreciate how easy the woom 1 is to assemble and adjust as their child grows.

Unlike most balance bikes, the woom 1 has a hand-brake system for a little extra security. There’s also

a steering limiter to prevent the front wheel from overturning, which can cause the bike to tip over.

Parents appreciate how easy the woom 1 is to assemble and adjust as their child grows.

As with any bike or scooter, make sure your child has the proper additional safety equipment: specifically, a helmet.

Community Reviews

hppygrrl33 "My five year old has been riding without training wheels since he was just past 3. We got him the Woom bike and he picked up on it in no time. My 3 year old is now riding it as a balance bike and is almost ready for pedals without training wheels. I think the hardest part for them to figure out is how to balance. I suggest getting a balance bike and then trying them out on the pedal bike."

Leesnov2021 "We've got a woom. We love it. I used to work for a health and fitness company, and so many folks got their kids the strider and loved it. Both are great. Woom just has better components, which means in theory an easier and better ride. Price tag is higher though, but I think they offer some trade-in programs to trade-up sizes when ready. I honestly think both are great."

Best Scooter for Toddlers

Micro Mini Foldable LED Scooter

No assembly required

Can be folded up

Kids like the LED lights

Expensive

Age range : 2 to 5 years

Material : Aluminum

Size : 25 x 10.5 x 21 inches

Why We Love It

Scooters are a great way for toddlers to work on their coordination and gross motor skills, all while zipping around – as fast as they can, of course – in the fresh air. And the Micro Mini Foldable LED Scooter is an excellent addition to round out your outdoor toy collection. With an adjustable handlebar, lightweight body, and eye-catching light-up wheels, your little one will have fun with it for years to come. (Mine certainly have!) The best part: You can easily fold it up and bring it with you to the park, to a friend’s house, or even on vacation. Just make sure you buy a helmet to go with it.

“Many toddlers start to use scooters or tricycles around age 2 and 3 and should wear an appropriately fitted helmet at all times,” says Dr. Johns, adding that kids will get used to them rather quickly.

Best Ride-On Toy for Toddlers

Lil’ Rider Wiggle Car

Can be used indoors

Fun for multiple ages

Can be hard for younger kids to maneuver

Age range : 3 and up

Material : Plastic

Size : 30 x 12.5 x 15.25 inches

Why We Love It

Although there are infinite ride-on toys on the market, the Lil’ Rider Wiggle Car stands out because, unlike other ride-ons, this one doesn’t require your child to use their legs to get it moving. And before you ask, it doesn’t require batteries either. It is operated by the easy-to-use steering handle that controls the front wheels and your child wiggling on the seat. The design is also unique, requiring kids to stretch their legs out rather than bend them down. This is great for kids with longer legs or older, taller kids.

Another plus: It can be used outside or inside on linoleum or tile floors.

My boys have — and love — this ride-on. Although my 2-year-old took a little longer getting a hang of steering it, my 5-year-old was racing around the yard in no time. It’s definitely a toy that will grow with younger kids and be a favorite for years to come.

Best Swing Set

KidKraft Ainsley Wooden Outdoor Swing Set with Slide and Rock Wall

Meets ASTM standards

Made of sturdy material

Multiple features

Not suitable for older children

Age range : 3 to 7 years

Material : Cedar wood, plastic, hardware

Dimensions : 123 x 108 x 93 inches

Why We Love It

Swings are great for developing gross motor skills in toddlers. And if you’re lucky enough to have some outdoor space for a swing set of your own, KidKraft’s wooden set is worth the money. Made from 100-percent cedar lumber, the swing set is sturdy enough to accommodate up to 660 pounds. The swings themselves are made of a soft plastic and use rope — not metal — to attach to the set, making it more comfortable for little hands. If your child isn't ready for a belt seat just yet, you can easily swap one or both swings out for bucket seats.

Swings are great for developing gross motor skills in toddlers. And if you’re lucky enough to have some outdoor space for a swing set of your own, KidKraft’s wooden set is worth the money. M

ade from 100-percent cedar lumber, the swing set is sturdy enough to accommodate up to 660 pounds. The swings themselves are made of a soft plastic and use rope — not metal — to attach to the set, making it more comfortable for little hands. If your child isn't ready for a belt seat just yet, you can easily swap one or both swings out for bucket seats.

In addition to two swings, this set includes a slide, rockwall and sandbox, so the options for play are truly limitless.

If you don’t have the space for such a large set, we’ve rounded up the best swing sets which include several smaller and more affordable options.

Best Slide for Toddlers

Gupamiga Toddler Slide

Folds for easy transportation and storage

Good for indoor or outdoor use

Holds up to 110 pounds

May be small for larger kids

Age range : 1 to 4 years

Material : Plastic

Size : 36 x 15 x 11.35 inches

Why We Love It

The ideal outdoor toy can be easily transported to another location, a criteria that rarely applies to things like swing sets and slides. Unless it’s the Gupamiga Toddler Slide. Made of a super smooth plastic, this sturdy yet small-scale slide folds in half for relatively easy transport. (It weighs a little over 14 lbs, so some people may require a second hand to move it.) This means you can move it inside during the colder months or to the grandparent’s house if you're there on an extended visit.

Parents appreciate that the steps have rails to better assist children as they climb to the top. And the neutral color scheme assures it won’t be an eyesore.

Just remember slide safety: Whether it’s this slide or one at the playground, Dr. Johns says, “adults should resist the temptation to go down a slide with a child on their lap as this poses an injury risk of the child’s leg getting caught under the adult’s, which can result in a fracture.”

Community Reviews

kburgy “We got our daughter a slide for Christmas and it has been great. The colors are more toned down and it’s actually nice quality! More expensive than the basic but way cheaper than the [Pikler] slides.”

Best Outdoor Climbing Toy for Toddlers

Avenlur 5-in-1 Outdoor and Indoor Playground Playset

Multiple ways to play

Can be used indoors

Assembly required

Age range : 2 and up

Material : Wood, plastic

Size : 82.7 x 42 x 38.4 inches

Why We Love It

Dr. Johns recommends super sturdy climbing structures, as they can help your child build balance, improve gross motor skills and even aid in critical thinking. Although it’s a bit of an investment, Avenlur’s 5-in-1 playset is loved by parents and kids alike. Made of sustainable, splinter-free material, the playset has multiple features to keep your child entertained (and wear them out): a ladder, a rock wall, a slide and a fabric tent for hiding.

Parents can also rest assured knowing the playset has been tested and certified by ASTM International and the Consumer Product Safety Commission, meaning it meets all safety standards and is strong enough to withstand repeated use from children.

ASTM International and the Consumer Product Safety Commission, meaning it meets all safety standards and is strong enough to withstand repeated use from children.

It will take some time to assemble, so be patient with yourself. And if you run into any issues, parents say Avenlur’s customer service is excellent.

Best Outdoor Playhouse for Toddlers

Radio Flyer Play & Fold Away Treetop Tower

Lightweight but durable

Folds up

Easy to assemble

May be small for bigger toddlers and little kids

Age range : 2 to 5 years

Material : Plastic, fabric

Size : 58.1 L x 24.67 W x 61.3 inches

Why We Love It

I can personally vouch for Radio Flyer treetop tower, a well-made playhouse that will provide hours of fun. There are multiple features to encourage multiple types of play and help develop different skills: A climbing ladder to help with coordination and balance; a steering wheel to work on gross motor skills; a telescope and hidden alcove to encourage imaginative play. And, of course, a slide for fun. My 2-year-old has enjoyed learning to climb up its ladder and use the slide over and over (and over) again, while my 5-year-old loves playing hide-and-seek underneath.

As a parent, there is one feature I really appreciate: The playhouse is light and folds flat. This not only makes it easy to store, but makes it easy to bring inside during the colder months. Another plus is that it’s smaller than other playhouses, so you don’t need a giant playroom or sprawling yard to use it. The only downside to that is your kids will outgrow it within a few years.

How to Shop for Outdoor Toys

The right outdoor toys can encourage imaginative play, help kids develop important skills like hand-eye coordination and keep them active and moving. While they can be well worth it, you don't need to splurge on a fancy swing set or playhouse to keep your little ones entertained. “Outdoor toys do not need to be overly complex and instead should help kids focus on and engage with nature,” says Dr. Lockwood.

Here’s some guidance on what to keep in mind when you’re shopping for new outdoor toys:

Age recommendations : Per the AAP , it’s always important to check the recommended age of any given toy to ensure it’s something your little one can safely use or is developmentally ready to enjoy.

Developmental appropriateness : Two-year-olds are vastly different in their abilities from 3- and 4-year-olds, so tailor your purchases and your expectations accordingly. For example, “a younger toddler may need more supervision with gross motor activities, such as climbing up a slide or kicking a ball,” says Dr. Lockwood. “You can still use these toys, but you will need to play a more active role in assisting your toddler until they develop the motor skills to use them independently.”

Weight and capacity limits : Toys where kids are sitting, riding or climbing on them (think: wagons, swings and slides) typically come with clear weight limits. Don’t ignore those for the sake of a cute toy — these limits ensure kids don’t injure themselves.

Choking risk : Avoid toys with small or removable parts (or toys that can fit entirely in a child’s mouth) for babies and young children. Toddlers might be tempted to put them in their mouths, which is a major choking hazard .

Durability : Outdoor toys are meant to be used outside, making the choice of material extra important. Many outdoor toys are made out of plastic, rubber or metal. Always choose toys made of sturdy, non-toxic materials. You will also need to maintain outdoor equipment to ensure there are no rusty nails, loose boards, splintering wood, etc.

Personal preference : Dr. Lockwood recommends choosing toys that align with your child’s interests. Artsy kids might love sidewalk chalk, for example, while truck-obsessed tots might appreciate a sandbox or sturdier toy cars to use outside.

One last thing to keep in mind: The best toys are not meant to completely replace caregiver time, but enrich it. Solitary play is important, but using toys with caregivers helps further enhance the skills your little one learns from play. So consider things you’d like to do with your child when picking out outdoor toys — it’ll upgrade the experience for you both.

American Academy of Pediatrics, Safety in the Sandbox , November 2015. American Academy of Pediatrics, Drowning Prevention for Curious Toddlers: What Parents Need to Know , June 2023. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, Mastering balance: The use of balance bicycles promotes the development of independent cycling , June 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics, Riding a Slide While Riding on a Parent's Lap Increases the Risk of Injury , September 2017 American Academy of Pediatrics, How to Buy Safe Toys , December 2021. Christina Johns , M.D., MEd, FAAP, a pediatrician, pediatric emergency physician, and spokesperson for the American Academy of Pediatrics Katie Lockwood, MD , Pediatrician, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Claire Goss, a childhood development expert and Senior Manager of Family and Client Support at Bright Horizons

Your Next Read

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

26 Toys for 18-Month-Olds, According to Child Play Experts and Parents Alike Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

6 Best Standing Toys to Help Your Baby Meet a Milestone Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Crafts for Toddlers Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for 15-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Benefits of Water Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Best Activities for 3-Year-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Sensory Play Activities for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Best Activities for 18-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 10-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Making Bathtime Fun for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window