From doulas to birth centers to public policy advocates, these leaders are organizing, mobilizing and educating in the name of Black maternal health.

Black women in the United States continue to face disproportionately high risks during pregnancy and childbirth. They are two to three times more likely than white women to die from pregnancy-related causes and make up more than half of all preventable complications during the prenatal and postpartum periods. A growing body of research points to systemic bias and medical racism as key drivers of these persistent disparities.

Research also shows that Black women are more likely to be uninsured, face greater financial barriers to health care, and are less likely to have access to quality, culturally competent maternity care. Compounding these disparities, 2020 saw a wave of hospital closures in predominantly Black neighborhoods, further limiting access to essential maternal health care.

Birth and reproductive justice advocates are taking active roles to combat these injustices and help improve birth outcomes for Black mothers and their babies. Here are just a few of the leaders who are organizing, mobilizing and educating in the name of Black maternal health.

Individuals pushing for change

Senator Cory Booker

Sen. Booker (D-NJ), along with Representatives Lauren Underwood (IL-14) and Alma Adams (NC-12), introduced the Black Maternal Health Momnibus Act to advance federal solutions to the high rate of Black women dying due to complications of pregnancy and childbirth. The legislation proposed comprehensive measures, including increasing access to maternal health care in underserved communities, extending pregnancy-related insurance coverage up to a year postpartum and expanding support for community-based organizations. As of April 2025, the Black Maternal Health Momnibus Act remains under consideration in Congress. Advocates continue to push for its passage, emphasizing its potential to significantly reduce preventable maternal deaths and improve health outcomes for Black mothers nationwide.

Learn more: booker.senate.gov

Veronica Gillispie-Bell, M.D.

Most maternal deaths in the United States occur not in the hospital but in the weeks and months after childbirth — up to a year postpartum. Dr. Gillispie-Bell, a board-certified OB-GYN and system medical director of health outcomes for the Ochsner Health System, is an outspoken advocate for maternal health equity and quality, especially during the fourth trimester. Her efforts focus on developing solutions to ensure that new mothers don’t fall through the cracks in postpartum care. For example, she has led efforts to provide mobile health care to women after delivery, eliminating some barriers that keep women from following up with their doctor.

Learn more: amjc.com

Nicole Deggins C.N.M., M.S.N., M.P.H.

Deggins is the founder and CEO of Sista Midwife Productions, the largest online Black midwives and doula directory. As a birth advocacy expert with more than 30 years of experience in the health field, she brings important knowledge to the current reproductive justice movement while raising awareness about how history impacts current birth outcomes for Black women. She also serves as a community educator, promoting transparency in the obstetric medical system and offering community-based prenatal education.

Learn more: sistamidwife.com

Joia A. Crear-Perry, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Dr. Crear-Perry is the founder and president of the National Birth Equity Collaborative. The National Birth Equity Collaborative (NBEC) has a simple yet immensely important vision: “All Black mothers and babies thrive.” Founded on values like leadership and freedom, the NBEC “creates solutions that optimize Black maternal and infant health through training, policy advocacy, research and community-centered collaboration,” according to its website. Dr. Crear-Perry speaks nationwide about how the legacy of slavery and structural racism continue to fuel the disproportionately high maternal mortality rate among Black women.

Learn more: birthequity.org

Senator Raphael Warnock

In Georgia, where the maternal mortality rates are among the highest, Sen. Warnock (D-GA), along with then-Senator Marco Rubio (R-FL), introduced bipartisan legislation to improve maternal outcomes with an often underutilized solution: fathers. Warnock introduced the Dads Matter Act of 2024. This legislation calls on the Department of Health and Human Services to launch a public awareness campaign to highlight the importance of father involvement and offer guidance to maternity care providers on including fathers in prenatal and postpartum care.

Learn more: warnock.senate.gov

Charles Johnson

Since his wife, Kira Johnson, died in 2018 followingafter preventable complications from a routine C-section, Johnson has dedicated his life to pushing for legislative and policy changes to save the lives of women of color during and after pregnancy and childbirth. He founded 4 Kira 4 Moms, an organization that advocates for better maternal health outcomes for Black women and offers support to bereaved families. The same year his wife died, Johnson testified in front of Congress about the circumstances of his wife’s death. In December 2018, the Preventing Maternal Deaths Act — landmark legislation to improve the quality and comprehensiveness of maternal death data, which Johnson helped support — was signed into law.

Learn more: 4kira4moms.com

Mayor Muriel Bowser

The mayor of Washington, D.C., is a fierce advocate for pregnant women and mothers. Each year since 2018, she's hosted the National Maternal & Infant Health Summit, bringing together stakeholders from government, education, health care and the community to collaborate and explore strategies to improve perinatal health and address racial disparities in maternal health outcomes. Mayor Bowser also launched Thrive by Five D.C., a comprehensive childhood health and early learning initiative.

Learn more: mayor.dc.gov

Senator Lisa Blunt Rochester

Mental health conditions are one of the most frequent causes of pregnancy-related death, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Sen. Lisa Blunt Rochester (D-Del.) wants to directly address that poor outcome by introducing the Moms Matter Act. The bill creates grant programs aimed at addressing maternal mental health conditions and substance use disorders, with a special focus on serving people of color.

Learn more: lisabluntrochester.com

Jennie Joseph

Joseph, the founder of Commonsense Childbirth, is one of the world’s most respected midwives. She advocates for maternal health care system reform through practical approaches. Notably, Joseph created The JJ Way, a patient-centered model of health care that aims to reduce disparities in birth outcomes. The goal is for The JJ Way to be incorporated into medical establishments to equip every mom-to-be with education and easy access to support and medical care.

Learn more: https://jenniejoseph.com/

Representative Gwen Moore

Rep. Gwen Moore (WI-4) reintroduced the Mamas First Act in 2024, a legislative effort to address the maternal mortality crisis by expanding Medicaid to cover doula and midwifery care. The bill aims to improve access to comprehensive prenatal, delivery and postpartum support, particularly for Black and other underserved communities. By ensuring Medicaid reimbursement for these services, the bill seeks to reduce disparities, particularly the higher maternal mortality rates among Black and Indigenous women.

Learn more: gwenmoore.house.gov

Representative Robin Kelly

Black women in rural areas are at the highest risk of pregnancy-related morbidity and mortality. Rep. Kelly’s goal is to improve those outcomes with the Rural Obstetrics Readiness Act. The bill seeks to address the shortage of obstetric care in maternity care deserts, where over 2.3 million women face limited access to essential healthcare services. The legislation will provide federal grants to rural healthcare facilities, ensuring they have the necessary equipment, workforce and training to handle obstetric emergencies.

Learn more: robinkelly.house.gov

William R Moore, CPE

As one of the first two men in Minnesota to become a certified doula, Moore is dedicated to health equity. He advocates for Black maternal health with the state's Birth Equity Council and works with fathers in the St. Paul area to educate and empower them to be active in the birth process and during postpartum.

Learn more: mnpqc.org

Congresswoman Alma Adams

Representing North Carolina's 12th congressional district, Congresswoman Adams helped launch the Black Maternal Health Caucus to improve Black maternal health outcomes. Her work has helped raise awareness within Congress for Black maternal health concerns, and she also advocates for culturally competent policies and reproductive justice for Black mothers.

Learn more: adams.house.gov

Senator Tammy Duckworth

As the first senator to give birth while serving in Congress, Sen. Duckworth (D-Ill.) has long been a champion for mothers’ rights. She’s also one of the original co-sponsors of the Black Maternal Health Momnibus Act. “It’s a tragedy every time a new mother dies from a preventable cause related to pregnancy or childbirth, and it’s shameful that far too often those new moms are women of color whose pain or symptoms have been overlooked or ignored,” Duckworth said in a press release.

Learn more: duckworth.senate.gov

Organizations advocating for Black maternal health

Roots Community Birth Center

As one of the few Black-owned birth centers in the country, Roots Community Birth Center is committed to addressing the unique needs of Black families. Research shows freestanding birth centers with a community-led approach play a pivotal role in transforming birth outcomes for Black families, and Roots provides just that. Founder and certified midwife Rebecca Polston centers their work on building relationships — with families, communities, and local hospitals and doctors. The effectiveness of this model is clear. In its decade of operation, Roots Community Birth Center has seen low Cesarean delivery rates, higher-than-average breastfeeding rates, and low hospital transfer rates.

Learn more: rootsbirthcenter.com

Mamatoto Village

Healthy mamas, healthy babies, healthy communities: This is the vision of Mamatoto Village. By offering training to Black future perinatal health workers and lactation specialists, the organization works to increase the number of culturally competent health care workers. Mamatoto Village offers virtual classes, services for pregnant women and new moms, training sessions and more. The organization highlights the needs of Black birthing women through various campaigns targeting social determinants of health. Their Housing is Maternal Health initiative, for example, brings awareness to the need for safe, affordable housing as part of the solution to the Black maternal mortality crisis.

Learn more: mamatotovillage.org

March of Dimes

In addition to their efforts to address the maternal health crisis and maternity care deserts in the U.S., the March of Dimes is one of the leading organizations supporting the Black Maternal Health Momnibus Act of 2021 and is providing implicit bias training to more than 15,000 health care providers. The organization has also partnered with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and UnitedHealthcare Community & State to fund a quality improvement pilot program aimed at improving maternal health outcomes for Black women.

Learn more: marchofdimes.org

National Black Doulas Association

The National Black Doulas Association connects Black parents with Black doulas across the nation to provide support, comfort and assistance from pregnancy through the postpartum period. The association also provides insightful training for those wishing to become a doula.

Learn more: blackdoulas.org

Preeclampsia Foundation

Racial disparities also exist in the prevalence of preeclampsia , a pregnancy-related hypertensive disorder that is a leading cause of maternal mortality. Black women are disproportionately affected, experiencing more severe cases. The Preeclampsia Foundation is working to reduce these risks through education, the advancement of healthcare practices and funding research for a cause and cure for preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome .

Learn more: preeclampsia.org

Dr. Shalon’s Maternal Action Project

This nonprofit organization is dedicated to addressing the Black maternal health crisis by removing barriers, biases and hospital practices that impede access to equitable, quality care for Black women. Established in honor of Dr. Shalon Irving, a CDC epidemiologist who tragically passed away from preventable complications three weeks after giving birth, the organization focuses on several key initiatives, including a peer support app and research projects for future interventions.

Learn more: drshalonsmap.org

Ancient Song Doula Services

This New York City-based group merges education with direct action birth work to help Black families who are navigating racism in the health care system. From doula training to policy advocacy, Ancient Song plays an active role in addressing disparities in New York City. The organization provides affordable doula services, ensuring that pregnant people of color can access high-quality, holistic care, regardless of their financial situation.

Learn more: ancientsongdoulaservices.com

Birthmark Doula Collective

The New Orleans-based birth justice organization offers childbirth education, birth and postpartum doula services, and lactation support. The collective aims to actively combat reproductive injustice with direct action. In addition to countless educational offerings and support groups, the Birthmark Doula Collective partners with nurse advocates, local activists and community groups to create an accessible network of support and resources for Black women.

Learn more: birthmarkdoulas.com

Black Mamas Matter Alliance

Through their advocacy and research, this Black women-led organization of educators, birth workers, experts and activists in Georgia has become a powerful voice in the reproductive justice movement. The group is working to change public policy regarding Black maternal health.

Learn more: blackmamasmatter.org

Black Women Birthing Justice

This collective of African American, African, Caribbean and multiracial women seeks to address issues that Black women face during pregnancy and childbirth. The group works to empower Black mothers and ensure that pregnant people everywhere are supported by caregivers who use evidence-based practices that take into account how race impacts lived experiences.

Learn more: blackwomenbirthingjustice.com

Black Women’s Health Imperative

Founded in 1983, the Black Women’s Health Imperative seeks to “lead the effort to solve the most pressing health issues that affect Black women and girls in the U.S.” The organization prioritizes the physical, emotional and financial wellness of Black women and girls nationwide through signature programs, policy development, special initiatives and more.

Learn more: bwhi.org

WhatToExpect.com, 10 Pregnancy-Related Complications Black Women Should Know About , May 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Why the Maternal Mortality Rate Is so Much Higher for Native American and Black Moms in the U.S. — and What We Can Do About It. June 2019. WhatToExpect.com, Preeclampsia , May 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Working Together to Reduce Black Maternal Mortality , April 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Racial Disparities in Breastfeeding Initiation and Duration Among U.S. Infants Born in 2015 , August 2019. Center for American Progress, Eliminating Racial Disparities in Maternal and Infant Mortality. May 2019. Journal of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal Medicine, Preeclampsia Outcomes at Delivery and Race , February 2020.

Updates history

April 9, 2025

Editor: Melissa Bykofsky

Major updates throughout to text and information.