25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Baby shower cakes

These creative baby shower cakes set the stage for a lovely celebration.

There are lots of moving parts when planning a baby shower. The baby shower invitations , party theme and guest list all play a role in setting the tone for the event. But no celebration would be complete without sweet treats — specifically, a gorgeous cake.

A baby shower cake can act as a visual centerpiece during the celebration, and it's a great opportunity to mirror the baby shower theme , decor and any other elements that are woven throughout the special day. Thankfully, creativity and cake design go hand-in-hand.

Need some inspiration? We rounded up 25 baby shower cake ideas for a festive, sweet fix guests (and the parents-to-be!) will love.

Simple baby shower cakes

Elephant baby shower cake

elephant baby shower cake

Elephants frequently feature as a baby shower party theme — and a nursery motif, too! A classic blue elephant cake is a charming option.

Under the sea baby shower cake

under the sea baby shower cake

This gorgeous cake is understated but beachy. And what expectant mama wouldn't love feeling like she's on a mini vacation during her baby shower?

Mom-to-be baby shower cake

celebrating the mom-to-be baby shower cake

Everyone's gathered to help welcome the baby, of course, but this gorgeous cake is a sweet way to put the mom-to-be front and center.

Halloween baby shower cake

fall baby shower cake

If you're having a fall baby shower , embrace the autumnal vibes by including some seasonal accents on your cake. Fondant pumpkins and a few simple leaves do the trick.

Baby shower cake toppers

Balloon baby shower cake topper

balloon baby shower cake

Decorating a cake with different shades of blue (or any color that matches the shower theme) and big balloon toppers is a simple but playful way to celebrate a new arrival.

Floral baby shower cake topper

floral baby shower cake

For the parents-to-be who love elegant flowers, consider incorporating fresh blooms as a delicate cake topper.

Baby carriage cake topper

baby carriage baby shower cake

This joyful pink cake topper — and delightful oversized bow — makes it clear that the baby on the way is already so loved.

Baby shower cakes for girls

Pink baby shower cake

winter baby shower pink cake

Hot pink makes this festive baby shower cake pop. Serve it up alongside a batch of colorful baby shower punch , and guests won't miss the buffet table.

Stork delivery baby shower cake

stork delivery baby shower cake

Look what the stork's delivering! Soft pink hues and stork details are a lovely way to celebrate a baby on the way.

Princess baby shower cake

pink princess baby shower cake

Embrace all things pink and princess-themed with a crown-topped baby shower cake fit for royalty.

Baby shower cakes for boys

Outer space baby shower cake

outer space baby shower cake

Infuse the dessert table with some flair from the Milky Way — or a galaxy far, far away.

Woodland baby shower cake

winter woodland baby shower cake

Chocolate "bark" makes this cake blend right in with other forest decor, like pincecones, bottle brush trees and a wooden stag.

Blue baby shower cake

Pastels are lovely, but a bold splash of color — like this vibrant navy cake with gold speckles — can really grab attention and double as a stunning baby shower centerpiece.

More baby shower cake ideas

Winter baby shower cake

all white winter baby shower cake

A all-white cake can welcome a winter baby in style. Mittens, snowflakes and polar bears make for sweet seasonal accents.

Stars and moon baby shower cake

stars and moon baby shower cake

A crescent moon, golden stars and puffy clouds festoon this sky-themed cake. It's perfect for the parents-to-be already imagining endless readings of Goodnight Moon !

Twins baby shower cake

twin baby shower cake

Double the babies, double the cake! For parents who are joyfully anticipating twins , a double cake is the perfect sweet treat.

Twinkle, twinkle baby shower cake

twinkle, twinkle baby shower cake

A sweet "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star" theme is always in style. This one doubles as a gender reveal !

Giraffe baby shower cake

giraffe baby shower cake

Elephants may be one of the most popular animals when it comes to nursery decor and baby shower themes, but giraffes are up there, too! (Just think of the many beloved Sophie teething toys out there.)

Floral baby shower cupcakes

floral baby shower cupcakes

Who says you have to have a cake? For the floral-loving mama-to-be, you might serve up these charming baby shower cupcakes decorated with breathtaking, elaborate blooms.

Bear baby shower cake

bear baby shower cake

Let your imagination go wild when it comes to picking out a baby shower cake! This impressive cake features a cuddly teddy bear in a chocolate hot air balloon.

Nautical baby shower cake

nautical baby shower cake

Whether the expectant parents are welcoming their little one in the summer or just love sailing, a nautical cake is a sweet bet.

Mickey Mouse baby shower cake

mickey mouse baby shower cake

This two-tier cake is a simple but striking way to celebrate a Disney lover.

Dr. Seuss baby shower cake

dr seuss baby shower cake

Beloved Dr. Seuss characters (especially "New Fish" in the stroller!) add eye-catching detail to a baby shower cake that's cleverly designed to resemble The Cat in the Hat's famous accessory.

Birch log baby shower cake

woodland baby shower cake

Sweet animals, mushrooms, shrubs and trees adorn this whimsical, woodland-themed cake that would be perfect for a winter wonderland baby shower .

Bunny baby shower cake

blue bunny baby shower cake

Oh, bunny! Celebrate a little bunny on the way with this Peter Rabbit-themed baby shower cake, complete with carrots and a frosting picket fence.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a Baby Shower , December 2023. WhatToExpect.com, 35 Creative Baby Shower Themes , August 2021. WhatToExpect.com, A Complete Guide to Baby Shower Etiquette , November 2023.

Updates history

December 6, 2023

Editor: Caroline Picard

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Fact-checked to ensure accuracy.

Your Next Read

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

14 Gender Reveal Cake Ideas to Share Your Sweet Baby News Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The Best Smash Cake Ideas for Your Baby's First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Gender Reveal Themes to Inspire Your Special Celebration Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The Best Baby Shower Food and Drink Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw a Winter Wonderland Baby Shower for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

30 Gender Reveal Ideas for Celebrating Your Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Coed Baby Shower? Why They’re the New Thing — Plus Party Themes Guests Will Love Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window