25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

Unisex baby names gender-neutral names

Searching for the perfect gender-neutral name for your little one? Check out the top unisex baby names here.

These days, gender reveals are an increasingly popular way to find out your baby's sex and announce it to the world. But if you’re one of those parents who would prefer to be surprised in the delivery room rather than in front of friends and family while cutting cake, these unisex names will save you a lot of in-the-moment deliberation and stress.

Plus, you might be surprised: Many monikers that have traditionally been thought of as a boy or girl name make a great gender-neutral name, too. You’ll love seeing how so-called boy’s names work for a baby girl, and vice versa — sometimes all it takes is one creative parent (or a famous celebrity) to change the perspective.

Here, some of our favorite unisex baby names for a baby boy or a baby girl. You can't go wrong with any of these gender-neutral ideas.

1. Alex

The variations of this classic unisex name can be written a few different ways on your child's birth certificate: Alex is, of course, a go-to nickname for Alexandra and Alexander, but it can also be shortened from Alexis, Alexia, Alexa, or Alexandria — or simply opt for Alex on its own.

2. James

You might not have considered the name James as being gender-neutral until actress Blake Lively gave her daughter the name in 2017. Nicknames like Jim or Jimmy work well for a boy, while Jamie is a sweet option for a girl.

3. Blake

Much like her daughter, Blake Lively knows what it’s like to navigate the world with a unisex name. Blake is a popular unisex name for both boys and girls, landing number 265 on the Social Security Administration's (SSA) list of top names in 2024 for boys, and 210 the same year for girls.[1]#1

4. Kyle

Real Housewives fans will instantly recognize where the inspiration for this unisex baby name comes from: Kyle Richards of the Beverly Hills cast.

5. Drew

Drew Barrymore, Drew Carey, Drew Brees. This four-letter name is easy to pronounce, easy to spell and easy to choose, whether you're expecting a boy or a girl.

6. Taylor

Another old-school favorite unisex baby name that has stood the test of time. Not only does the name Taylor work for both girls and boys, but it’s a common surname, too.

7. Kennedy

Although currently more popular for girls than boys — the name took spot 89 on the SSA's 2024 list for girls, but was not in the top 1,000 for boys — Kennedy is a noble name perfect for a natural-born leader.

8. Jordan

Jordan is a classic gender-neutral baby name, nabbing spot 539 in 2024 for girls and 104 for boys. Celebrities like Jordan Sparks and Jordan Peele come to mind.

9. Parker

Parker is one of those charming gender-neutral names that works just as well in the baby years as it does into adulthood. Plus, it sounds perfect alongside basically any middle or last name.

10. Avery

This unisex baby name was one of the most popular names for girls in 2024, landing spot 31, but works equally well for boys (it nabbed spot 259 that same year).

11. Ryan

Ryan might seem like a boy’s name, but it's become more popular over the past few years for baby girls. You can also choose an alternate spelling, such as Rhyan or Ryann.

12. Brooklyn

Brooklyn Decker rocks her name, and Brooklyn Beckham sure does, too. This location-inspired name is a no-brainer.

13. Cameron

Cameron Diaz is one famous Cameron, but this unisex baby name works also works well for boys. Plus, the nickname Cam couldn’t be cuter.

14. Logan

Although often thought of as a boy’s name, Logan is absolutely a unisex baby name that has an equally nice ring for any lucky little girl.

15. Emerson

Perhaps this baby will be a creative like his or her philosopher namesake: Ralph Waldo Emerson. Consider this unisex baby name if you envision raising a free thinker.

16. Charlie

More and more, this now-unisex baby name is being used for girls. Think: Rebecca Romijn’s daughter with husband Jerry O'Connell. Charly or Charley are sometimes used as alternate spellings.

17. Ezra

This unisex baby name also made our list of the top hipster baby names , and for good reason. Ezra works perfectly for a boy or girl, is easy to spell and blends seamlessly with many middle or last names.

18. Austin

Another city-inspired unisex baby name, Austin is a great choice for a girl or boy — living in Texas not required.

Still hunting for the perfect baby name? Open the What to Expect app for the top 1,000 names (and plenty of unique ones, too) — plus get week-by-week updates on the tiny human you’re naming.

Updates history

September 28, 2025

Editors: Kathleen Felton/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,898 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

50 Vintage Baby Names That Are Making a Comeback Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

26 Baby Names Inspired by the British Royal Family Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Oh Là Là! 16 French Baby Boy Names That Stylishly Cross Borders Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window