Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes

Minor copy and formatting changes.

first birthday party ideas

Celebrate your baby's first birthday in style.

Hitting the 1-year mark is a big deal for your baby — and you. Mark the occasion by celebrating with friends and family, including all the new mom friends and babies you've met during the first year of your little one's life.

How to throw a unique (and fun) first birthday party

A first birthday is, at its core, a celebration for the parents. That's because your tiny guest of honor is a bit too young to fully appreciate your party-throwing efforts, but that doesn't mean you can't go all out. After all, you did make it through the emotional rollercoaster of baby’s first year.

Whether you decide to plan a big birthday bash , keep things more intimate at home or throw a virtual birthday party , honing in on a theme can help make the event feel all the more special. It's also the key to staying organized. Knowing that the party is all about mermaids, trucks or whatever theme you land on will help you make decisions about snacks, decorations, invitations and more.

And the good news: When it comes to a first birthday, there are so many fun themes to choose from. To help narrow down your choices, consider aligning the party theme with the theme of your little one's nursery . There's a reason you chose that theme in the first place, right? You love it! But the real bonus: Chances are you already have a lot of complementary decor, which will save you money and reduce waste.

To keep things interesting, you can always tweak the theme to better suit a first birthday. For example, if your baby has a safari- or elephant-themed nursery, the party theme could be Wild One . Of course, there's no harm in straying from the nursery theme if you want to exercise your creativity. Here, get some clever ideas and themes perfectly suited to a first birthday party.

Unique first birthday party themes

Princesses or trucks are always fun themes for first birthdays, but if you're looking for something a little outside the box, there are also tons of ways to get a little punny and play on the words "one" or "first." There are also plenty of themes that lean on popular story books or TV shows. Here, browse some favorite ideas.

Dinosaur first birthday party

Dinosaur First Birthday Party

Your baby's too young to say much more than "Mama" and "Baba," but pretty soon, the words triceratops and velociraptor may be tripping off his tongue. Throw your little T-rex a dinosaur party with invites that say "Roar!" and a dino-shaped cake. (Even simpler: Make or buy cupcakes and then top with paper cutouts in the shape of dinosaurs.)

For the bigger kids in attendance, you can play a game of "pin the tail on the dinosaur." Pick up plastic dinosaurs of all sizes at any toy store — you can use them as decorations during the party, and send them home with guests as party favors .

Space first birthday party

Space first birthday party

Throw an out-of-this-world space-themed party for your 1-year-old. Use balloons or Styrofoam balls to create a DIY solar system — this can also be a memorable background for photos. Serve cookies in the shapes of stars and crescent moons; use these same cookie cutters to make sandwiches in galaxy-themed shapes.

Have bigger kids create their own solar systems using crayons and paper, all to the accompaniment of a space-themed playlist that adult guests will appreciate. (You'll want to include songs like Elton John's "Rocket Man" and David Bowie's "Space Oddity" in the queue.)

Unicorn first birthday party

Magical unicorn first birthday party

Make these mythical creatures the center of a magical first birthday party . Use balloons to make a rainbow backdrop — or, even easier, print out or purchase a giant unicorn illustration and place birthday messaging above it. A piñata in the shape of the horned creature provides entertainment (and sweets!) for the older kids and adults in attendance. If it's warm out, have kids toss rings around a unicorn horn.

A unicorn-topped cake is the perfect sweet treat for a unicorn-themed party , or try cupcakes with horns on top. Think rainbows when it comes to the rest of the menu: You can serve fruit skewers with the pieces in ROYGBIV order. Put the party favors in a bag bedecked in unicorns, or make each baby guest a personalized onesie with a unicorn image.

Princess first birthday party

Princess first birthday party

Go ahead, pile on the ruffles and lace. Opt for a princess party that celebrates everything pink and frilly to celebrate your little royal family member. Serve tea sandwiches for grown-ups, along with beverages in teacups. Cake in the shape of a castle is one option, as are cupcakes with a crown on top or sugar cookies with the names of Disney princesses.

Use a chalk sign to display a message for your little prince or princess. (Think: "You're royalty to us!") Bubble wands can serve as entertainment; have adults can help littles blow the suds.

"One in a Melon" first birthday party

one in a melon birthday party balloons and decor

Mark this big occasion with a sweet and fresh theme just as unique as your baby. Green-and-pink decor plus a coordinating menu make the "One in a Melon" concept perfect for summer birthdays, but you could use it to brighten up a party venue any time of year.

Keep guests busy with a variety of produce-themed activities — like watermelon bowling, a melon-eating contest and a challenge to guess the weight of a watermelon — and then send them home with favors that say "Thanks a Melon" for coming to the birthday bash.

Dog first birthday party

dog birthday party decor

Make dreams come true at a dog-themed birthday party by sending children home with puppies — the stuffed animal kind, that is. Dalmatian spots and other pet-inspired accents — like dog house-shaped place cards and paw print cookies — will please any animal lover in attendance. Don't forget to pose for photos in front of a fetching backdrop!

Farm first birthday party

farm birthday party tablescape

If you've practiced animal sounds with your baby, show off those adorable moos with a farm-themed party . Your budding cowgirl or cowboy will love digging into a barn-shaped cake — and guests can peruse a "grazing table" filled with additional party snacks.

Berry first birthday party

berry first birthday theme

Your newly-minted 1-year-old is as sweet as can be. Lean into that fact with a "berry" first birthday filled with strawberries, blueberries and blackberries. Besides serving up a fruit-filled menu, you can play "pin the berry on the cupcake" or organize a scavenger hunt for paper berries hidden around the room.

Sweet One first birthday party

sweet one birthday dessert table

Anyone with a sweet tooth will adore this candy-filled theme. A Sweet One birthday party could include a sundae bar or donut wall — or both! Keep little hands busy stringing candy or cereal onto necklaces, or have them decorate paper cupcakes with stickers and other art supplies.

Mr. Onederful first birthday party

Mr. Onederful birthday party cake

Bowties, mustaches and top hats can bring the glam factor when celebrating your Mr. Onederful on his birthday. Impress adult attendees with some jazz music (performed live or on a playlist), or cater to littler ones in attendance with a number one-shaped piñata.

Circus first birthday party

Circus first birthday party

Got a big group? Rent a tent to bring the carnival theme to life. You can also opt for simpler decor with a pennant banner, which can go anywhere — outside your home, on your little one's high chair, around the dessert table and so on.

Use red-and-white striped bags to send guests home with party favors — or fill them with popcorn for a snack! Place elephant stickers on milk glasses or paper cups to expand on the theme. You can play also musical chairs with circus music as a party game.

Winter Onederland first birthday party

Winter wonderland first birthday party

A Winter Onederland theme is just right for any winter baby. Opt for an icy blue if you want to tap into a more traditional winter color palette, but if you don't mind veering from the norm, just about any pastel color can work. Don't forget to pepper in plenty of snowflakes and glitter to make the party decor sparkle like the snow outside.

Wild One first birthday party

Wild one birthday party

Nod to the chaos of toddlerhood with a safari-, jungle- or zoo-themed party for your "Wild One" (year-old, that is). Bring the theme to life with a color palette inspired by nature — greens, browns and a touch of yellow or blue. Then include plenty of wild animal motifs or patterns. For a fun activity, hire a face painter to turn the tots into their favorite wild animals.

Soccer first birthday party

Soccer first birthday party

Good weather? Head outdoors for a soccer-themed party. Gently roll soccer balls back and forth on the grass with baby attendees; bigger kids (and adults, too!) can play a more competitive game of footy.

For food, make cookies in the shape of soccer balls and soccer jerseys. (Put your guests' names on them for extra personalization.) You can also go for a big cake in the shape of a soccer ball … so ideal for a cake smash !

Storybook first birthday party

Storybook first birthday party

Make your little one's favorite bedtime story the center of the soirée with a picture book theme. Nearly any book will do, but The Very Hungry Caterpillar , Goodnight Moon , The Tale of Peter Rabbit and other classics will inspire nostalgia among guests.

Blow up photocopies from the pages of the book, and hang them from the ceiling or tape them to the wall. Use the characters or motifs from the book for the cake decorations, too. Try a Curious George cake, for instance, or cupcakes spread out to look like the Hungry Caterpillar himself. You can do a dramatic reading of the story during the party, then send home each guest with a copy of the book as a favor.

Transportation first birthday party

Transportation first birthday party

For the little kid who loves all things that go vroom, a transportation- or construction-themed party is the perfect fit. First, deck out the birthday baby in shirts that feature trucks or cars — as you know, finding those in a store (or your little one's closet!) isn't hard at all.

Next, decorate the high chair with a truck-shaped banner. Cake decorations are a breeze: Just place small trucks or cars on top of the frosted cake. (Make sure to clean those vehicles first!) As to what to play with at the party, go with the simplest, most on-theme option and dump all the wheeled toys in a play area for every tiny guest.

Mermaid first birthday party

Mermaid first birthday party

Let the tail lead the way when it comes to a mermaid birthday party — use it as a decorative element on the invitations, cake and party favors. A sea-themed backdrop and balloons in aquatic colors can serve as decor, or use shells and netting to transform the room.

Let mermaid coloring books can entertain guests. Got warm weather? Fill a kiddie pool with water, and let babies make a splash! Another idea: Grab some buckets, fill them with water and let all the babies in attendance dunk toys in for a sensory delight. ( Party safety tip : Assign someone to supervise any water activities closely.)

Rainbow first birthday party

Rainbow first birthday party

A rainbow party couldn't be simpler when it comes to food and decorations — but visually, this theme makes a real impact. Use balloons, streamers or big sheets of colored paper to create a rainbow-hued backdrop (perfect for photos that'll help you remember the occasion for years to come).

Purchase plates, utensils and cups in three or four primary colors. Opt for a cake with frosting in rainbow colors, or press colorful candy on a basic vanilla-frosted cake. For an easy game, help babies and older guests find items in the house that are red, orange, yellow, green and so on.

"Bee-day" first birthday party

Bee first birthday party

Celebrate your little bumblebee by decking her out in an appropriately colored outfit and placing a black-and-yellow polka dot party hat on her head. Serve cakes, cookies or cupcakes in bee colors.

Commemorate the bee-utiful guest of honor with a sign displaying favorite things from this first year of life. Use paper or fabric in either yellow or black to drum up some decorations.

Donut first birthday party

Donut first birthday party

Here's what's so great about this theme: A donut is shaped like the letter "O" as in "one." Get it? That makes invites easy. And the question of what to serve to guests is obvious, too — a big platter of donuts in all different flavors. Milk is the beverage of choice here (along with coffee or tea for the adult guests).

Look for pool toys shaped like donuts to hang as decorations — or seek out plates and napkins festooned with sprinkles. You might want a sign that says something on-theme, like "Take a bite out of ONE" or "Donut grow up!" For entertainment, cut circles in the center of white paper plates and have kids color and decorate a donut of their own.

Movie or TV first birthday party

Movie first birthday party

Pick a favorite movie or television show — like Sesame Street , Toy Story or Peppa Pig — and make it the focus of the party. Here's one big perk of this theme: Choose a popular show or movie, and you'll easily find branded decor and tableware at a party supply store.

Use figurines as cake toppers, or cut out cookies in the shape of characters and places that are important in the show.

Sun first birthday party

Sun first birthday party

A sun-themed party is a sweet nod to your little one who just completed one trip around the sun. To bring it to life, lean on the color yellow for plates, cups, balloons and other decor. Then, pepper in the sun motif in spots like the cake topper and on your baby's onesie.

While presenting the cake, tap into the emotional side of things by playing the song "You Are My Sunshine." Other solar-inspired tunes, like "Soak Up the Sun" and "Walking on Sunshine," can play while you open first birthday gifts . (Although if you'd prefer to skip present opening, that's okay too — toddler party etiquette says it's up to you.)

Baby Shark first birthday party

Baby shark birthday party

Your baby's 1, do-do-do-do! For any baby who loves to boogie, a first birthday celebration inspired by Baby Shark is nothing short of perfect. A party based on the smash-hit song lends itself to lots of fun colors, too. Think vibrant pinks, yellows and blues to mirror the sharks in the music video.

Be sure to include the characters wherever possible — the cake, the plates and the favors are great options. And don't forget to queue up the song. Just be prepared for it to be on repeat, per the kids' requests.

Bear first birthday party

Bear first birthday party

You're bear-y lucky to have such a cutie in tow. Wish them a bear-y happy birthday with a woodland-inspired theme that highlights (what else?!) a big brown bear.

The bear motif is easy to carry throughout, from the cake topper to the decor itself. Gifting little teddy bear party favors is a super sweet way to send guests on their way.

Winnie the Pooh first birthday party

Winnie the pooh birthday party

Hone in on one of the most beloved bears of all time — Winnie the Pooh. There's something so adorable and heartfelt about the characters, and a soft yellow and blue color palette pairs perfectly. Also nice: The story has so many sweet quotes that can inspire the background to your buffet table or even a special photo booth moment. If you're looking for an activity, sit all of the little ones down for story time.

No matter what theme you go with and how far you take it, don't forget the true meaning of the party: to celebrate one of the biggest milestones in you and your baby's life. Don't sweat the small stuff — like if your baby cries rather than dives head first into the smash cake. Savor the moment, and take pictures. No matter how things go, this is one event you'll want to remember forever.

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a First Birthday Party , December 2023. WhatToExpect.com , 15 of Your Biggest Toddler Birthday Party Questions — Answered , December 2023.

Updates history

December 21, 2023

Editor: Caroline Picard

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Fact-checked to ensure accuracy.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Space Birthday Party Ideas That Are Out of This World Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Dog-Themed Ideas for a Pawfect Puppy Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Throw a T-Rex-iffic Dinosaur Birthday Party That'll Go Down in History Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Host a 'Wild One' Birthday That's a Roaring Good Time Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window