25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

Unique Baby Boy Names

Looking for an original name for your baby boy? From Ace to Ranger, you'll find a unique boy name you love on this list.

Expecting a little boy and searching for a baby name that isn’t like all the others? We’ve rounded up 25 unique baby boy names to help inspire you.

1. Ace. It’s hard to think of a name more associated with winning than Ace. It conjures up images of playing cards, tennis, and golf (among other games) and means “one” in Latin.

2. Alaric. Meaning “all-powerful ruler” and once common among kings, this German name is just starting to gain more ground.

3. Bartholomew. While this name may sound like a mouthful, it’s associated with lots of cute nicknames, including Bart, Tollie, Barley, and Art. Bartholomew was one of the 12 apostles in the Bible.

4. Cassius. As in Cassius Clay, boxer Muhammad Ali's birth name.

5. Castor. This is one of the Gemini twins’ names in Greek mythology, meaning “pious one” in Latin and “beaver” in French.

6. Cedar. This is one of the lesser-used “tree” names, and can be unisex.

7. Daxton. Similar in sound to the popular name Jackson, Daxton is French in origin and means “warrior who conquers great obstacles." Shorten it to “Dax” (as in Dax Shepard, Kristen Bell’s husband) for an adorable-yet-boyish nickname.

8. Finnian. This is the slightly more formal cousin of “Finn." Like that name, it's Irish in origin and means “fair.”

9. Gianni. The Italian equivalent of “Johnny” oozes European sophistication and means “God is gracious.”

10. Hiram. For parents who want a Biblical name that’s on the adventurous side, this is a bold choice. Country music fans take note: Hank Williams’ real name is Hiram Williams.

11. Kai. This Hawaiian name, meaning “sea,” is beautiful choice.

12. Lochlan. Another name rooted in both history and nature, Lochlan means “land of lakes” in Scottish and was used to describe Vikings long ago. An alternate spelling is "Lachlan," and it's rising in popularity (slowly) in the U.S.

13. Lynx. Like Fox and Wolf, Lynx is a strong, one-syllable animal name for boys, but its advantage is that it's not as common (yet, anyway).

14. Marmaduke. You may remember Marmaduke as being the goofy Great Dane in the Sunday paper comics, but this name is coming back into fashion.

15. Marquise. If you’re searching for a name that’s associated with royalty but is more unique than King, this one's for you.

16. Merritt. If you’re a fan of names ending in a double "t" but want something more off-the-grid than Beckett or Emmett, add Merritt to your list of possibilities for your baby boy. It's an Old English, unisex name .

17. Odin. This is one of the Norse god names that’s on trend, and offers a unique twist on the similar-sounding (and more popular) Owen.

18. Percival. Harry Potter fans are surely familiar with this name, which has strong English roots. But did you know that Percival was also the one perfectly pure knight of King Arthur’s Round Table?

19. Quill. This unusual baby boy name is of Gaelic and Celtic origin and is fitting for a child born to avid writers and literary types.

20. Ranger. If you like an active name like Ryder but are looking for a more unusual option, this update of French origin, meaning "forest guardian," might suit your son.

21. Rollo. Short, quirky names that end in “o” are popular for boys — this one is a jolly-sounding variation on the more common name Roland.

22. Rook. The tower piece in chess and synonym for “crow” or "raven" is part of the trend of familiar words being turned into baby names.

23. Sutter. Sutter is another up-and-coming “action” name for boys. While it’s associated with California’s Gold Rush, the word comes from Old English and means “shoemaker.”

24. Winslow. Surnames used as first names continue to grow in popularity, and this is a nice choice for your little boy. Winslow Homer, the American landscape painter, is one of the more famous men to have it as a first name.

25. Zephyr. Searching for a name that starts with “Z”? Zephyr has roots in nature and means “west wind” in Greek. It’s also the name of the mischievous monkey in the Babar children’s books.

Still looking for the right baby name? Open the What to Expect app for even more name ideas for your little one, plus tips from parents who have navigated this big decision too.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Updates history

September 28, 2025

Editors: Kathleen Felton/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,901 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Searching for a Dashing Baby Boy Name? These 15 British Boy Names Deliver Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Oh Là Là! 16 French Baby Boy Names That Stylishly Cross Borders Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

50 Vintage Baby Names That Are Making a Comeback Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window