25 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as an eggplant.

Now that you're in week 25 of pregnancy, your uterus is about the size of a soccer ball, and you may finally have that pronounced baby bump you've been imagining since the start.

Meanwhile, your baby's nose and lungs are becoming more functional in preparation for life on the outside.

Your Baby at Week 25

At a Glance

The startle reflex

Don’t scare the baby! Your little one’s startle reflexes are now developing. Hmm, perhaps you can scare baby’s hiccups away!

Baby fat

Baby fat is coming! Even though your baby-to-be is still lean, he's slowly putting on pounds and losing that wrinkly appearance.

Hair debut?

If your baby-in-waiting has hair, and not all do, the texture may actually be seen at this stage of the game.

25 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 25 weeks pregnant, you're in month 6 of your pregnancy. Only 3 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 25 weeks?

Your baby is growing by leaps and bounds, reaching 13 inches — over a foot long! — in length and more than 1½ pounds in weight.

That's taller than two juice boxes stacked one on top of the other, and almost as heavy as four of them.

Baby's lungs are gearing up to breathe

What else is going on this week? No matter what your baby's skin color will eventually be, it's turning pinker now — and not because he's getting overheated.

In fact, the amniotic fluid is perfectly climate-controlled, keeping him at an always-comfortable temperature. Instead, the skin is changing color because small blood vessels, called capillaries, are forming under the skin and filling with blood.

Later this week, blood vessels will also develop in your baby's lungs, bringing them one step closer to full maturity — and one step closer to taking that first breath of fresh air. But at 25 weeks pregnant, those lungs are still very much works-in-progress.

Though they are already beginning to produce surfactant, a substance that will help them expand with oxygen after baby is born, the lungs are still too undeveloped to sufficiently send oxygen to the bloodstream and release carbon dioxide when he exhales.

Baby’s nose starts working

The lungs aren't the only system that's gearing up for air intake. Your baby's nostrils and nose are starting to work this week too. This allows your little one to begin taking practice breaths.

It was previously believed that the nostrils stay plugged up until around now in the pregnancy. The latest research shows, however, that they open much earlier and stay that way through all three trimesters.

Of course, since there's no air in there, your baby is really only "breathing" amniotic fluid, but it's the practice that counts, right?

Baby could also be able to smell various scents in utero by this week too. If not, that sense will kick in by the third trimester.

Your Body at Week 25

Having a ball?

At 25 weeks pregnant, your ever-growing uterus has now reached the size of a soccer ball. Look at that — you're already a soccer mom and you didn't even have to buy the minivan!

But while you're probably enjoying your cute soccer ball tummy up in front, and getting to know your growing little midfielder through all those practice kicks, chances are you're not enjoying what's going on in your backside.

Hemorrhoids

More than half of all pregnant women experience swollen, itchy veins in the rectum due to that bigger uterus pressing down as well as to increased blood flow to the area. And while they're not dangerous to your body, hemorrhoids — a form of varicose veins — can be downright painful and even cause rectal bleeding.

Constipation can aggravate them, so your best bet at prevention is to increase your fluid and fiber intake and to eat plenty of fiber-rich foods, like fruits, veggies, and whole grains. Doing pelvic-floor exercises (Kegels) and trying not to strain when you poop can help too.

In the meantime, try witch hazel pads, sitz baths , or ice packs to soothe your sore bottom — and keep in mind that they should go away after delivery — though you're probably getting tired of hearing that!

Dental health

Want to up your chances of keeping your baby safely inside you until term? Whip out the dental floss and make sure you're brushing your teeth at least twice a day, since research links good dental health and oral hygiene with longer pregnancies.

Sounds kind of zany, but brushing your teeth at least twice a day, flossing regularly and visiting the dentist every six months can reduce the risk of gingivitis — a common condition in which your gums become inflamed and red, and may even bleed.

If you don't take proper care of your teeth, the result can be periodontitis, which has been linked to premature birth and even an increased risk of preeclampsia .

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 25

Heartburn or indigestion

Does it feel as if stomach acids are burning up your esophagus and setting fire to your chest? Always have some antacids nearby so you can cool your heartburn as soon as it strikes.

Symphysis pubis dysfunction (SPD)

If you’re feeling pain in the pelvic area, you may be experiencing SPD, caused by relaxed and stretchy ligaments that normally keep your pelvic joints (aka the symphysis pubis) aligned. Stay on top of your pelvic tilts and Kegels, which will strengthen the muscles in that region, try wearing a support belt, and if pain is severe, ask your practitioner for a referral to a physical therapist.

Restless legs syndrome (RLS)

As if you didn’t have enough to worry about with tingling hands, you may also feel a tingling in your legs accompanied by a strong urge to move them. Ask your practitioner to test you for iron-deficiency anemia, since some experts think it’s linked to RLS. Keep a food journal too — some women feel that a sensitivity to certain foods makes symptoms worse.

Tingling hands (carpal tunnel)

Increased blood volume during pregnancy can cause swelling that puts pressure on nerves in the wrists, resulting in carpal tunnel syndrome. Ask your practitioner about wearing wrist braces, or try acupuncture to alleviate the pain and tingling.

Fast-growing hair

Because normal daily hair loss is suppressed by pregnancy hormones, you may notice that your hair feels thicker and more lustrous than ever before. Enjoy it now — after delivery, you may shed the hair that didn’t fall out during pregnancy.

Snoring

Snoring is pretty common during pregnancy, since increased blood flow to mucus membranes in your nose can cause congestion. But if you find your snoring is seriously interfering with your sleep, this could be a sign that you have sleep apnea. Be sure to ask your practitioner about it.

Tips for You This Week

Play the baby name game

You’ve been playing Name That Baby for a while now. Ask yourself these questions before committing to a baby name : What do the initials spell? Are there awkward rhymes? What are any likely nicknames?

You’ve been playing Name That Baby for a while now. Ask yourself these questions before committing to a

: What do the initials spell? Are there awkward rhymes? What are any likely nicknames?

Consider the cadence, and be careful about combinations that could turn your child's name into a joke. How long will it take for Savannah Anna to become Savannah Anna Banana?

Rely on moisturizer

Your uterus is now the size of a soccer ball — and all that stretching may be causing your tummy to itch .

Skin irritation is a common problem that tends to appear during the fifth or sixth month of pregnancy, when you’re really starting to show. Unfortunately, it only seems to get more pronounced as time passes and your belly continues to grow. Slather on moisturizer or calamine lotion if needed.

Get a prenatal massage

After the first trimester, you’ll likely be able to get a prenatal massage if you let your massage therapist know you’re pregnant. (Just make sure to get the green light from your practitioner first.)

if you let your massage therapist know you’re pregnant. (Just make sure to get the green light from your practitioner first.)

During pregnancy, regular prenatal massage may help relieve insomnia , neck and back pain, sciatica, swelling in the hands and feet, headaches , and sinus congestion.

Can’t make it to a massage therapist? Ask your partner or a friend for an at-home massage. Have them start with a foot rub: Using gentle pressure, have them rub the top of the foot, working from the toes to the ankle.

Feeling down? Talk to your doctor

Depression during pregnancy and postpartum depression (PPD) are surprisingly common. Some symptoms include crying, irritability, a lack of appetite, and poor sleep, among others.

are surprisingly common. Some symptoms include crying, irritability, a lack of appetite, and poor sleep, among others.

One study suggests that downplaying positive emotions — aka “I don't deserve to be happy” — might increase your risk. Sound familiar? Talk to your doctor as soon as you can about getting help.

Snack on healthy sweets

Need some sweet snack ideas ? When you've been hit by the midday slump, nosh on carrot or oat bran muffins (they can replace donuts and coffee cake), along with a slice of cheese or a container of yogurt.

? When you've been hit by the midday slump, nosh on carrot or oat bran muffins (they can replace donuts and coffee cake), along with a slice of cheese or a container of yogurt.

You can also pick yourself up with apple wedges and peanut butter, all-fruit jam spread on a whole wheat English muffin, cottage cheese with strawberries, tangerines and cinnamon, yogurt topped with walnuts and dried fruit, or a smoothie.

Take note of eye symptoms

Your eyes are yet another seemingly random part of the body affected by pregnancy hormones. During this time, your vision might be less sharp — Is that you, Honey? — and your contact lenses could be less comfortable to wear.

Your eyes are yet another seemingly random part of the body affected by pregnancy hormones. During this time, your

— Is that you, Honey? — and your contact lenses could be less comfortable to wear.

Another twist in the eye story: Even though you're retaining fluid, ironically your eyes may be drier than ever.

But don't worry — eye symptoms, like skin symptoms, will disappear after delivery. Just be sure to let your practitioner know what's going on so they can "keep an eye on things."

Start a bedtime routine (for yourself)

You need a good night’s sleep now more than ever — but as soon as you lie down, your baby is on the move .

There’s a reason for that: When you’re running around during the day, your baby may be lulled to sleep by all the movement. But when you slow down, your baby may wake up — ready to roll (and punch … and kick ...).

You can’t do much about your squirming night owl right now, but you can try to nod off faster by setting up a bedtime routine … for yourself. (Good practice for when you need to follow one for your baby!)

Before you go to sleep, take a warm bath, get into comfy PJs, try a few relaxing yoga poses or stretches, and read a book while playing some soft, soothing music in the background.

A calming bedtime routine can do wonders, sending you off to dreamland night after night.