26 Baby Names Inspired by the British Royal Family

Minor copy updates and updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

baby boy with paper crown

From Elizabeth to Charles to George, these names are great options for your little one.

The British royal family's lineage includes both traditional names like George and Henry and modern monikers like Archie, meaning there’s no shortage of options. Whether you’re pregnant and looking for the perfect baby name, or are just obsessed with the U.K.'s most famous family (thanks, “The Crown!”), take a look at some of the British royal family-inspired names below.

Baby girl names inspired by the British royal family

1. Elizabeth. The name of the late Queen Elizaebth II herself, Elizabeth is a popular choice for baby girls both in the U.K. and across the pond. According to the U.S. Social Security Administration, Elizabeth is currently the 17th most popular name for girls in the U.S. Not to mention, the adorable nickname options are endless.

2. Diana. Diana, the name of the late Princess of Wales, is currently the 243rd most popular name for girls in the U.S. In the years after Diana married Prince Charles, her name nearly doubled in popularity, from spot 118 in 1980 to spot 64 in 1982.

3. Margaret. The name of Queen Elizabeth's younger sister, Margaret took the number three spot for girls in the U.S. in 1911. Today, it ranks as the 119th most popular pick. And, like Elizabeth, there are tons of cute nickname options, from Meg to Maggie to Marge.

4. Anne. Princess Anne’s name was fairly popular in the U.S. when she was born in 1950 (taking spot 84), but has since dropped off to spot 649. Annie, a popular nickname, currently ranks higher for girls, at number 191.

5. Camilla. Her Majesty Queen Camilla is King Charles III's current wife. Her name is currently at spot 324 for baby girls in 2024.

6. Catherine. Catherine, the first name of the Princess of Wales (aka Kate Middleton), is the 320th most popular name for baby girls in the U.S. The name peaked in popularity in 1917 at spot 18. The name Kate, meanwhile, currently holds spot 535.

7. Charlotte. The name of the Prince and Princess of Wales' second child and only daughter has recently surged in popularity. While Charlotte held spot 289 in 2000, it’s currently the fourth top name choice for girls in the U.S.

8. Isla. A modern name you might not have anticipated from the royal family, Isla is Princess Anne's granddaughter and one of Queen Elizabeth II's great-granddaughters. It's currently the 35th top name for girls in the U.S.

9. Meghan. Like her husband, the Duchess of Sussex also chooses not to go by her official first name, which is Rachel. The name Meghan is currently at spot 989 for baby girls, while Rachel is number 247.

10. Savannah. The name of Queen Elizabeth II's first great-grandchild (and Isla's sister), Savannah is another beautiful pick for girls. It's also a trendy choice: Savannah is currently the 107th most popular name for baby girls in the U.S.

11. Louise. Lady Louise is the eldest child of Edward, Earl of Wessex. Her name was popular in 1914, when it was the 17th top name for baby girls. Coincidentally, 1914 was the same year a similar royal name, Louis, peaked at spot 20 for boys.

12. Zara. The name of Princess Anne’s daughter, Zara has gained traction in recent years. It only entered the top 1,000 names for girls in 2005, but has since climbed its way up to being spot 234.

13. Eugenie. Eugenie, the name of Princess Eugenie (the king's niece) is another more unique name choice. The last time it was in the top 1,000 names for girls was in 1920.

Baby boy names inspired by the British royal family

1. Charles. Charles, the name of King Charles III, is a popular name choice. The name was very popular in the 20th century; in fact, it didn’t leave the top 10 names for boys until 1955.

2. Philip. The late Duke of Edinburgh's name peaked in popularity in 1941, when it was the 52nd most popular name for boys in the U.S. Today, Philip holds spot 521.

3. William. These days, Prince William's name is far more popular than his father’s: William is currently the number 10 name choice for baby boys in the U.S., and hasn’t left the top 20 since at least 1900. (In fact, if you were a boy born in the U.S. in 1920, you had about a one in 22 chance of being named William!)

3. George. George, the name of the Prince and Princess of Wales' eldest child and first son, was widely popular in the early 20th century. It peaked in 1911 as the fourth most popular name for boys in the U.S.

4. Alexander. Not only is Alexander the number 27 name for boys in the U.S. right now, it's also one of Prince George's middle names! The moniker peaked in popularity in 2004, when it was the fourth most popular name for baby boys.

5. Harry. Did you know that the Duke of Sussex’s official first name is Henry? While both monikers are lovely options, Henry actually outweighs Harry in popularity: It's currently the sixth most popular name for boys in the U.S., while Harry is 777th.

6. Albert. The name Albert is another traditional pick. It was the name of Queen Victoria's husband, Prince Albert, and is also one of Prince Harry's middle names. The moniker was at the height of its popularity in 1910, when it was the 14th most popular name for boys. Today, it's number 606.

7. Louis. As with George, the name Louis was also a popular pick for boys in the early 20th century. The name of the Prince and Princess of Wales' youngest child, Louis peaked in 1914 as the 20th most popular name for boys.

8. Arthur. The name Arthur has appeared throughout the British royal family's lineage. It's one of Prince Louis' middle names, and is also the name of Princess Margaret's grandson and the late Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn (Queen Victoria's third son).

9. Archie. Archie, the name of Prince Harry and Meghan, Duchess of Sussex's son, has historically been a more unique name for boys in the U.S. It’s currently at spot 333, but peaked in 1907 at spot 98.

10. Edward. Edward, Earl of Essex, is the king's youngest brother. His name is popular within the royal family: It's also the moniker of King Edward VIII, who briefly reigned in 1936 until his abdication the same year, and of Prince Edward, Duke of Kent. Like several other royal names, Edward was a popular pick for boys early in the 20th century (it was number eight in 1923), but is now at spot 228.

11. Peter. Peter is the name of Princess Anne’s son and the queen's eldest grandchild, Peter Phillips. While his name remained in the top 100 picks for boys from 1900 to 1996, it's currently at spot 192.

12. Harrison. Harrison has been climbing the ranks in popularity over the last few decades, jumping from spot 754 in 1980 to 121 today. The middle name of Archie, Harrison is a sweet name to consider for your little one.

13. James. James, Viscount Severn, is Louise’s brother and the second and youngest and child of the Earl and Countess of Wessex. His name is a popular pick: James has been in the top 20 names for boys in the U.S. since at least 1900, and is currently the fifth top name choice.

Still searching for the perfect baby name? Open the What to Expect app for the top 1,000 names for boys and girls, plus tips on naming your little one from parents who have been there.

BBC.com, Royal Family Tree and Line of Succession , January 2025. The Royal Family, Role of the Royal Family , 2025. Town & Country, The British Royal Family Tree , January 2025. U.S. Social Security Administration, Popular Baby Names , 2025.

Updates history

September 28, 2025

Editors: Kathleen Felton/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Minor copy updates and updates to sourcing.

Fact-checked for accuracy.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,922 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Searching for a Dashing Baby Boy Name? These 15 British Boy Names Deliver Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

50 Vintage Baby Names That Are Making a Comeback Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

120 Astrological Baby Names Inspired by Your Baby's Zodiac Sign Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Fierce and Fearless: 9 Baby Names for Girls With Superhero Energy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window