26 Toys for 18-Month-Olds, According to Child Play Experts and Parents Alike

Collage of the Best Toys for 18 Month Olds

Quick Summary

The best toys for 18-month-olds are those that are developmentally-appropriate, versatile and safe, according to experts and parents in the What to Expect community.

Chances are that by 18 months, your toddler is always on the go. With their constantly-developing motor skills — such as independent walking and even running — the best toys for 18-month-olds will encourage this newfound mobility and burgeoning independence. They’ll also encourage your child’s cognitive and language skills, as your little one is getting better at problem-solving and trying out new words.

You can always make playtime out of just about anything — use household items to make up a game or turn a car ride into an educational opportunity to point out shapes and colors. But, you’ll likely want to have some toy options to further support their exciting new skills. Below, check out recommendations from What to Expect staff and community members, as well as child play experts.

How I Chose the Best Toys for 18-Month-Olds

Toys for 18-month-olds should be engaging but age-appropriate, so I spoke with three child development experts — Sarah Lytle , Ph.D., Executive Director of the Playful Learning Landscapes Action Network (PLLAN); Natasha Burgert, M.D., F.A.A.P. , a pediatrician in Overland Park, Kansas; Lori Caplan-Colon, a leading speech language pathologist and founder of Montclair Speech Therapy ; and Sanam Hafeez, Psy.D , a neuropsychologist in New York City — to learn more about what parents should consider when shopping for toys for 18-month-olds.

I also included recommendations from users in the What to Expect community as well as parents on the What to Expect staff, who’ve road-tested many of these toys with their little ones at home.

Based on this feedback, I made sure that each toy was:

Developmentally-appropriate: If a toy’s too easy, your child will get bored; too difficult and they’ll get frustrated. I prioritized toys that encourage toddlers’ growth in at least one of the following areas: fine and gross motor skills, cognitive skills and language skills.

Versatile: For the most value — and to provide the most interest for your child — I prioritized toys that can be played with in multiple ways. For instance, many of the toys on our list can be used for counting as well as sorting, or can be used for educational play as well as imaginative play.

Safe: At 18 months, you still need to keep an eye out for toys with loose or small parts that could potentially become a choking hazard, so we took time to ensure that each of our picks is safe for your little one to hold and put in their mouth. All toys on this list are free from these hazards.

Best Learning Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Laugh & Learn Count & Rumble Piggy Bank

Easy to operate

30+ songs and phrases

Comes with batteries

Can be boring for older kids

Weight: 1.82 pounds

Dimensions: 5 x 7 x 6.5 inches

Power: 3 AA batteries included

Why We Love It

Caplan-Colon loves dump-and-fill toys, like the Fisher-Price piggy bank , because they promote hand-eye coordination. And this particular toy also allows ample opportunities for important one-on-one interaction with your little one, from singing together to counting to pointing out colors. Plus, they’ll develop fine motor skills by picking up each oversized coin and dropping it into the cute bank. And the more than 30 songs and phrases will keep kids engaged and entertained.

, because they promote hand-eye coordination. And this particular toy also allows ample opportunities for important one-on-one interaction with your little one, from singing together to counting to pointing out colors. Plus, they’ll develop fine motor skills by picking up each oversized coin and dropping it into the cute bank. And the more than 30 songs and phrases will keep kids engaged and entertained.

The coins also have numbers and shapes so you can practice counting as they get older. Though some parents note that their children outgrew this toy quickly, I found that my own kids kept playing with it well past toddlerhood, as it was a great addition to their pretend play store or bank.

Community Reviews

amyhensley007 "My LO can play with this piggy bank toy for ages. She loves dropping coins in and then opening the door to get them out. Right now her favorite obsession is opening and closing doors."

dannygirl417 "Fisher price piggy bank is my go to 1yo gift."

Best Developmental Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Learning Resources Spike the Fine Motor Hedgehog

Quiet

Multiple ways to play

Encourages fine motor skills

Some parents say quills are too small

Weight: 8.8 ounces

Dimensions: 9.1 x 9.1 x 3.9 inches

Why We Love It

Spike the Fine Motor Hedgehog is more than cute to look at: It’s a quiet activity that helps your little one build upon their dexterity and problem-solving skills as they try to fit the quills into the holes on his back. That’s not the only way to play, though. You can also help your toddler learn colors, counting and — later — patterns by sorting the quills together. Parents love that everything can be stored in Spike’s back for easy clean up.

is more than cute to look at: It’s a quiet activity that helps your little one build upon their dexterity and problem-solving skills as they try to fit the quills into the holes on his back. That’s not the only way to play, though. You can also help your toddler learn colors, counting and — later — patterns by sorting the quills together. Parents love that everything can be stored in Spike’s back for easy clean up.

"This was another toy that my daughter could play with independently, but when we played with her we could make it a little more educational by teaching her colors and numbers," says Leah Rocketto, What to Expect’s Associate Commerce Director and mom of a 3-year-old.

Community Reviews

Ellidal "Learning resources has great toys! I've ordered some on Amazon. I got the bake set and spike the fine motor hedgehog."

Best STEM Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Melissa & Doug Rainbow Caterpillar Gear Toy

Bright colors

Engaging

Solid construction

Cogs can get lost

Weight: 7.52 ounces

Dimensions: 14 x 6 x 2 inches

Why We Love It

At first glance, you might not think this Melissa & Doug caterpillar gear toy is all that entertaining, but between the bright colors, interlocking gears and caterpillar design, it’s the perfect toy to keep an 18-month-old learning and engaged. When the six colorful gears are lined up on the caterpillar board, your toddler can turn them to watch how each gear works to move the one next to it. Parents love how this toy can help their little ones develop problem solving skills, sorting skills and color recognition all in one.

is all that entertaining, but between the bright colors, interlocking gears and caterpillar design, it’s the perfect toy to keep an 18-month-old learning and engaged. When the six colorful gears are lined up on the caterpillar board, your toddler can turn them to watch how each gear works to move the one next to it. Parents love how this toy can help their little ones develop problem solving skills, sorting skills and color recognition all in one.

Note that because the cogs are unattached, they can get shuffled around and lost if you don’t make it a point to keep them all together.

Community Reviews

barrettporter “We also LOVE Melissa and Doug brand toys. They have amazing stuff that will last you years, like the gear caterpillar, or the car carrier, or the bead maze...my toddler still loves these and my baby is getting into them now too!”

bbaugust "...we got him a lacing beads and that caterpillar gear toy that turns. Kept him VERY busy."

Best Puzzle Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Melissa & Doug First Shapes Jumbo Knob Wooden Puzzle

Easy for little hands to hold

colorful

familiar theme

Some parents say it’s too simple

Weight: 1.25 pounds

Dimensions: 12 x 11.75 x 1.7 inches

Why We Love It

Introduce your little one to the concept of problem-solving with this peg puzzle . My sons had several of these Melissa & Doug puzzles with the easy-to-grasp knobs, and they were an absolute hit because of their simplicity. The feeling of accomplishment that comes along with completing an entire puzzle on their own is hard to beat for an 18-month-old. This particular design is colorful and the wooden puzzle pieces are sturdy, which is a good thing, as chances are high they will like to bang them together.

One thing What to Expect parents often flag about these large knob puzzles? Your baby will likely move onto jigsaw puzzles by 2 years old.

Community Reviews

beebop2004 "My daughter is obsessed with puzzles - she loves the Melissa & Doug wooden peg puzzles and Chuckle & Roar puzzles from Target. She’s mastered all the ones she has so we’re going to get her more."

whitedovemomma "Mine is currently obsessed with Melissa and Doug wooden puzzles like this link below. Both chunky and peg, as long as they have the matching picture underneath. She will do them over and over again while I cook, etc. We have a couple without the matching picture underneath that she doesn't quite get on her own yet, but we like to sit and do them together."

Best Blocks for 18-Month-Olds

Lovevery The Block Set

Colorful

Variety of shapes and sizes

Comes with two storage options

Made of sustainably-sourced wood

More expensive than other block sets

Weight: 8.1 pounds

Dimensions: 15 x 6 x 5 inches

Why We Love It

This isn’t your average block set. With 70 wood pieces in a rainbow of 18 different hues and 18 different shapes and tools, the Lovevery blocksprovide endless play potential. In fact, it comes with a stage-based activity guide that features more than 20 fun learning and developmental activities ranging in complexity, which helps parents make playtime more fruitful. Plus, the blocks come packaged in a wooden storage box that converts into a pull car. But because stuffing all those shapes back into the storage box isn’t always possible, it also comes with a drawstring bag for quick cleanup.

This isn’t your average block set. With 70 wood pieces in a rainbow of 18 different hues and 18 different shapes and tools, the

provide endless play potential. In fact, it comes with a stage-based activity guide that features more than 20 fun learning and developmental activities ranging in complexity, which helps parents make playtime more fruitful. Plus, the blocks come packaged in a wooden storage box that converts into a pull car. But because stuffing all those shapes back into the storage box isn’t always possible, it also comes with a drawstring bag for quick cleanup.

"You can transform it into a car with four small holes, pegs and circular blocks — this is my daughter’s favorite way to play," Leah wrote in her review of the set. She loves wheeling her dolls from room to room. You can also place the lid on top to create a shape sorter, perfect for younger children. And as a bonus, the box serves as a gorgeous storage system that you don’t need (or even want) to hide."

Community Reviews

"The Lovevery Block Set is another favorite. My daughter started playing with it when she was around 12 months old and it’s been a favorite ever since. Plays with it every day."

“My son plays with it all the time! He got it for Christmas last year and it’s one of our most used toys. He does go through phases where he prefers his legos but will never pass up the opportunity to build and knock down towers.”

"The lovevery block set makes a really good first birthday gift. It's got so many pieces that can be used really creatively, and my baby loves it."

Best Book for 18-Month-Olds

LeapFrog Learning Friends 100 Words Book

Uses English and Spanish

Interactive

Pages are easy to turn

Requires batteries

Loud

Weight: 1.1 pounds

Dimensions: 9.4 x 9.2 x 1.9 inches

Power: 2 AA batteries required (included)

Why We Love It

As your little one starts to build their vocabulary, a book like the LeapFrog 100 Words Book will help expand their language skills. It includes various categories such as animals, food and colors with a corresponding image for each word, so you can point to the picture and read your tot the vocabulary word.

will help expand their language skills. It includes various categories such as animals, food and colors with a corresponding image for each word, so you can point to the picture and read your tot the vocabulary word.

Shelley Gingrich, Executive Director of Brand Solutions at What to Expect, uses this book with both of her kids, aged 1 and 5. "We all giggle at the sounds, but it's also a great tool for learning words for our 1 year old and reading for our 5 year old," she says.

What’s more is that it also includes a touch feature so they can play independently, too. By pressing the picture, they’ll hear the word in English or Spanish, plus associated sounds and fun facts for building their understanding around each word.

Parents like that there is volume control on this book, although some noted that the lowest setting is still pretty loud. Another thing to keep in mind is that the buttons are on the sensitive side. "My only gripe is that it's really sensitive to touch, so my 1-year old often is trying to hit one picture but it makes the sounds for the picture below or beside it," says Shelley.

Community Reviews

emreyna "I second this word book! My son has about a 10 second attention span but he will actually sit and play with this book for a bit independently."

Xpecting2021 "Leapfrog learning friends 100 words book. Get it for sure 109k reviews cant be wrong."

Best Obstacle Course Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Edx Education Step-a-Trail

Allows for open-ended play

Sturdy

On the pricier side compared to other toys

Weight: 6.35 pounds

Dimensions: 18.9 x 5.4 x 2.5 for the logs, up to 11.3 x 5.2 for the stumps

Why We Love It

Bring the playground fun to your home with this Step-a-Trail set.It's designed to look like brightly-colored logs and tree stumps that will tempt your tot to practice walking and hopping along them, all while they develop motor skills like balance and coordination.

It's designed to look like brightly-colored logs and tree stumps that will tempt your tot to practice walking and hopping along them, all while they develop motor skills like balance and coordination.

Each of the six pieces — three logs and three stumps — is made of a sturdy plastic with rubber grips on the tops and bottoms so that slipping isn't an issue. They're built to withstand more than 790 pounds of weight, so you can get in on the fun with your toddler, too. And don't worry if you’re short on yard space: This toy can be used inside or outside.

Community Reviews

ylime111 "Edx Education Step-A-Trail is great for indoors or out. Kids from 18mo-4yo in our family love it."

Best Baby Doll for 18-Month-Olds

Manhattan Toy Wee Baby Stella

Comes in a variety of skin tones

Soft

Easy to carry

Includes magnetic pacifier

Some wish pacifier was attached to doll

Weight: 4 ounces

Dimensions: 2.5 x 4 x 12 inches

Why We Love It

Your 18-month-old loves to do things just like you, which makes this a great time to introduce a first baby doll. For an affordable, age-appropriate option, consider the Wee Baby Stella from Manhattan Toys. The 12-inch doll is adorable and comes with a magnetic pacifier, as well as a full outfit that comes on and off, both of which help baby with fine motor skills. Plus, it’s a great toy for imaginative play.

Your 18-month-old loves to do things just like you, which makes this a great time to introduce a first baby doll. For an affordable, age-appropriate option, consider the

from Manhattan Toys. The 12-inch doll is adorable and comes with a magnetic pacifier, as well as a full outfit that comes on and off, both of which help baby with fine motor skills. Plus, it’s a great toy for imaginative play.

"It's such an adorable first baby doll for a younger child who's not quite ready for anything more than a soft stuffie," says Shelley. "My daughter loves the magnetic pacifier and pointing out her different body parts as she learns the words like eyes, arms, legs."

Parents liked how soft the head and body are, making it a good toy for snuggling. And, many said that it’s easy to spot clean.

Community Reviews

"Our daughter carries it everywhere with her when she crawls around and gives her the pacifier. We love it! Our best purchase, I'm considering buying more than one in case this one gets lost or ruined."

"My daughter has this doll and loooooves it. ... She's constantly making sure her paci is in her mouth. It's so cute seeing her take care of her baby doll the way I'd take her care of her."

I used a Wee Baby from Manhattan Toy when I was expecting my November 2019 baby. My son was 2 at that time. I liked the size, that it was soft and there were different skin tones. My children are half Korean so the beige baby Stella was a great option for us.

"I got my guy a baby stella doll— he loves it so much. The paci and bottle are magnetic and the dolls are just really well made. They make lots of other clothes/accessories if you want that too!"

"We got a couple Baby Stella dolls for our daughter when I was pregnant with #2 so we could practice being gentle with a baby. She loves them and loves the magnetic pacifier and bottle. The are soft and super cute, they have boy and girl babies in a few different skin tones. Just got her another one for Xmas."

Best Activity Cube Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Battat Discover Farm Animals Wooden Activity Cube

Plenty of play options

Sturdy design

Some parents say it’s smaller than they expected

Weight: 13.24 pounds

Dimensions: 13.4 x 11.81 x 17.72 inches

Why We Love It

When my oldest son was nearly a year old, he fell in love with the activity cube in our pediatrician’s waiting room. So,when his baby brother was born a few months later, we invested in this adorable activity cube that remained a staple in our playroom throughout both of their toddler years. The options for play are virtually endless: Open and close doors to play peek-a-boo with farm animals, push and pull wooden beads through loops, spin the side blocks to discover new animals, and race animals up and down zigzag paths. The farm animal motif is such a classic and when my own kids were toddlers, they would spend hours making different animal noises, racing the beads through the top hoops and crawling around the cube together, all the while practicing motor, language and problem solving skills.

When my oldest son was nearly a year old, he fell in love with the activity cube in our pediatrician’s waiting room. So,when his baby brother was born a few months later, we invested in

that remained a staple in our playroom throughout both of their toddler years.

The options for play are virtually endless: Open and close doors to play peek-a-boo with farm animals, push and pull wooden beads through loops, spin the side blocks to discover new animals, and race animals up and down zigzag paths. The farm animal motif is such a classic and when my own kids were toddlers, they would spend hours making different animal noises, racing the beads through the top hoops and crawling around the cube together, all the while practicing motor, language and problem solving skills.

Community Reviews

Kfol "So for the most part my guy is disinterested in most toys and just likes getting into things he is t supposed to, but one toy that does hold his attention is this"

Best Activity Toy for 18-Month-Olds

VTech Smart Shots Sports Center

Colorful

Lots of play potential

Relatively portable

Scoreboard can be finicky

Batteries required

Weight: 2 pounds

Dimensions: 16.53 x 22.83 x 24 inches

Power: 3 AA batteries (not included)

Why We Love It

VTech’s electronic sports centeris a basketball hoop and soccer net all in one. For active tots, it’s a great foray into the world of sports. Your little one can develop their large motor skills by shooting or kicking the ball, and hone in on fine motor skills by pressing the interactive buttons and turning the spinning gears as you cheer them on.

is a basketball hoop and soccer net all in one. For active tots, it’s a great foray into the world of sports. Your little one can develop their large motor skills by shooting or kicking the ball, and hone in on fine motor skills by pressing the interactive buttons and turning the spinning gears as you cheer them on.

An LED scoreboard provides further encouragement and learning as it counts the number of baskets made, plus displays fun animations and plays lights, sounds and songs. Some parents say that the scoreboard can be a bit touchy and doesn’t always keep an accurate count, but that’s the perfect opportunity for you as the caregiver to swoop in and help — everything’s a learning opportunity! My two boys had a similar toy when they were small and it was a great jumping-off point for them to learn the mechanics of how to score a goal.

Community Reviews

stephaniexox "[My little one] has a VTech basketball hoop that he likes to put his ball into. He's obsessed with balls in general lately."

Best Arts & Crafts Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Crayola My First Fingerpaint Kit

Washable

Small bottles are easier for little ones to handle

Big pieces of paper included

Messier than most activities

Size: 3 fluid ounces

Dimensions: Each sheet of paper is 13 x 19 inches

Why We Love It

At 18 months, your child is now old enough to experiment with basic crafts, so why not introduce them by way of Crayola's First Fingerpaint Kit ? A fully tactile experience, your little one can dip their fingers into three tiny tubes of non-toxic primary paint colors to create their own masterpiece. As a bonus, you’ll also get 10 big sheets of paper for your petite Picasso, which are specially made to prevent the paint from seeping through.

Community Reviews

"My little girl just turned one and we tried finger painting for the first time. I bought washable fingerprint kit from crayola . We spread newspapers on the floor and I had her in just a diaper. It was messy ."

"I'd use crayola washable paints. They're non-toxic and wash off very easily. If you're doing hand prints, keep a baby wipe nearby to quickly clean off their hands so they don't end up with them in their mouth or get paint everywhere while carrying them to the sink/tub. Ad while they say washable, the paint doesn't always come out of clothes so I'd recommend painting while they're only in a diaper."

"I second the crayons washable paints! So many colors and they're non toxic. I also use a wipe really quick before getting her to the sink, comes off super easy. & for the price it's better than buying multiple single paint colors. And you get a decent amount of paint in each jar, I've made so many crafts with them already!"

Best Fine Motor Skills Toy for 18-Month-Olds

KiwiCo Color Wheel Racers and Ramp

Durable stand and pieces

Lots of play potential

Non-toxic/water-based paints

Pricey

Dimensions: 1.8 x 14 x 4.8 inches

Why We Love It

Exercise baby’s fine motor skills with this zig-zag tower maze . Tots get the wooden pieces rolling by dropping them on top then watching them roll down the tower. They’ll also need to figure out how to extract them from the bottom. Each of the five wooden pieces features a different design, so your little one can work on color and pattern recognition, too."My daughter was wildly entertained by this, and treated the wheels like little cars she’d watch 'race,'" say Leah, who adds that the compact size makes it easy to store and travel with.

. Tots get the wooden pieces rolling by dropping them on top then watching them roll down the tower. They’ll also need to figure out how to extract them from the bottom. Each of the five wooden pieces features a different design, so your little one can work on color and pattern recognition, too."My daughter was wildly entertained by this, and treated the wheels like little cars she’d watch 'race,'" say Leah, who adds that the compact size makes it easy to store and travel with.

KiwiCo is also beloved by parents because of their handy grownup guides, which are included to help keep playtime fun and interesting for your little one.

Best Musical Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Fisher-Price Classic Xylophone

Durable

Good sound

Classic toy that can be passed on

Some think string is too short

Weight: 14.8 ounces

Dimensions: 12.4 x 7.28 x 3.03 inches

Why We Love It

Another way for your 18-month-old to express their creative side is through music. While they likely won't be composing symphonies just yet, this classic rainbow-colored xylophone plays eight soft notes that are pleasing to the ear (theirs and yours), which is to say that it’s loud enough without being too loud.

Another way for your 18-month-old to express their creative side is through music. While they likely won't be composing symphonies just yet, this

Tapping or banging the keys helps develop hand-eye coordination, as does using the attached mallet. The mallet is on a string, so you won’t lose it, but it’s important to note that some parents think the string is just a touch too short to make epic jam sessions easy. This toy also has a pull string and wheels so your little one can take it around wherever they go, which also helps develop gross motor skills. At just over a foot long, this fits nicely on a child’s lap when seated.

Community Reviews

Lizamo "[My baby] likes the Fisher-Price xylophone."

Takver "We also put on music and play along with instruments (shakers, a fisher price xylophone, anything to bang on)."

Best Outdoor Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Little Kids Fubbles No-Spill Tumbler

Easy to use

Spill- and leak-proof

Small bubble capacity and wand

Weight: 8.4 ounces with a 4-ounce bubble solution volume

Dimensions: 5.3 x 3.3 x 9 inches

Why We Love It

There’s nothing like blowing bubbles to get a tot moving! Kids love to chase after them and pop them, or jump around as a shower of bubbles rain down on their heads. Of course, one of the problems with most bubble containers is that in all that excitement, tots can knock over the bubbles.

This ingenious no-spill tumbler has solved that problem by creating a container with a small opening that’s just large enough for the wand to slip through. Encourage your little one to take a turn dipping the wand and blowing the bubbles — it just so happens to help them build upon fine motor skills, too, as they figure out how to get the wand in the hole. Keep in mind that the tumbler only holds four ounces of bubble solution, so you might want to have some extra on-hand for refills .

has solved that problem by creating a container with a small opening that’s just large enough for the wand to slip through. Encourage your little one to take a turn dipping the wand and blowing the bubbles — it just so happens to help them build upon fine motor skills, too, as they figure out how to get the wand in the hole. Keep in mind that the tumbler only holds four ounces of bubble solution, so you might want to have

Community Reviews

MaryMJ88 "Fubbles no-spill container is a game changer! It actually doesnt spill!"

BethA14 "The Fubbles no spill bubbles. Yes yes yes!! A bubble container that I am OK with my toddler carrying all over the house! I found them in the Easter basket stuffer section at Walmart and bought a bunch! I refill them with any bubble solution, it’s really the container that’s the winner!"

Best Bath Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Nuby Floating Purple Octopus

Adorable

Soft material

Multiple textures

Smaller than expected

Only has six legs

Weight: 6.7 ounces

Dimensions: 6.8 x 6.8 x 5.6 inches

Why We Love It

Your budding toddler is sure to love bathtime with this fun, floating purple octopus . During bathtime, your little one will hone their skills while grabbing floating rings and placing them on the friendly octopus’s tentacles. It’s not only engaging, but it also requires kids to manipulate it with their hands to get the rings on and off, encouraging hand-eye coordination and fine motor skills.

. During bathtime, your little one will hone their skills while grabbing floating rings and placing them on the friendly octopus’s tentacles. It’s not only engaging, but it also requires kids to manipulate it with their hands to get the rings on and off, encouraging hand-eye coordination and fine motor skills.

"It's such a fun bath toy," says Shelley. "We love that it floats, and getting the rings on the tentacles is lots of fun. It's also easy to clean."

Also nice: There are no small holes to let in water, so you won’t have to worry about keeping it clean and mold-free.

Community Reviews

"[My daughter] also loves this."

“I got this crazy guy and my little looooves it.”

"My daughter loves staring at this floating octopus, it’s her favorite."

Best Riding Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Little Tikes Rocking Horse

Can be used indoors or outdoors

Easy to move around

Easy to wipe clean

Can tip as it is very lightweight

Weight: 6.5 pounds

Dimensions: 17.5 x 33 x 10 inches

Why We Love It

Does your little one have a lot of energy to burn? This durable Little Tikes rocking horse can help with that. The toy can be used indoors or outdoors and is safe enough for the younger set to ride, thanks to a low, wide profile and easy-grip handles as they work on their motor skills. It’s lightweight, so it’s easy to move around, but some parents note that this also makes it prone to tipping over. But, thanks to the low profile design, it’s still safe and fun to use. A nice bonus: Because it’s made of a smooth plastic, it’s easy to wipe down after playtime.

Does your little one have a lot of energy to burn? This durable

can help with that. The toy can be used indoors or outdoors and is safe enough for the younger set to ride, thanks to a low, wide profile and easy-grip handles as they work on their motor skills. It’s lightweight, so it’s easy to move around, but some parents note that this also makes it prone to tipping over. But, thanks to the low profile design, it’s still safe and fun to use. A nice bonus: Because it’s made of a smooth plastic, it’s easy to wipe down after playtime.

Community Reviews

mammalove “The little tikes rocking horse is a hit here and doesn’t look worn even though it’s been in the garden 2 years. [A]lso have a small slide which is another hit.”

babijol "My toddler received a Little Tikes rocking horse for his first birthday and he was obsessed (still is!). We couldn't get him off it lol. It comes in blue and pink and you can find it on Amazon."

Best Toy Cars for 18-Month-Olds

Fisher-Price Little People Helpful Neighbors Wheelie Garage

Sturdy

Supports imaginative play

No assembly required

Cars occasionally need help down the ramp

Crank can be difficult to turn

Weight: 2.43 pounds

Dimensions: 13.5 x 5.28 x 12.52 inches

Why We Love It

For engaging in pretend play on a smaller scale, look for one of the Fisher-Price Little People sets . This garage comes with two chunky vehicles that are easy for kids to put on the platform and crank the handle to lift up so the mechanic can take a look. This allows them to engage in imaginative play and can also help develop communication skills when you play with them. Meanwhile, they’ll enhance hand-eye coordination and as they fill the tank with gas, place cars in the elevator and turn the crank to raise the platform.

. This garage comes with two chunky vehicles that are easy for kids to put on the platform and crank the handle to lift up so the mechanic can take a look. This allows them to engage in imaginative play and can also help develop communication skills when you play with them. Meanwhile, they’ll enhance hand-eye coordination and as they fill the tank with gas, place cars in the elevator and turn the crank to raise the platform.

Some parents say that their little ones struggle to turn the crank at times and that the cars might need some help getting down the ramp, but that overall with the help of a parent or caregiver, these are only minor, temporary inconveniences to an overall awesome playset.

Best Building Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Lego Duplo My First Number Train

Lots of play potential

Durable

Easy to grasp

May come apart easily when your little one drives the train around

Weight: 1.2 pounds total

Dimensions: 3 x 14 x 2 inches wide (train with wagons attached)

Why We Love It

Before your little builder gets into LEGOs, consider the brand’s larger, easier-to-grasp Duplo blocks . With this set (and the help of a parent or caregiver), they'll be able to assemble their very own train using the 23 included blocks while practicing problem-solving skills and hand-eye coordination.

. With this set (and the help of a parent or caregiver), they'll be able to assemble their very own train using the 23 included blocks while practicing problem-solving skills and hand-eye coordination.

"We're huge Lego Duplo fans at our house," says Shelley. "My son is now 5 and still plays with them to build all kinds of imaginative creations. The number train is a great first Lego set as it helps littles learn numbers, and it's lots of fun as a train to move around, too."

Once constructed, your tot will have fun zooming their train around, working on motor skills and potentially engaging in pretend play. Eventually, they'll begin to learn numbers by counting the cars on the train.

Just be aware that during the course of driving the train around, the connection points may disengage, which could lead to a bit of frustration — but you can always jump in as a train repair technician!

Community Reviews

"My little boy has just turned three and loves his Duplo. His five year old sister is getting into Lego now but still loves Duplo. They play with Duplo every day."

"My son loves his duplo legos and he is 20 months old"

"We play with our Legos Duplo train set and our Brio trains every single day."

Best Toy Kit for 18-Month-Olds

The Lalo Play Box 16-18 Months

Multi-purpose toys

Includes a play guide

Has a subscription option

Expensive

Contains many small parts to keep track of

Weight: 1.5 pounds (total)

Dimensions: Sorting & Counting Toy: 3.3 x 1.4 inches; Shape Puzzle: 11 x 4.13 x 0.5 inches; Racer: 12 x 2.76 x 10.43 inches; Fruits and Veggies: 0.98 x 6.3 inches (knife)

Why We Love It

The Lalo Play Box comes with multiple toys designed to help grow your tot’s new motor and cognitive skills, as well as encouraging their language development. The kit comes with five toys, including a sorting and counting toy that also promotes color recognition and a car-racing toy that helps with fine motor skills and problem solving. These toys offer tons of play potential and are made with simple designs that won’t overstimulate your toddler. One thing to note is that there are many different pieces in this kit, so you’ll have to keep track of them. And, you might want to check out the play box for 19- to 21-month-olds if your baby is a little bit further ahead developmentally.

The Lalo Play Box comes with multiple toys designed to help grow your tot’s new motor and cognitive skills, as well as encouraging their language development. The kit comes with five toys, including a sorting and counting toy that also promotes color recognition and a car-racing toy that helps with fine motor skills and problem solving. These toys offer tons of play potential and are made with simple designs that won’t overstimulate your toddler. One thing to note is that there are many different pieces in this kit, so you’ll have to keep track of them. And, you might want to check out

if your baby is a little bit further ahead developmentally.

Best Toy Kitchen for 18-Month-Olds

Cocomelon Just Play Learning Kitchen

Buttons on microwave play 42 phrases

Ideal for pretend play

Smaller than some expected

Weight: 5.47 pounds

Dimensions: 15.5 x 5.5 x 19 inches

Power: 2 AAA batteries

Why We Love It

“Providing toys that allow for real-world play strengthens the developmental skills used for social connectedness and critical thinking,” says Dr. Burgert. “Although playing with a kitchen set, for example, may not seem very complicated to an observing adult, the skills a child uses during pretend play are foundational for social and emotional growth.”

That’s exactly why this Cocomelon Just Play Learning Kitchen playset is perfect for toddlers. Though some parents prefer a standalone full kitchen, this pint-sized set has a tabletop design that can be moved wherever your toddler wants to play with it — and therefore, it won’t soak up too much square footage of room (ideal for parents who don’t have designated play areas). It includes a stovetop, five play foods and utensils to practice motor skills, all while engaging in imaginative play. There’s plenty of opportunity for caregivers to join in on the fun, too, whether through expanding their vocabulary by pointing out the different fruits, vegetables or "cooking" a meal.

Take note that some parents were surprised by the size of this kitchen, and expected it to be larger. It also requires two AAA batteries, which are not included with your purchase.

Best Climbing Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Lily & River Little Climber

Folds for storage

Lots of play potential

Add-ons available

Attractive design

Requires assembly and close supervision

Expensive

Weight: 20 pounds, with a 90-pound weight capacity

Dimensions: 31.5 x 31.5 x 24 inches open, 31.5 x 6.75 x 28 inches folded

Why We Love It

If you have a little climber on your hands, they’re sure to love this indoor climbing gym . The climber is built to handle toddlers’ active lifestyles: It's constructed of strong, sustainably-sourced bamboo wood and sealed with a non-toxic finish. There are plenty of add-ons to add to the play potential as they get older or for big siblings, including a rock wall accessory and a reversible ladder/slide.

. The climber is built to handle toddlers’ active lifestyles: It's constructed of strong, sustainably-sourced bamboo wood and sealed with a non-toxic finish. There are plenty of add-ons to add to the play potential as they get older or for big siblings, including a rock wall accessory and a reversible ladder/slide.

As they explore, there’s no doubt this climber will help your little one vastly improve their ever-expanding gross motor skills and balance, but they may need your help to get the hang of things at first. Though this particular toy is an investment, it makes a great gift and you can occasionally catch a great sale through Lily & River or Pottery Barn Kids, so definitely keep an eye out for that.

Community Reviews

"We got one for our little man and he loves it!! He’s always been a climber, so he took to it pretty good. ‘Lily & River’ always has sales, check them out — we love ours from them."

We got the Lily & River climber for our son for Christmas. He’s been climbing everything since he could stand himself up. We have had it out since the holidays and when he sees it, he’ll climb it.

"We have the Lily & River one and our LO loves it!! He climbs, slides, rolls balls and cars down it, uses it as a tent (with a blanket over top), and plays pretend with his animals climbing up it, etc. … For reference, we got it for his first birthday and he already had a climbing arch since 8 months old. He's currently 18 months and all of our friends kids who are 2-3 love to climb them both too so I think he'll continue to enjoy it for a long time."

Best Magnetic Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Kikidex Magnetic Drawing Board

Detachable legs

Mess-free art project

Some experienced issues with the legs

Weight: 1.21 pounds

Dimensions: 14.2 x 5.8 inches (screen); 5.9 inches (legs)

Why We Love It

Around this time, your toddler may start doodling. Let them unleash their creativity with this versatile magnetic drawing board beloved by parents as it doesn’t leave behind a mess. "Because the drawings stay on the board, I can let my daughter play with this independently, which gives me a little break," says Leah. "It’s also light enough to take from room to room for easy play anywhere."

Another pro: You won’t have to worry about having extra supplies on hand — this tiny table is a reusable blank canvas and the detachable legs make it easy to take in the car or on a plane for a travel-friendly activity. It’s also available in seven colorways, so you can easily find one with your toddler’s new favorite color.

Community Reviews

mommamia214 "Got my daughter a magnetic drawing board she loves it"

cribbkat "Yes to the magnetic drawing boards! My daughter got one for her first birthday and used it so much that it broke. She now has 2 at our house and 2 at grandma's"

Best Water Table for 18-Month-Olds

Step2 Rain Showers Splash Pond Toddler Water Table

Multiple engaging activities

Several designs available

Better for outdoor play in warmer months

Weight: 15 pounds

Dimensions: 32 x 24 x 39 inches

Why We Love It

If you want an activity that gets your little one outdoors during the warmer months, Step2 makes water tables in several different designs. I am, however, partial to the best-selling Step2 Rain Showers Splash Pond Toddler Water Table , shown here. (Other popular themes include summer and ducks .)

Fill the basin with water or sand to help your toddler engage in sensory development, and when you pour water on the top level, it delivers a rainfall effect. The set also comes with 13 toys to promote a number of activities. When playtime is over, simply unplug the drain and wipe it down.

Community Reviews

mashd9191 "We have the step2 water table and it holds her attention for well over a half hour. She loves it so much."

growinggrogu "My son LOVED his water table last summer. Water is his happy place … it's a Step2 water table—they have a variety of designs."

Best Sorting Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Learning Resources Smart Snacks Shape Sorting Cupcakes

Helps with fine motor skills

Long-lasting

Some found it difficult to pull apart the cupcake parts

Dimensions: 10 x 10 x 3 inches (each cupcake measures 2 x 1.5 inches)

Why We Love It

These cupcakes look like the real deal, but don't let that fool you — they’re all about learning and development. Encourage your little one to lift up each cupcake top to reveal a shape that coordinates with a specific cupcake bottom. Practice fine motor skills by matching the cupcake top to the correct bottom.

While this toy is one your toddler will use for years (one mom shared her son is using it six years later!), a few What to Expect testers note the cupcake parts were difficult to separate and required extra help from an adult.

Community Reviews

"Learning resources shape sorting cupcakes are always my first recommendation. We’ve had them for probably 6 years now, perfect condition, and still played with by the 7 year old. Sometimes the 7 year old and the 1 year old fight over them."

"we really love the learning resources brand on Amazon. They're really good quality!"

"Learning Resources brand on Amazon has lots of toys to teach shapes, colors, matching, sorting, alphabet, numbers, etc. I have several that are still her favorite."

Best Stacking Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Mega Bloks First Builders Toddler Blocks Toys Set

Multiple colors and configurations

Convenient carrying bag

Less engaging for older babies

Weight: 2.2 pounds

Dimensions: 12 x 14 x 5 inches

Why We Love It

Think of these Mega Bloks as a primer for your 18-month-old’s future LEGO collection. These 80 blocks were made for small hands, and they come in a wide range of colors and shapes. The set will arrive in a handy bag, which makes cleanup a breeze, and also allows you to take them on the go. While these are suitable for toddlers, some parents say they weren’t quite as engaging as LEGO Duplos.

Community Reviews

"our guy loves these. he's getting better at stacking and not just throwing"

"We get a lot of use out of our mega blocks. My 2 year old loves them and we’ve had them about a year."

"This is baby 3, so we already have wood blocks, Mega blocks and Duplos. Mega blocks are good and easier to stack for littles, but not as good as Duplos for hand strengthening."

Best Plush Toy for 18-Month-Olds

Pottery Barn Kids Farmhouse Animal Stack

Designed for fine motor skills

Stackable for easy cleanup

Great gift idea

Pricey

Weight: 0.5 pounds

Dimensions: 6.5-inch diameter, 11 inches high (overall)

Why We Love It

What’s better than one plush toy? Four plush toys. This set from Pottery Barn is made to help baby practice fine motor skills and creative play, among other developmental learnings. All the loveys — a chicken, sheep, llama and horse — are detachable, so your tot can play with one at a time.

Another bonus? The set also comes with its own stacking dowel, which makes for an easier cleanup process.

Our Research

To determine what to look for in toys for 18-month-olds, we reviewed the AAP recommendations for toys and spoke to the following experts:

Sarah Lytle, Ph.D., director of the Outreach and Education division at the Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences (I-LABS) at the University of Washington.

Natasha Burgert, M.D., F.A.A.P. , a pediatrician in Overland Park, Kansas.

Lori Caplan-Colon, a leading speech language pathologist and founder of Montclair Speech Therapy .

Sanam Hafeez, Psy.D , a neuropsychologist in New York City.

We also spoke with Shelley Gingrich, Executive Director of Brand Solutions and mom of a 1- and 5-year-old, as well as Leah Rocketto, Associate Director of Commerce and mom of a 3-year-old, who has experience with several toys on this list.

Additionally, as a mom of two and a parenting writer, I’ve included my personal experience with many of the toddler toys on this list.

Finally, we canvassed the What to Expect community boards to see which toys parents of 18-month-olds gave high praise.

FAQ

What are the best toys for 18-month-olds?

Toys that encourage your child to move with their whole body, like music they can dance to or a ball they can kick, roll or chase, are developmentally on-target for this age group’s gross motor skills. Toys that develop fine motor skills and hand-eye coordination, like sorting toys, stacking toys and even car and doll toys, are also great options. Many of these types of toys also help your tot’s cognitive development as it requires them to problem-solve fitting items into certain shapes or solving a puzzle. Art toys also help encourage their creativity and imaginative play while helping them hone fine motor skills, too (through grasping and using art supplies).

Books are always a great choice for your little one when working on their language skills. Reading with your child every day is recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), as it will help encourage their vocabulary development. Toys that play music or sound and encourage repetition, such as teaching numbers, colors, letters and nursery rhymes, are also great for this area.

American Academy of Pediatrics, Bathing Your Baby , September 2023. American Academy of Pediatrics, Choking Prevention , September 2019. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Important Milestones: Your Child By Eighteen Months , June 2023. KidsHealth from Nemours, Toddler Reading Time , August 2023. What to Expect, When Do Toddlers Start Running, Jumping, Kicking and Climbing? , October 2021. What to Expect, How to Encourage Pretend Play in Babies and Toddlers , September 2021. Natasha Burgert, M.D., F.A.A.P., Pediatrician, South Overland Park, Kansas. Lori Caplan-Colon, Speech Language Pathologist and Founder of Montclair Speech Therapy, Caldwell, New Jersey. Sanam Hafeez, Psy.D, Neuropsychologist, Faculty Member, Columbia University, New York, New York. Sarah Lytle, Ph.D., Executive Director of the Playful Learning Landscapes Action Network (PLLAN).

Your Next Read

Best Activities for 18-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

6 Best Standing Toys to Help Your Baby Meet a Milestone Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

Best Activities for 15-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 9-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 6-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 10-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Do Babies Start Playing With Toys? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for an 11-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for 3-Year-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

Best Games to Play With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Crafts for Toddlers Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Your 1-Year-Old's Developmental Milestones Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window