27 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a cabbage.

Hurrah! Welcome to the last week of the second trimester — the end is near, and you can see the light!

Your baby, on the other hand, is fine-tuning skills of his own ... and let's just say your voice is music to his ears.

Don't be surprised if you suddenly start noticing little jumps in that growing belly of yours, either. Your little one might have a case of the hiccups !

Your Baby at Week 27

At a Glance

Ear muffs

Your baby can hear you, but know that it’s muffled because the ears are still covered in vernix caseosa, that waxy protective coating on the skin.

Baby's got hiccups

If you’re feeling unusual movements in your belly, it may be hiccups. As baby’s lungs continue to develop, chances of hiccups increase.

So active!

Your little gymnast has started to develop muscle tone from all that kicking, rolling, and punching he's doing.

27 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 27 weeks pregnant, you're in month 6 of your pregnancy. Only 3 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 27 weeks?

By the end of the second trimester, your baby is now measuring about 14½ inches — more than a foot long. His weight is creeping up the charts too, coming in at around 2 pounds. That's double what it was four weeks ago.

Most babies this age, yours included, still like to snuggle in a slightly curled position inside the uterus — thus the term "fetal position."

Baby recognizes your voices

Big news: Your baby may recognize both your and your partner's voices by now.

His auditory development , or hearing, is progressing as the network of nerves to the ears matures — though the sounds he hears are muffled, thanks to the creamy coating of vernix covering them.

So this might be a good time to read and even sing to your baby — or rather, your tummy — and a good chance to start memorizing those nursery rhymes and lullabies you'll need to be repeating (and repeating) pretty soon.

While you're at it, here's another way to have some family fun at 27 weeks pregnant: Your partner might be able to hear baby's heartbeat by pressing an ear to your stomach.

And baby's eyes might open this week, if they didn't last week.

Baby’s tasting ... and hiccupping

Your baby's taste buds are very developed now too. Need a taste test? If you eat some spicy food, your baby will be able to taste the difference in the amniotic fluid. Just keep in mind that you'll have different mealtimes, with his coming about two hours after yours.

Some babies will even respond to that spicy kick by hiccupping . And although hiccups, which feel like belly spasms to you, may seem like they're disturbing him, he isn't stressed at all. It's just one more sensation babies need to get used to.

Your Body at Week 27

Swelling and edema

Two weeks ago, your belly was probably about the size of a soccer ball — and by 27 weeks pregnant, your uterus may have swelled to the size of a basketball. Unfortunately, that's not the only thing that's swelling.

Nearly 3 in 4 pregnant women experience mild swelling of the extremities — particularly the feet, ankles, and hands — and it may kick into even higher gear around now.

Called edema, it occurs when fluids build up in your body tissues thanks (or no thanks) to increased blood flow and uterine pressure on the inferior vena cava, the large vein on the right side of your body that returns blood from your lower limbs to the heart.

While the puff factor is completely normal and temporary, now might be a good time to take off your rings and kick off those too-tight shoes.

And if it seems to be excessive, talk to your practitioner , since it can be one sign of preeclampsia . Though when it is, it's accompanied by a variety of other symptoms, like elevated blood pressure and protein in the urine. If you aren’t experiencing those symptoms, you have nothing to worry about.

To spell swell relief, avoid sitting or standing for a long time, try some pregnancy-appropriate exercise like walking or swimming (if your practitioner okays it), and sit or sleep with your feet elevated. Hey, if anyone deserves to put those sore feet up, it's you!

Be sure, too, to drink enough each day; restricting fluid intake will not decrease swelling, but staying hydrated may. And try to look on the bright side: Edema is a temporary condition — you'll deflate soon after you give birth.

Soothe heat rash

Caused by the combination of an already overheated pregnant body , dampness from excessive perspiration, and the friction of skin rubbing against itself or against clothing, heat rash is a pregnancy skin change that shows up as prickly, pimply, itchy, red patches.

It is most common in the crease between and beneath the breasts, in the fold where the bulge of the lower abdomen rubs against the top of the pubic area, and on the inner thighs.

A cool, damp compress can take some of the heat out of your heat rash. A dab of calamine lotion can also be temporarily soothing and is safe to use. If any rash or irritation lasts longer than a couple of days, ask your practitioner about next steps.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 27

Round ligament pain

Blame that growing tummy of yours again for those growing pains around your middle. The best thing to do? Yep, you know the drill: Get off your feet for a while.

Stuffy nose

As if a swollen belly, feet, and fingers weren’t enough, now you may be contending with swollen nasal passages, making for one stuffy feeling. You’ll get relief when you deliver, but until then, over-the-counter nasal saline sprays or nasal sprays are usually off-limits. Check in with your practitioner for other recommendations.

Faintness or dizziness

It’s a common pregnancy symptom, but mention it to your practitioner, especially if you do faint. You can stop a dizzy spell by lying down and elevating your feet as soon as you feel light-headed.

Braxton Hicks contractions

Here's how to tell the difference between these "dress rehearsal" contractions and the real thing.

Itchy belly

Your stretched-out belly can cause your skin to become dry and itchy. Apply moisturizer regularly, and consider soaking in a warm oatmeal bath to ease the itch.

Restless legs syndrome (RLS)

For some expectant women, it may feel as if their legs take on a life of their own, becoming tingling and jittery — especially when they lie down at night. Talk to your practitioner if that's the case for you. In some women, RLS is linked to iron-deficiency, anemia or a sensitivity to certain foods. You can also consider yoga or other relaxation techniques, which may help.

Bleeding gums

Thanks to pregnancy hormones, your gums could be swollen, inflamed, and even bleeding. Although bleeding gums are common — and will probably go away after delivery — take extra good care of your teeth and gums right now by brushing twice a day and flossing at night.

Tips for You This Week

Read up on car seats

You may already know this, but you won't be allowed to drive home from the hospital with your newborn if you don’t have a car seat.

It's likely the first piece of baby gear you'll use — and one of the most important — so there's a lot to consider when you're shopping for an infant car seat .

Before buying a car seat, always brush up on recent recalls to make sure the kind you settle on isn't on the list.

Get relief for tired eyes

The two main culprits for sleepy, puffy eyes are water retention and fatigue, so try to get as much rest as possible, and drink plenty of water to flush out your system. The more you drink, the less you retain.

your system. The more you drink, the less you retain.

Still more swollen than you'd like? Here are some quick fixes: Because dark circles and under-eye puffiness tend to be more prominent in the morning, place something cool over your eyes when you first wake up.

Try the always-favorite cool cucumber slices, cold tea bags, chilled spoons, or a bag of frozen blueberries. Concealer and mascara can help too, if you're so inclined.

Choose the best salmon

Heard conflicting salmon stories? Time to set the record straight: Salmon's definitely one of nature's best providers of DHA, a brain- and mood-boosting omega-3 fatty acid that's good for babies and moms.

Salmon's definitely one of nature's best providers of DHA, a brain- and mood-boosting omega-3 fatty acid that's good for babies and moms.

Try to opt for wild, which also contains more of those healthy fats, or organically raised farmed.

Can't find either? Just follow these tips, no matter what fish you're choosing : Go skinless, trim dark meat thoroughly, and cook your filet through. Most of the chemicals found in fish accumulate in skin and dark meat, and a thorough cooking will get rid of what's left.

Can't find either? Just follow these tips, no matter what fish you're choosing : Go skinless, trim dark meat thoroughly, and cook your filet through.

Most of the chemicals found in fish accumulate in skin and dark meat, and a thorough cooking will get rid of what's left.

Look into infant CPR

Chances are, you'll never need to save your baby's life. But emergencies occasionally do happen, even when you're vigilant.

Luckily, with a little preparation, you can be ready to act in the unlikely event that you'd need to. Sign up for an infant CPR class — many are also offered virtually.

Check your heart rate during workouts

Now that you're pumping for two, it's more important than ever to keep an eye on your heart rate when you're exercising .

The best way to check how much you're exerting yourself is to use the exercise talk test — no need to take your pulse! If you can't exercise and talk simultaneously, your heart rate is probably too high.

If restless leg syndrome is driving you crazy, try keeping a food journal to note what you ate before you experience bouts of RLS.

is driving you crazy, try keeping a food journal to note what you ate before you experience bouts of RLS.

Some moms-to-be find that certain foods — such as carbs eaten late in the day — may trigger restless legs. A journal may help you figure out what foods make your symptoms improve or worsen.

Fight bloat

We know you’re probably gassy and bloated . It’s normal! To help curb the problem, you may want to swap flatulence-causing foods like broccoli and asparagus for less-gassy spinach and carrots.

. It’s normal! To help curb the problem, you may want to swap flatulence-causing foods like broccoli and asparagus for less-gassy spinach and carrots.

Also, keep sipping water throughout the day, and try eating more-frequent-but-smaller meals or snacks rather than just a few oversized servings. The more food you take in during one sitting, the more gas you may have later on.