29 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a head of cauliflower.

If you haven't already, you should start doing daily kick counts once or even twice a day (more on how below) by week 29 of pregnancy.

Baby is running out of room in there, but you should still feel him squirming and moving regularly. If you notice any changes in frequency, be sure to get in touch with your practitioner ASAP.

On the symptoms front, varicose veins may be visible, and your nails may be growing faster than usual.

Your Baby at Week 29

At a Glance

Baby's first smile

Your baby may begin to smile this week, especially in his sleep.

More hiccups

Your little one is continuing to hiccup. They feel like light, rhythmic taps to you and aren’t uncomfortable for baby, either.

Tight quarters

As your little bean plumps up, your womb is getting a bit cramped, so those hard kicks you were feeling will be more like jabs and pokes now.

29 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 29 weeks pregnant, you're in month 7 of your pregnancy. Only 2 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 29 weeks?

At 29 weeks pregnant, your baby weighs 2½ to 3 pounds now and measures 15½ to 16 inches long. Though he's getting pretty close to his birth length, he still has some more growing to do in the weight department.

In fact, over the next 11 weeks, he'll more than double — or even come close to tripling — his weight.

Baby's getting more fat and fewer wrinkles

As more fat is deposited under the skin surface, his wrinkled skin is smoothing out. This white fat, as it's called, is different from the earlier brown fat your developing fetus accumulated.

Brown fat is necessary for body temperature regulation, while white fat — the same kind you have — actually serves as an energy source.

Counting baby's kicks

Since space in your baby's living quarters is now at a premium, you'll be feeling jabs and pokes from elbows and knees, mostly.

And they'll be more vigorous and less erratic than before because your baby is stronger and excitedly responding to all sorts of stimuli — movement, sounds, light, and that candy bar you ate half an hour ago.

That means now's a good time to start doing a kick count once or twice a day, depending on what your doctor recommends. Plus, it's a good excuse for a rest.

Your Body at Week 29

Varicose veins

By week 29 of pregnancy, you may notice some new additions on your skin if you're like the roughly 20% of expectant moms who develop varicose veins .

These swollen blood vessels can either appear or worsen when you’re expecting, though they’re rarely cause for concern. They pop up because your blood volume increases during pregnancy, your growing uterus is putting pressure on the pelvic veins, and hormones are making your veins relax.

Varicose veins can also occur in your rectum (as hemorrhoids) or even your vulva, but don't confuse them with purplish-red spider veins , which resemble — you guessed it — spiders.

Some pregnant women find varicose veins painful, while others have no discomfort at all. Like stretch marks, they can be passed on from generation to generation.

If you want to prevent or minimize their appearance , your best bet is to keep your circulation going by avoiding standing or sitting for a long time. Aim to get in some daily exercise and try wearing special support hose, which can also be helpful. Most of the time, varicose veins recede within a few months after delivery.

How to do a kick count

Have you counted your baby's kicks today? Once you've gotten to week 28 or after, you should be monitoring them every day.

To make sure everything's A-okay inside, get into the habit of counting kicks once or twice a day, depending on what your doctor recommends.

Best to do it lying down, since babies are more likely to perk up when Mom's resting — a pattern they tend to continue after they're born! — or sitting if you're not comfortable on your back.

Count any and all movements, even swishes and rolls, until you hit 10. If you haven't reached 10 within an hour, your little Rockette may just be taking a break right now, so have a light snack and try again — that blood sugar rush is likely to get baby back on the move.

Just remember that fewer than 10 movements within two hours warrants a call to your practitioner. Chances are everything's fine, but it's always better to be safe than sorry. If there's a noticeable decrease in frequency in baby's kicks, call your doctor immediately, or head to the nearest emergency room or urgent care.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 29

Constipation

Pregnancy hormones relax your muscles, including those in your bowels, which can cause your system to get backed up. One way to get on track is to eat yogurt with the probiotic L. acidophilus — look for brands that contain “live active cultures” — since those beneficial bacteria can aid in digestion and help get things moving.

Heartburn or indigestion

If heartburn is keeping you up at night, avoid eating too much and chowing down too close to bedtime. And stay away from coffee or chocolate in the evening, since those energizers will make it harder for you to get to sleep.

Pregnancy brain

No wonder your mind feels especially foggy these days — hormones are wreaking havoc on your memory, and your brain cell volume actually decreases during the third trimester. Try not to take this temporary pregnancy symptom to heart — it's totally normal, and you're not alone.

Migraines

When a blinding headache like a migraine hits, alleviate pain by lying down in a quiet, dark room with a cold compress on your neck or forehead. It's also safe to take acetaminophen (Tylenol) occasionally during pregnancy if nothing else will stop the pain.

Hemorrhoids

If the veins in your rectum have begun to bulge and pop out as a result of increased pressure and blood flow to the pelvic area, reduce discomfort and irritation by using gentle wipes or warm water on soft toilet paper after bowel movements. And, of course, drink lots of fluids so your stool isn’t hard.

Fast-growing nails

Even though your nails may be growing faster than ever, pregnancy hormones may also cause them to become dry and brittle. Trim them regularly.

Tips for You This Week

Schedule a hospital tour

The start of the third trimester (month 7) is a good time to schedule a tour — either in-person or virtual — of the hospital or birthing center where you'll be having your baby.

— either in-person or virtual — of the hospital or birthing center where you'll be having your baby.

If you've signed up for childbirth classes and they're at the same place where you'll welcome your new arrival, check whether a tour will be included (it usually is).

You can also ask your practitioner about how and when to set one up. It's a good way to get the lay of the land, and it helps to visualize where the magic will happen!

Remember to resist cookie dough

When eating eggs, remember to make sure that the whites have set firmly and the yolks have begun to thicken. And never eat salad dressings, sauces, or mousse-type desserts made with raw eggs unless you're using the pasteurized variety.

Also, resist the temptation to eat raw cookie dough or cake batter. As yummy as it is, it's a good idea to kick the habit even if you're not pregnant!

Decorate the nursery ... on a budget

Setting up your baby’s nursery is a lot of fun. Seeing the price tags for cribs , changing tables , and gliders — not so much.

If you’ve already blown your budget on the big-ticket items, use a few DIY decorations for the rest of the nursery .

Hang some vintage pictures, inexpensive online prints, or drawings from older siblings on the walls, or get creative with stencils and decals. Or position some colorful toys on the open shelves to create vibrant displays.

Soothe sensitive skin

Those pregnancy hormones may make your skin more sensitive to things that never used to bother you, such as sunlight, heat, detergents, chlorine, and even certain foods. You may notice more itching, redness, and even a rash.

to things that never used to bother you, such as sunlight, heat, detergents, chlorine, and even certain foods. You may notice more itching, redness, and even a rash.

Talk to your doctor about pregnancy-safe remedies for itchy, irritated skin .

Have the right fitness gear

Having the right stuff for working out is especially important during pregnancy, when your body is more sensitive to overheating and fatigue, and your sense of balance is compromised.

Make sure you have comfy shoes with solid arch support; a good sports bra; water to drink before, during, and after exercise; a cool, wet cloth in a small plastic bag to wipe your neck or face; and a phone, money, and some identification.

Consider cord blood banking

The big day is coming, so here's a big question: What is cord blood, and should you bank or donate your baby's?

First, a definition: Cord blood is what remains in the umbilical cord and placenta following birth. Why is this blood so important? It's because cord blood contains stem cells that can be used to treat certain diseases, including some forms of cancer like leukemia and lymphoma.

is what remains in the umbilical cord and placenta following birth. Why is this blood so important? It's because cord blood contains stem cells that can be used to treat certain diseases, including some forms of cancer like leukemia and lymphoma.

To collect the blood, a doctor or hospital staff member will draw it from the umbilical cord vein just after the baby is born. It’s a safe and painless procedure that takes about five minutes.

More and more parents are saving their baby's cord blood, either for donation to a public facility so the cells can be used by others in need, or for private storage so it's available should the need arise within their own families.

Whichever you choose — and it's okay if you choose not to at all — you should talk to your practitioner about it now so all the necessary (and lengthy) prep work can be done in advance.

Recognize contractions

Now that you're in the homestretch of your pregnancy (hurray!), your body will be kicking into even higher gear when it comes to practicing for the big day — delivery day, that is.

Meaning you're likely to feel Braxton Hicks contractions a bit more often than you’re used to (if you’ve felt them already).

a bit more often than you’re used to (if you’ve felt them already).

Talk to your doctor about recognizing the difference between Braxton Hicks, or "rehearsal" contractions, and real labor contractions so you know what you're dealing with when they happen.