30 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a beet (including the leaves).

Your baby is filling out fast at 30 weeks of pregnancy, meaning your bump may be popping even more now. A big part of that growth is in baby's rapidly developing brain.

Meanwhile, you may be welcoming back a few of those early pregnancy symptoms you thought you'd kissed good-bye at the end of the first trimester, such as frequent urination .

Your Baby at Week 30

At a Glance

Wrinkly baby brain

The surface of your baby’s brain begins to crinkle — those wrinkles are called convolutions — so that it can hold more brain cells.

Hold on tight!

Your baby’s hands are now fully formed and fingernails are growing. In ultrasounds, you may catch baby grabbing a foot.

Do your kick counts!

Your growing baby's quarters keep getting tighter, but you'll still feel movement every day. So don't forget those kick counts!

30 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 30 weeks pregnant, you're in month 7 of your pregnancy. Only 2 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 30 weeks?

Your belly's increasing size is a definite clue that your baby is getting bigger every day — now she weighs about 3 pounds. She’ll be packing on weight at a rate of roughly half a pound per week for the next seven weeks.

Baby's brain is getting bigger

Also growing at a quick pace these days? Baby's brain . Until now, its surface was smooth — but now, your fetus' brain is taking on those characteristic grooves and indentations.

The reason for the different appearance: Those wrinkles allow for an increased amount of brain tissue — a necessary change as your baby prepares to develop street smarts for life outside your womb.

Lanugo is disappearing

Now that baby’s brain and new fat cells are regulating body temperature, the lanugo — that soft, downy hair covering your little bean's body — is beginning to disappear.

No need for that furry coat anymore! But you may see a few leftover strands of fur on your newborn's back and shoulders when she’s born.

Bone marrow is making red blood cells

Another big change at 30 weeks pregnant: Your baby's bone marrow has completely taken over production of red blood cells — before, tissue groups and then the spleen took care of producing the blood cells. This is an important step for your baby because it means she'll be better able to thrive on her own once she's born.

Your Body at Week 30

They're baaack!

You're 30 weeks pregnant — only 10 more to go! Many of the early pregnancy symptoms you thought you'd put behind you may be coming back to haunt you, at least to some extent, like the need to pee all the time because your baby's head is now pressing on your bladder, tender breasts that are gearing up for milk production, fatigue, and pregnancy heartburn .

Or you may be one of the lucky ones who still feels pretty great — just remember that it's all normal, and everyone is different!

Heartburn

These days you may feel as though you've got a flamethrower in your chest. Indigestion is one of the most common (and annoying) pregnancy ailments.

Here's why: The same pregnancy hormones that cause your body's pelvic muscles to relax so you can deliver your baby also relax the ring of muscle that separates the esophagus from the stomach.

The result: Food and digestive juices can head upstream from your tummy into your chest and throat — hence, the infernal inferno. Your expanding uterus, now exerting pressure on your stomach, only fuels the fire.

So how do you spell relief? Among other things, avoid foods that can cause digestive discomfort — like spicy, fatty, or fried dishes; chocolate; and tomato sauce — eat smaller meals, and don't lie down while snacking or right after eating.

And, of course, keep a supply of antacids, which also give you a healthy bonus of calcium, at popping distance (within reason).

Fortunately, once your baby is born, heartburn will be a thing of the past — at least until you try to gobble down dinner during a crying marathon.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 30

Fatigue

Your second trimester get-up-and-go may have up and left now. Your growing baby is putting more demands on your body, and insomnia may be leaving you wiped out during the day. Now’s the time to ask for help — a skill that will come in handy after childbirth — especially while doing something strenuous.

Bloating and gas

As your uterus expands, it puts pressure on your rectum, which can weaken muscle control and lead to uncontrollable passing of gas. Drink plenty of water to avoid constipation, which aggravates the condition.

Constipation

Even if you managed to conquer constipation earlier in your pregnancy, you may have to contend with a return to more sluggish bowels — thank your ever-expanding uterus, which is putting pressure on them. Remember that fluids and fiber are your friends, as are probiotics, which you can find in yogurt.

Swollen feet and ankles

About 75% of pregnant women suffer from puffy ankles and feet. Besides wearing comfy shoes, you can relieve your swollen tootsies by taking breaks and putting your feet up. You deserve it!

Stretch marks

As your skin stretches to accommodate your growing belly and body, you — and up to an estimated 90% of the pregnant set — are probably starting to see pink, red, yellow, tan, or sometimes purplish or brown streaks known as stretch marks. There’s no miracle cure, so don’t blow the bucks on expensive creams that promise to make them disappear. Lotion can soothe your itchy belly though.

Changes in fetal movement

You’ll feel your baby moving every day now, sometimes with a punch or a kick — your itty-bitty boxer is getting stronger! — and other times with a wiggle or stretch. You can also expect more activity after you’ve eaten and (sadly!) when you’re lying down. Baby’s quarters are getting more cramped, though, so you may feel fewer hard kicks at this stage. Always check with your practitioner about any changes in fetal movement to be sure.

Tips for You This Week

Prop yourself up

Breathless? Your growing baby is pressing against your diaphragm. As your pregnancy progresses, you may start to feel winded even after minimal amounts of physical exertion.

You can’t completely relieve shortness of breath during pregnancy, but standing up straight can give your lungs a little, well, breathing room.

At night, try sleeping in a semi-seated position on your left side, with pillows propping you up. And sometimes even eating standing up can help, as the winded feeling can be made worse when your tummy is full of food.

Opt for flats

Time for comfy shoes! Your shifting sense of gravity and loosening joints (thanks to that all-important hormone, relaxin) leave you clutzier than usual .

Prevent falls by wearing flats or other comfortable shoes and watching your step.

Ask about episiotomies

Talk to your health care provider about episiotomies during labor . The procedure involves a surgical cut in your perineum, the muscular area between your vagina and your anus, right before delivery to enlarge your baby's exit.

. The procedure involves a surgical cut in your perineum, the muscular area between your vagina and your anus, right before delivery to enlarge your baby's exit.

In the past, episiotomies were routine, but now, they’re done much less often unless there’s a good reason. What you want to hear from your doctor: "I only perform them if absolutely necessary."

In the past, episiotomies were routine, but now, they’re done much less often unless there’s a good reason.

Save money on diapers

One thing is for certain: Your baby will be in constant need of a diaper change for at least the next year-and-a-half (and likely longer) — a habit that will cost about $70 to $80 a month.

To help keep diaper costs low , try joining a few diaper reward programs, which allow you to earn coupons and points for gift cards when you buy their products. Take advantage of registry welcome boxes from retailers like Amazon, Buy Buy Baby, and Walmart, which also offer diapers.

Combat water retention

Here's a “swell” reason to drink water: Drinking plenty of liquids can help flush out sodium and other waste products in the body, which keeps swelling under control.

can help flush out sodium and other waste products in the body, which keeps swelling under control.

While a certain amount of pregnancy edema is to be expected when you're expecting — and represents a normal and necessary increase in body fluids — keeping the fluids flowing (as well as cutting back on your salt intake) can prevent too many from accumulating where you'd rather they didn't … like in your ankles .

Support stockings can also help reduce swelling, as can soaking in epsom baths and swimming.

Wash up during food prep

It's more important than ever now to be a hand-washing pro , especially in the kitchen.

Wash your hands well for at least 20 seconds before prepping any food, and be sure your dish towels, countertops, and sponges are cleaned regularly too — along with everything else that's part of the food-prep process. That includes the food itself!

Be vigilant when handling raw meats, eggs, poultry, or fish — wash your hands with warm, soapy water before, during, and after you touch those foods, and be sure to clean the utensils and cutting board along the way.

Wash fruits and veggies well in cold water before eating them, even the ones you intend to peel. The one exception? Don't rinse raw meat or poultry. You won't be washing off the bacteria — only cooking can eliminate that — but you will be splashing it all over the sink and countertop.

Choose safe sugar substitutes

Here's what you need to know about low-cal and no-cal sugar substitutes and artificial sweeteners during pregnancy:

Sucralose (Splenda) , which has less of an aftertaste, appears to be safe during pregnancy, so you can sweeten your day — and your coffee or tea — with it.

Aspartame (including Equal and NutraSweet) has experts divided. Some think it’s harmless, while others think it's unsafe. Given this lack of consensus, it's probably smart not to give Equal equal billing with other sweetener options.

Saccharin (like Sweet ‘N Low) has never been proven unsafe during pregnancy, but it's never been proven safe either. It gets to your baby through the placenta, and when it gets there, it's slow to leave. To be safe, avoid it while you’re expecting, or at the very least, check with your doctor before using it.

Xylitol is a sugar alcohol derived from plants that's naturally occurring in many fruits and veggies and is considered safe during pregnancy in moderate amounts.

Stevia (steviol glycoside) is a food additive that’s "generally recognized as safe," and therefore doesn't need approval from the Food & Drug Administration (FDA), but there's no research showing that it's okay for pregnancy. Ask before using it.

Your best bet? Check with your practitioner before using any of these sugar substitutes. And just remember: When it comes to artificial sweeteners, consumption in moderation is always a good idea, and you may be better off just using the real thing (sugar) in small amounts.