31 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a coconut.

Now that you're 31 weeks pregnant, your baby's brain is getting more sophisticated and he's more active than ever in there — pedaling his feet, sucking his thumb, and practicing other important skills for the real world.

You may be running to the bathroom more frequently and feeling tired faster these days.

Your Baby at Week 31

At a Glance

Brain connections

Your baby's brain connections are developing at a rapid pace, which is a good thing since he has to make billions of them!

Sleepy baby

Your baby is a drowsy one, putting in longer stretches of snooze time, specifically REM sleep. Want to wake him up? Eat or drink something sugary.

Such a smarty

Your brainy baby can already process information and pick up signals from all five senses.

31 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 31 weeks pregnant, you're in month 7 of your pregnancy. Only 2 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 31 weeks?

Weighing in at 3-plus pounds and measuring about 16 inches long, your baby is quickly approaching his birth length — though he's got to pack on another 3 to 5 pounds before delivery day.

Baby is sleeping more

He's putting in longer stretches of sleep, which is why you're probably noticing more defined patterns of wakefulness, movement, and rest.

Baby's developing five senses

Your baby's brain is working overtime these days, developing faster than ever. Connections between individual nerve cells — he's got to make billions of them! — are being made at a super fast rate. He's now processing information, tracking light, and perceiving signals from all five senses.

Sure, your baby may not be able to smell too much right now, though he likely can smell and taste different foods you eat through the amniotic fluid, as well as catch a whiff of some beauty products you use (which also wind up in the amniotic fluid).

Lucky for you and your baby, yours will be one of the very first scents he breathes in, a scent that will quickly become his very favorite.

Pedaling his feet and sucking his thumb

So what's your little dove doing all day while you're busy feathering your nest for his arrival? Making faces, hiccupping , swallowing, breathing , pedaling with little hands and feet along your uterine wall, and even sucking his thumb. In fact, some babies suck their thumbs so vigorously while in the womb that they're born with a little blister on their thumbs!

Your Body at Week 31

Shortness of breath

So your stomach feels like it's in your chest and your lungs feel like ... hmm ... They don't even feel like they're there anymore, do they?

Movin' on up at 31 weeks pregnant, your uterus can now be felt about 4 inches above your belly button. This means that your uterus is pushing all the internal organs that used to be there somewhere else, crowding your diaphragm and lungs, and making it more difficult for them to expand fully.

The result: Your body is spare on air and will be until your baby drops near the end of pregnancy in preparation for birth. While this shortness of breath may feel very uncomfortable to you, your baby is as happy as a clam because he’s getting his oxygen from the placenta .

That out-of-breath feeling may get better toward the end of your pregnancy, when your baby drops down into your pelvis in preparation for delivery. Until then, be sure to stand as straight as you can given the weight you're carrying around, eat smaller, evenly-spaced meals, and sleep propped up on your left side so that your lungs have more space to ... well, breathe.

How a baby responds to sex

Sex and orgasm can have an interesting effect on babies in the womb, as you may have noticed. Some are very quiet when their parents have sex — rocked to sleep by the rhythmic movement, perhaps — while others become active themselves.

Both responses are completely normal and in no way indicate that your baby is aware of what's going on.

So keep enjoying your sex life as much as you like and for as long as you can — which, with your practitioner's approval and a few advanced Twister-type moves, can be right up until delivery day. Pretty soon, jumping into bed together with a baby in the house won't be quite so easy or convenient.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 31

More frequent urination

Your uterus puts more pressure on your bladder in the third trimester, giving it less room to store urine. Cut down on the bathroom trips by double voiding: Pee, then when you’re done, pee again. That’ll make sure you’ve emptied your bladder completely.

Backaches

That burgeoning belly can also do a number on your back as it curves to accommodate the load. If you haven’t already, now is the time to incorporate some prenatal yoga into your exercise routine. The stretches will relax your back — and your mind!

Occasional headaches

If tension is twisting your head up in knots, try spending a few minutes in a dark, quiet room. If you’re at work, close your eyes and put your feet up for 15 minutes. It's also generally safe to take acetaminophen occasionally when nothing else seems to relieve the pain.

Pregnancy brain

Welcome to mommy-to-be brain — a condition that’s a result of shrinking brain cell volume in the third trimester. Don’t worry — your brain cells go back to normal a few months after delivery. Don’t stress out about your foggy memory, since stress just makes it worse. Write things down or program them into your phone, and delegate responsibility if possible.

Sleep problems

This is another common third trimester woe, caused by a constellation of other conditions, such as leg cramps, heartburn, frequent urination, and plain old anxiety, with a dash of pregnancy hormones. If tension keeps you tossing and turning all night, talk it out with friends or your partner during the day.

Clumsiness

Your shifting posture, increasing girth, and lack of concentration may make you clumsier these days. Take it easy when you’re climbing into the shower or tub, and roll up any area rugs that could trip you up at home.

Tips for You This Week

Skip the bumpers

Setting up the crib? Don’t buy or register for bumpers . Cute as they may look, bumpers pose a serious sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) risk — so much so that in May 2022, crib bumpers were officially banned .

. Cute as they may look, bumpers pose a serious sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) risk — so much so that in May 2022,

Other cute-but-unsafe bedding to skip: pillows, stuffed animals, and blankets.

Pack your hospital bag

Delivery day is getting close, so it's time to pack your hospital bag if you haven't already.

Along with necessities, you may want to stash these feel-good items inside: lip balm since your lips may become very dry, even before you start breathing heavily during labor ; bands or scrunchies to keep your hair back; a brush for tangles (plus having someone brush your hair may feel relaxing); moisturizer; warm socks and slippers; mints; flip-flops (if your feet swell); and a warm robe.

inside: lip balm since your lips may become very dry, even before you start breathing heavily during labor ; bands or scrunchies to keep your hair back; a brush for tangles (plus having someone brush your hair may feel relaxing); moisturizer; warm socks and slippers; mints; flip-flops (if your feet swell); and a warm robe.

They just might make your labor, delivery, and overall stay more comfortable. Remember, don't bring or wear anything you really love, like your favorite PJs or that fancy negligee, since it may get lost or ruined.

Prepare a birth plan

You've read all you can about pregnancy and childbirth, you've prepped for labor and delivery as well as anyone can, and you're pretty sure you know exactly how you'd like the birth of your baby to go — from the first contraction to the last push.

That’s where a birth plan comes in. Like the name suggests, a birth plan is a written plan that clearly states your preferences for before, during, and after labor and delivery. After all, the best plan is to have a plan, so start thinking now about how you'd like the experience to go.

comes in. Like the name suggests, a birth plan is a written plan that clearly states your preferences for before, during, and after labor and delivery. After all, the best plan is to have a plan, so start thinking now about how you'd like the experience to go.

Remember to be flexible though. Even the best-laid plans can change at the last minute — so you’ll need to check your childbirth ideals at the hospital and let the doctors, nurses, or midwives make the best decisions for you and your baby’s health.

Visit the dentist

Teeth cleanings are a good thing — especially because about 40% of the pregnant set have periodontal disease, which ups their chance of preeclampsia (a pregnancy complication that's characterized by high blood pressure).

are a good thing — especially because about 40% of the pregnant set have periodontal disease, which ups their chance of preeclampsia (a pregnancy complication that's characterized by high blood pressure).

Dental X-rays should be saved until after baby arrives, though, unless the risk of not having one done outweighs the relatively small risk of radiation to the fetus.

If you do have an X-ray, wear a lead apron or abdominal shield over your lower belly.

Choose comfortable shoes

The best prescription for swollen feet and ankles isn't the most fashionable one: sensible, comfortable shoes that breathe and aren't too tight.

Don't have any that fit that description? That might be because your feet have grown a half size or so.

Don't have any that fit that description? That might be because your feet hav

e grown a half size or so.

Get yourself to a shoe store — but do it at the end of the day, when your feet are at their puffiest.

While you're at it, get a pair of elasticized slippers and wear them whenever you can get away with it. And be sure to have some flip-flops on hand for postpartum swelling of the feet and ankles, which can happen as the pregnancy fluids are leaving your body after you give birth.

While you're at it, get a pair of elasticized slippers and wear them whenever you can get away with it. And be sure to have some flip-flops on hand for

of the feet and ankles, which can happen as the pregnancy fluids are leaving your body after you give birth.

You can also try support hose to relieve pregnancy swelling. No, they’re not sexy, but they can be the difference between a swell day and a not-so-swell one. Put them on first thing in the morning, before your feet have a chance to puff up.

to relieve pregnancy swelling. No, they’re not sexy, but they can be the difference between a swell day and a not-so-swell one. Put them on first thing in the morning, before your feet have a chance to puff up.

If you can't track down ones made for pregnancy, knee- or thigh-highs should do the trick. But avoid any that have uncomfortable elastic tops.

Learn early labor signs

Unless you’ve gone into labor before, you're probably wondering how you'll know your labor symptoms are the real thing.

Learn the signs of labor in case it’s not obvious: contractions coming regularly and at closer intervals, period-like cramps, vaginal bleeding or spotting, a constant dull backache, diarrhea, and a tightening feeling in your uterus.

Your water might even break before you get to the hospital, though don’t count on that!

Do simple stretches

Chances are, you’re carrying a lot of tension in your neck, especially now that you’re in the third trimester and your posture is off-kilter. The result can be a pain in the neck.

One way to loosen your muscles and relax your mind: Do this easy stretch — anytime, anywhere. Start by tilting your head to one side, without raising your shoulders; try to lower them down the back instead. Hold for three seconds and exhale. Repeat on the other side.

and relax your mind: Do this easy stretch — anytime, anywhere. Start by tilting your head to one side, without raising your shoulders; try to lower them down the back instead. Hold for three seconds and exhale. Repeat on the other side.

Do this several times a day — at your desk, while you're waiting at your practitioner's office, or in line at the post office.