32 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a bunch of celery.

Your baby is busy cultivating real-life tricks like sucking, breathing, and swallowing.

And you may be doing some rehearsals of your own in the form of Braxton Hicks (or practice) contractions ahead of the big day.

Your Baby at Week 32

At a Glance

Baby organs are fully formed

All your baby’s major organs are fully developed now, except for the lungs. So even if you gave birth this week, your little one would probably do just fine.

Breathing practice

Your baby inhales amniotic fluid to practice using those lungs.

Skin changes

Bye-bye, see-through baby! This week, your little bean's skin is now opaque instead of transparent.

32 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 32 weeks pregnant, you're in month 8 of your pregnancy. Only 1 month left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 32 weeks?

What's up with your baby? She's starting to get ready for her big debut, tipping the scales at 3½ to 4 pounds and topping out at 15 to 17 inches.

Baby's prepping for birth

In these past few weeks, it's all about practice, practice, practice as she hones the skills she'll need to thrive outside the womb — from swallowing and breathing to kicking and sucking.

In anticipation of that momentous transition to mouth feeding, your baby's digestive system is all set and ready to go.

And though you're weeks away from your due date , your baby's looking more and more like a newborn: As fat accumulates under her skin, it's no longer transparent and is now opaque.

Fetal position: head down or breech?

At 32 weeks pregnant, you're likely feeling tapping and squirming instead of your baby's signature rocking and rolling. That's because, while comfy, your baby is a bit tight for exercise space right now — she’s actually back to a curled-up position (you try standing up in those cramped quarters!).

Between 32 and 38 weeks, your baby will also probably settle into the head-down, bottoms-up presentation in your pelvis in preparation for birth. That's because the fetus' head fits better at the bottom of your inverted, pear-shaped uterus, plus it’s easier during childbirth if your baby comes out head first.

Fewer than 5% of babies prefer the bottom-down (or breech) position by full-term — so don't worry if your little bean hasn't assumed the head-down position yet. There's still a good chance she'll flip before birth, even in the tight confines of your uterus.

Baby's sleep cycles

And speaking of the big day, hope you're resting up for it, because your bambino certainly is. In preparation for that first date with you, your baby is sleeping like a baby with regular sleep and wake cycles.

Your Body at Week 32

Braxton Hicks contractions

This week, your body may start prepping for delivery day by flexing its muscles ... literally. If you feel your uterus tightening or hardening periodically, those are Braxton Hicks contractions — irregular practice contractions that are first felt around mid-pregnancy and increase in frequency and strength as things progress.

These prelabor rehearsals are a warm-up for the real thing and are typically experienced earlier and with more intensity in women who've been pregnant before. In fact, many novice moms-to-be don't notice them as much.

They feel like a tightening sensation that begins at the top of your uterus and then spreads downward, lasting from 15 to 30 seconds, though they can sometimes last as long as two minutes.

How do you know they aren’t real labor ? They’ll stop if you change position, so try getting up if you’re lying down or walking if you’ve been sitting.

If they are real labor contractions, they'll become progressively stronger and more regular — so in that case, put in a call to your practitioner. In the meantime, when they're just the practice kind, try taking a warm bath to help with the discomfort.

Ultrasound photos

Ultrasound is a tried-and-true prenatal tool — and a window into the wonderful world of your womb — but this procedure has taken a giant leap from the confines of a doctor's office to a storefront at the mall, with 3D- or 4D-ultrasounds . Is it safe to take a peek inside your tummy on the way to the mall?

The Food & Drug Administration (FDA) warns against having ultrasounds for fun as opposed to getting them for medical reasons. That's because the three-dimensional imaging machines and procedures can expose your baby to more heat and for a longer time than the ultrasound machines at your doctor's office.

Plus, many medical professionals say that only qualified technicians should perform the ultrasound, and fear that nervous moms-to-be will come away mistakenly convinced there's something wrong with their baby. If you're still interested in an elective sonogram, make sure to check with your practitioner for the go-ahead.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 32

Constipation

Your growing uterus is cramping your bowels, making them sluggish and irregular. Get some regular exercise — anything helps, from brisk walks to prenatal yoga — and drink up!

Faintness or dizziness

Feeling faint or light-headed can be a result of any number of things, including low blood sugar. Don’t forget to carry a protein-and-carb-rich snack in your bag to munch on when you feel dizzy. Granola bars, trail mix, or soy chips are a great choice and may keep light-headedness at bay.

Itchy tummy and skin

That swelling belly is getting itchier and itchier, as the skin stretches and dries out. If slathering on creams and moisturizers doesn’t help, try calamine or some other type of anti-itch lotion that soothes more stubborn cases. Or add oatmeal to your bath and have a soak in warm — not hot — water.

Leg cramps

Just as you’re ready to drift off to dreamland you may feel a painful spasm in your calves — though no one is quite sure what causes the pain or why it’s worse at night. One theory: There’s a lack of calcium and magnesium in your diet. Ask your practitioner if taking an extra calcium supplement is a good idea and be certain you’re devouring your daily dose of dairy — bring on the cheese and yogurt!

Hemorrhoids

Hemorrhoids, which are actually varicose veins in the rectum, can literally be a pain in the rear, especially if you spend a lot of time sitting. Ice packs or witch hazel can soothe, as can warm baths.

Colostrum (leaky breasts)

As your breasts get bigger in the third trimester, they may also leak a yellowish fluid called colostrum, which is the precursor to breast milk. This liquid, packed with protein and antibodies, is the first milk your baby will get. If the leaks are getting uncomfortable, try wearing nursing pads.

Tips for You This Week

Write down your dreams

Your night visions may be extra trippy these days, thanks to pregnancy hormones . Consider keeping a dream journal — either a physical one or a digital version (use the My Journal tool in the What to Expect app ).

Your night visions may be extra trippy these days, thanks to pregnancy hormones . Consider keeping a dream journal — either a physical one or a digital version (use the

Pregnancy dreams and daydreams tend to peak during the third trimester , as sleep is more disrupted, and you may increasingly find yourself imagining what life with a new baby will be like.

Research your pain options

These days, there are plenty of safe and effective medical options that can take some of the labor out of labor and delivery.

It is possible to create a birth plan that ensures little or no pain while you remain awake during the entire process and are able to greet your newborn as he emerges.

Make sure you know about all your labor pain relief options , including local anesthesia and breathing techniques. You may change your mind about the particulars as the time nears.

Manage varicose veins

You might not be a fan, but varicose veins , or swollen blood vessels, are usually painless and harmless.

, or swollen blood vessels, are usually painless and harmless.

The reason they develop or get more pronounced during pregnancy is because you've got more blood pumping through your body, and your growing uterus is pressing against veins in the pelvic region. That allows all that extra blood to pool in your legs. Hormones only add to the problem by causing blood vessels to relax.

The reason they develop or get more pronounced during pregnancy is because you've got more blood pumping through your body, and your growing uterus is pressing against veins in the pelvic region.

What to do? Some good varicose vein remedies: Exercise daily to improve circulation, take frequent breaks from sitting or standing,elevate your legs as often as possible, and sleep on your left side to relieve pressure on your main blood vessels.

levate your legs as often as possible, and sleep on your left side to relieve pressure on your main blood vessels.

Do pelvic tilts

Your pelvis is crucial to a smooth pregnancy and delivery, so treat it well. One way to strengthen your pelvis is to do pelvic tilts regularly .

Your pelvis is crucial to a smooth pregnancy and delivery, so treat it well. One way to strengthen your pelvis is to

These easy exercises, which you can do anywhere, can help strengthen your abs, soothe backaches during pregnancy and labor, and make delivery go more smoothly.

Now that you're in your third trimester , tilts should be done in a standing position — so find the nearest wall. To do a standing pelvic tilt, stand up straight and relax your spine. Breathing in deeply, press the small of your back against the wall. Exhale, and then repeat for about five minutes.

Help plan your baby shower

Want to help throw yourself a baby shower?

You can get the party started by talking to a close friend or relative about acting as a host and deciding whether you want a traditional baby shower or a virtual one if you'd rather go that route.

or a virtual one if you'd rather go that route.

Before you send out invitations, create a baby registry — this way, your guests will know what to give you.

Skip some of the big-ticket items, such as cribs and strollers, and instead ask for things like onesies, bibs, blankets, and other baby care essentials.

Get the RSV vaccine

Now that you’re at week 32 of your pregnancy, you may be eligible for the RSV vaccine . The shot, known as Abrysvo, is given late in pregnancy between weeks 32 and 36, during RSV season (November to January).

. The shot, known as Abrysvo, is given late in pregnancy between weeks 32 and 36, during RSV season (November to January).

It helps prevent lower respiratory tract disease (LRTD) from RSV in babies from birth to 6 months. RSV , or respiratory syncytial virus, is a common, contagious virus that causes cold-like symptoms that usually last a week or two.

It helps prevent lower respiratory tract disease (LRTD) from RSV in babies from birth to 6 months.

But some babies have a higher risk of severe RSV, which could lead to illnesses like pneumonia or bronchitis.

By getting vaccinated, you’ll provide protection for your baby for the first six months of life. Ask your practitioner about how and where you can get the shot.

Protect your eyes

Your eyes may be feeling more dry and sensitive than usual, so keep your sunglasses and lubricating eye drops, known as “artificial tears,” handy.

and sensitive than usual, so keep your sunglasses and lubricating eye drops, known as “artificial tears,” handy.

Many are safe to use during pregnancy, but ask your doctor for a recommendation first. Your peepers will be filled with tears of joy soon enough.