34 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a pineapple.

With 34 weeks down, you're cruising through month 8 of your pregnancy.

Your little bambino is now weighing in at about 5 pounds — the same as a standard bag of flour.

Meanwhile, your uterus keeps on growing (and growing) to accommodate the bigger bun in the oven.

Your Baby at Week 34

At a Glance

Sleep schedule

Your baby closes those cute eyes when he snoozes and opens them when he’s awake, helping your little one settle into a sleep schedule.

Thick skin

The waxy, cheesy coating on your baby’s skin — vernix — begins to thicken this week before it starts shedding in the next few weeks.

Poking through

As your baby grows, you may be able to see body parts like little hands and feet through your belly!

34 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 34 weeks pregnant, you're in month 8 of your pregnancy. Only 1 month left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 34 weeks?

This week your baby is clocking in at 5¼ pounds and could be as long as 18 inches. Need a visual? Hold a 5-pound bag of flour in your arms and imagine it's your soon-to-be-born baby — cradle it, and you'll only get strange looks in the baking aisle.

Then stack three such bags one on top of the other and get ready for some more strange looks, maybe from the same clerks who saw you grinning and holding that 1-pound bag of sugar a few weeks ago. That's how long your baby is at 34 weeks pregnant.

Baby sex differences

If your baby is a boy, then this week the testicles are making their way down from the abdomen to the scrotum. Some full-term baby boys — roughly 3 to 4% — are born with undescended testicles, but they usually make the trip down sometime before the first birthday. About 30% of preterm boys are born with undescended testicles too.

Tiny fingernails and toenails

In other baby-related developments, those tiny fingernails have probably reached the tips of his fingers by now — and are getting ready for that first postpartum manicure.

Your Body at Week 34

Still growing

Your eyes do not deceive you: Your uterus is still growing — and you thought there was no more room! — and, at 34 weeks pregnant, is around a whole 5 inches above your navel now.

Vision changes

But wait ... are you seeing things? You likely aren't seeing as well as usual. That's because your eyes are yet another part of your body that can fall prey to those pesky pregnancy hormones — the same ones doing a number on your digestive tract and your ligaments.

Not only can your vision seem blurry these days, but a decrease in tear production can leave your eyes dry and irritated, especially if you wear contact lenses.

What's more, an increase in fluid behind your eyes’ lenses can temporarily change their shape, making some women more nearsighted or farsighted than usual. You may find wearing glasses rather than contact lenses to be more comfortable.

Happily, these changes are all temporary. Things should clear up as your eyes return to normal after delivery, so there's no need to change your prescription just yet.

But do keep in mind that certain more serious vision problems can be a sign of preeclampsia , so be sure to mention any vision changes to your practitioner.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 34

Bloating and gas

As your third trimester progresses, you may be getting gassier. Anxiety just makes those gassy feelings worse — you tend to swallow more air when you’re stressed — so try this tension-tamer: Breathe deeply through your nose and out through your mouth for a minute or two each day.

Backaches

Your shifting center of gravity from back to belly puts more pressure and pain on your lower back. There are many solutions to cure your aching back, so if one doesn’t work, another most certainly will. One to try: Take a break and stretch, stand, or walk. Sitting too long can make your back hurt even more.

Constipation

Need to rev up those slow-moving bowels? Rough up your diet with some dried fruits, fresh fruits and veggies, and whole grains. One thing you don’t want to do is take laxatives, even herbal ones. Get your practitioner on board before taking any medicine for constipation.

Increased vaginal discharge

As your pregnancy progresses, you could see an increase in vaginal discharge. Blame pregnancy hormones, especially estrogen, for this symptom — they increase blood flow to the pelvic area and stimulate the mucus membranes. Wearing undies with breathable cotton liners can keep you drier and curb odors.

Shortness of breath

As your pregnant belly gets bigger, your lungs won’t be able to expand as fully, so you may feel winded, even after a trip to the bathroom. Sleeping propped on your left side can help at night.

Insomnia

If you’re not worrying about delivery day, then leg cramps and trips to the bathroom are banishing any chance of shut-eye. Try lulling yourself to sleep with a warm bath and a cup of warm milk, and read a book or listen to music instead of watching TV or scrolling online, both of which can keep you awake.

Leg cramps

Leg cramps are most common around now, when the three main culprits — pregnancy weight, swelling and fatigue — are at their peak. If you feel a spasm, try standing on a cold surface, which can sometimes stop one in its tracks.

Edema (swelling in feet and ankles)

As you get bigger and your body tissues accumulate and retain fluids, you may experience swelling in your ankles, feet, and fingers. Slipping into comfy slippers at the end of the day can help soothe your swollen tootsies.

Stretch marks

Stretch marks may show up as pink, red, purple, reddish-brown, or dark brown streaks, depending on your skin tone. If your mom had stretch marks, then you have a genetic predisposition toward them, but you can try to keep these marks of maternity to a minimum by keeping your weight gain slow and steady.

Fast-growing hair

You knew your hair would grow faster and more lustrous while you were pregnant, but you probably didn’t know it would grow in places you weren’t expecting — like your cheeks, chin, and back. Waxing is generally considered safe during pregnancy, but since skin is extra sensitive now, ask for a formula for sensitive skin.

Hemorrhoids

Constipation’s almost-constant sidekick? Hemorrhoids. They can be kept to a minimum by doing Kegels, which can improve circulation to the area.

Leaking colostrum

As your due date approaches and the third trimester wears on, your breasts may leak colostrum — yellowish pre-milk that will be your baby’s first drink. You won’t be leaking more than a few drops, but if you feel uncomfortable, try nursing pads.

Tips for You This Week

Install the car seat

You bought the car seat , but have you installed it yet? A better question: Have you installed it correctly? Between 85 and 95% of new parents make a mistake setting it up.

, but have you installed it yet? A better question: Have you installed it correctly? Between 85 and 95% of new parents make a mistake setting it up.

No matter the model of vehicle or car seat you have, you should always follow three important rules for installing an infant car seat :

1. Keep baby in the back. The safest spot for your baby is always in the backseat — preferably in the middle spot, away from passenger-side air bags.

The safest spot for your baby is always in the backseat — preferably in the middle spot, away from passenger-side air bags.

2. Face it backwards. Experts including the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) urge parents to keep kids in the rear-facing position until they reach the highest weight or height allowed by their car seat.

Experts including the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) urge parents to keep kids in the rear-facing position until they reach the highest weight or height allowed by their car seat.

3. Be sure the base is secured tightly. A car seat shouldn’t wobble, pivot, slide, or tip. If you're not sure if you installed it correctly, get yours checked by a professional technician. Your local police or fire station may also be able to check your handiwork for free.

Breech baby? Try this

If your baby is breech , ask your doctor if you’re able to do certain exercises that may help turn your baby head-down — the best exit strategy when it comes to birthing.

, ask your doctor if you’re able to do certain exercises that may help turn your baby head-down — the best exit strategy when it comes to birthing.

If you get the green light, try doing pelvic tilts or kneeling with your knees hip-width apart, bending over so your breasts touch the floor and your belly nearly does. Repeat three times a day.

Certain pregnancy-safe yoga poses and even a Chinese medicine tradition called moxibustion may also help, but talk to your doctor about your options.

If baby doesn’t flip, your practitioner will try to manually move your baby into the head-down position by applying firm pressure to your stomach, usually toward the end of pregnancy, around 37 weeks . In more than half of cases, baby will usually turn, but if it doesn’t work, you’ll likely need to have a C-section .

Get help for anxiety

Nearly every pregnant woman is a little bit anxious about something. (Is my baby kicking too much? Too little?)

While some anxiety is normal, studies show that about 15% of pregnant women have anxiety disorders .

If you’ve had a previous pregnancy loss or fertility struggles , or have had complications during your pregnancy, you may have a heightened risk.

Anxiety during pregnancy can strike at any time — and there’s no shame in asking for help. Talk to your provider; some anxiety meds are safe to use when pregnant.

Make breakfast a priority

Do you skip breakfast because you're not a breakfast person? Well, your baby doesn't mind if you opt out of the oatmeal and go for a toasted cheese sandwich instead — or even a slice of cold meatloaf from last night's dinner.

If you forgo the morning meal because you’re not a morning person, you might want to try setting your alarm for 15 minutes earlier, so you'll have a chance to wake up and grab some granola and yogurt — even if you have to eat your breakfast on the run.

If you're always in a rush, try to prepare something the night before, like a breakfast burrito that's ready to roll after a quick stop in the microwave or a bag of dry cereal and trail mix washed down with calcium-fortified juice.

Or whip up a quick breakfast smoothie — put all the ingredients in the blender jar, stick it in the fridge, and then give it a whirl in the a.m.

Give yourself a boost

Looking for an energy lift? Believe it or not, you'll find it in regular exercise . A brisk walk, jog, or yoga session will increase blood flow and boost feel-good endorphins. The result: A revitalizing burst of energy, one that actually lasts longer than the coffee-induced kind.

Looking for an energy lift? Believe it or not, you'll find it in

. A brisk walk, jog, or yoga session will increase blood flow and boost feel-good endorphins. The result: A revitalizing burst of energy, one that actually lasts longer than the coffee-induced kind.

Need more convincing? Babies of pregnant exercisers tend to sleep through the night sooner, are less prone to colic , and are better able to soothe themselves.

Need more convincing? Babies of pregnant exercisers tend to sleep through the night sooner, are less

, and are better able to soothe themselves.

Scientists attribute the positive link to babies being stimulated through changes in heart rate and oxygen levels, as well as the sounds and vibrations they experience in the womb during workouts. How’s that for payoff?

Go for a (safe) soak

Love a good soak in the tub? Then dive right in, Darling. There's no truth to the myth that bathwater can enter the cervix and cause an infection. Do check that the temperature is right though: It should be warm, not hot.

? Then dive right in, Darling. There's no truth to the myth tha

hwater can enter the cervix and cause an infection. Do check that the temperature is right though: It should be warm, not hot.

And just be careful when you climb inside — at 34 weeks pregnant, your bigger belly may affect your sense of balance, and not being able to see your feet can make you even more prone to spills. Make sure your tub has a non-skid surface, and take your time getting in and out.

Talk through your labor game plan

Make sure you talk to your doctor about what to do when you think you're in labor . It will help to get clear instructions on when to call your practitioner about contractions , what to do if your water breaks , and if or when to go to the hospital directly. That way, you’ll know what to expect and won’t be confused in the heat of the moment.