What to Expect’s Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award Winners 2024: A Gentle Retinol Alternative, Hydrating Eye Cream and More

What to Expect Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Awards 2024

Quick Summary

After polling over 1,300 members of the What to Expect community, we put together a list of the Best Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Products, from face wash to sunscreen to stretch mark cream. Discover all 35 winning products here.

Between charcuterie, sushi and your favorite cocktail, it sometimes seems like pregnancy is a long list of things you can’t have. And it’s not limited to what you put in your body — your skin can potentially absorb certain chemicals from cosmetics, prescription skincare products and self-care items that could pose risks to prenatal or fetal health.

"The skin is a good barrier for keeping the bad things out and letting the good things in," says Amy Wechsler, MD, a New York City-based dermatologist. "It’s not like you’re eating it. But during pregnancy, we are very cautious."

To give yourself some peace of mind (which is crucial to many moms-to-be to reduce their pregnancy anxieties) you may want to swap your go-tos for the best pregnancy-safe skincare and beauty products.

It’s important to not only focus on prohibited ingredients: You should also look for products designed to be extra nourishing and beneficial for pregnant people who may experience things like itchy skin , stretch marks or acne . And you may also want some products that allow a little extra pampering during this period, like a luxe face serum or cheek balm that makes you glow.

We know that wading through all of these labels to determine which beauty products get the green light for pregnancy can just add to your long list of things to do before baby arrives. With help from our community of parents and expert guidance from dermatologists, we did the work for you by vetting and reviewing a comprehensive list of the best beauty products to use during pregnancy — and we're giving them a shoutout in the third annual What to Expect Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Awards.

How We Chose the What to Expect Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award Winners

We started by combing through the What to Expect message boards to flag beauty products moms and moms-to-be are buzzing about. Once we gathered an extensive list of beauty products, we asked thousands of moms and moms-to-be in our What to Expect parent community to vote on their favorites. This included everything from pimple patches that are free from harsh chemicals to a light, non-crunchy hairspray that won’t make you gag. More than 16,800 total votes were cast for the best-of-the-best skincare, makeup, hair and body care products.

From there, each product was vetted by Robin Schaffran, M.D. , a board-certified dermatologist practicing both pediatric and adult dermatology in Beverly Hills, California and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board to ensure all of the ingredients are safe for prenatal use. Per her guidance, we ensured products were free from these ingredients that are potential red flags during pregnancy:

Retinoid/retinol products

Hydroquinone

2% salicylic acid

Glycolic acid with over 10% concentration

Arbutin

Phthalates

Phenols

Sodium Lauroyl Sarcosinate (SLS)

Triclosan

Toluene

Parabens

BPA

Oxybenzone, avobenzone and octinoxate

Formaldehyde

CBD

Some essential oils

Here, we present the winners of the 2024 Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Awards.

Best Face Wash

Cerave Hydrating Facial Cleanser

Why We Love It

There are a few reasons why this product has snagged the top pregnancy-safe cleanser title three years in a row. First, Cerave’s face wash is a drugstore classic that always comes highly recommended by dermatologists. It also works for all skin types; sensitive skin (including eczema), perpetual dryness, acne and oiliness, or combination skin. If your skin issues can be a bit unpredictable with the influx of pregnancy hormones, this face wash will be there for you for all the ups and downs of the next nine months.

There are a few reasons why this product has snagged the top pregnancy-safe cleanser title three years in a row. First,

is a drugstore classic that always comes highly recommended by dermatologists. It also works for all skin types; sensitive skin (including eczema), perpetual dryness, acne and oiliness, or combination skin. If your skin issues can be a bit unpredictable with the influx of pregnancy hormones, this face wash will be there for you for all the ups and downs of the next nine months.

The hero ingredients are hyaluronic acid, soothing ceramides and glycerin, all of which moisturize and nourish skin and leave it feeling soft. These also help protect the skin’s barrier no matter what elements you may be facing during the various seasons of your pregnancy. You also can’t beat the prince point! Community members agree that this cleanser is key for everything from moisturizing dry spots around the nose and mouth to tackling the most random breakouts of body acne.

Community Reviews

"Refreshes my face and with double-washing, has helped reduce pregnancy acne."

"Leaves my face glowing and clear. Not a heavy soapy effect either."

"I have combo skin and I love how this hydrates my dry spots without adding excess oil to my acne-prone areas!"

"Been using it before pregnancy, but it’s not harsh on your skin and gives it that little extra moisturizing!"

"Best face cleanser and great for body use too for the random acne you get during pregnancy."

Best Serum

The Ordinary Hyaluronic Acid 2% + B5

Why We Love It

The Ordinary is known for having pregnancy-safe skincare options and for its super reasonable prices. This $10 serum has a light, non-sticky and hydrating formula that’s meant to be a simple step sandwiched in between your cleanser and moisturizer.

The Ordinary is known for having pregnancy-safe skincare options and for its super reasonable prices. This $10

has a light, non-sticky and hydrating formula that’s meant to be a simple step sandwiched in between your cleanser and moisturizer.

It’s not uncommon to lose some of the oil in your skin and have a dry, flaky complexion due to all the hormonal changes you’re going through. But hyaluronic acid, the key ingredient, works overtime to moisturize and nourish your skin. Other hydrators in the formula include ceramides and vitamin B5, a soothing, anti-inflammatory ingredient. You’ll need to replenish your skin with almost constant hydration, which is why you should rub it into clean skin both day and night.

Community Reviews

"Affordable and effective."

"So lightweight and easy to apply, exactly what a mom-to-be wants as part of her routine."

"Helps with skin health without a large skincare routine."

Best Moisturizer

La Roche-Posay Toleriane Double Repair Moisturizer

Why We Love It

A dermatologist-beloved brand, La Roche-Posay’s double repair moisturizer’s base is its signature French mineral water. But water isn’t the only moisturizing ingredient: Skin barrier-bolstering ceramides, as well as nourishing squalane and niacinamide are also key components. The best part is that you don’t even need to go anywhere close to France to get it: Grab it for under $25 in your local drugstore.

’s base is its signature French mineral water. But water isn’t the only moisturizing ingredient: Skin barrier-bolstering ceramides, as well as nourishing squalane and niacinamide are also key components. The best part is that you don’t even need to go anywhere close to France to get it: Grab it for under $25 in your local drugstore.

With no added fragrances, it’s a win for anyone who is sensitive to scents during pregnancy or has dry and/or sensitive skin in general. Our community members love the lightness of the moisturizer and the non-greasy feel, too.

Community Reviews

"Light and feels good on my skin."

"Really gentle and hydrating."

"Great for sensitive skin."

"Love this product line. Feels nice to put on. Not too greasy."

"I’ve legit gone through 3 of these."

Best Eye Cream

Neutrogena Hydro-Boost Hydrating Eye Gel-Cream

Why We Love It

If pregnancy insomnia has you tossing and turning, it might be time to add this two-time Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award winner to your routine. Neutrogena’s oil-, dye- and fragrance-free eye cream is a winner thanks to its light, gel-like consistency and accessibility. (You can find it at almost any drugstore and won’t break the bank!) It cools the area under the eyes while offering tons of hydration, which is why many What to Expect community members say it feels like a refresher that makes them look slightly less tired.

If pregnancy insomnia has you tossing and turning, it might be time to add this two-time Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award winner to your routine.

is a winner thanks to its light, gel-like consistency and accessibility. (You can find it at almost any drugstore and won’t break the bank!) It cools the area under the eyes while offering tons of hydration, which is why many What to Expect community members say it feels like a refresher that makes them look slightly less tired.

The cream’s main ingredient is — you guessed it — hyaluronic acid, which hydrates, plumps and smooths delicate skin around the eyes. It is light enough to wear under makeup and ophthalmologist-tested, so you can feel comfortable dabbing it near your eyes.

Community Reviews

"Makes me look less tired and covers my bags."

"No dirt or grease left behind and makes you look and feel 20 times better."

"Good for my sensitive skin."

Best Acne Treatment

The Ordinary Niacinamide 10% + Zinc 1% Oil Control Serum

Why We Love It

Finding a pregnancy-safe acne product can be an extra challenge because go-to acne-fighting ingredients, salicylic acid and retinol, are off the table. But The Ordinary’s blemish-busting serum contains niacinamide, a derivative of vitamin B3, which can help tame inflammation that contributes to breakouts and brighten your skin at the same time. And according to our community members, it actually works just as well as pricey facial treatments to clear pores. It’s no wonder it’s won Best Acne Treatment three years in a row. In addition to being effective, the Ordinary serum is vegan, and free of parabens, fragrances and oils.

Finding a pregnancy-safe acne product can be an extra challenge because go-to acne-fighting ingredients, salicylic acid and retinol, are off the table. But

contains niacinamide, a derivative of vitamin B3, which can help tame inflammation that contributes to breakouts and brighten your skin at the same time. And according to our community members, it actually works just as well as pricey facial treatments to clear pores. It’s no wonder it’s won Best Acne Treatment three years in a row. In addition to being effective, the Ordinary serum is vegan, and free of parabens, fragrances and oils.

Some rules of thumb: You’ll definitely want to follow this product up with a moisturizer to prevent dryness or flaking. And if you’re also using a vitamin C serum, use one serum in the morning and another at night to avoid compromising the effectiveness of these potent ingredients.

Community Reviews

"Affordable, but works just as well as high end treatments."

"Good brand that has active ingredients to help fight acne."

"Clears acne and hyperpigmentation."

"Doesn't irritate my skin and helps improve the texture."

"The price point is unmatched."

Best Pimple Patches

Mighty Patch Invisible+ Patch

Why We Love It

Many pimple patches are made with salicylic acid, commonly known to fight acne, but that’s on the no-go list for pregnancy. Mighty Patch Invisible+ , however, uses hydrocolloid, commonly known for wound dressing, because it absorbs fluid from the pimple to prevent bacteria from entering the area. Our community of readers echoed that the patches are useful for "sucking the gunk out of" painful acne that exists below the skin’s surface.

Many pimple patches are made with salicylic acid, commonly known to fight acne, but that’s on the no-go list for pregnancy.

, however, uses hydrocolloid, commonly known for wound dressing, because it absorbs fluid from the pimple to prevent bacteria from entering the area. Our community of readers echoed that the patches are useful for "sucking the gunk out of" painful acne that exists below the skin’s surface.

That’s not an appealing image to think about, but ultimately these patches are speeding up acne’s healing process. Once you press it on, you’ll barely know it’s there so you can camouflage any breakouts that come your way.

Community Reviews

"Affordable, available anywhere, works well."

"Mighty patch is my hero! I get deep level pimples which hang around for a long time until they come to the surface. Once I notice the pimple show, I put a mighty patch on and it sucks all the gunk right out. It's amazing."

"Clears spots in 24hrs."

"Drastically reduces swelling in pimples."

"I have problems picking my zits during the day. These keep me from picking my zits as well as helping them heal."

Best Sunscreen

Supergoop! Mineral Sheerscreen

Why We Love It

When you’re pregnant, experts recommend using mineral sunscreens , as they tend to be made without harmful chemical ingredients such as oxybenzone, avobenzone and octinoxate. What to Expect moms love that this Supergoop sunscreen offers more than SPF 30 coverage: It moisturizes the skin thanks to aloe leaf juice, and softens it with squalene. And, although many mineral sunscreens may leave a white cast behind, especially on deeper skin tones, community members emphasize that this one blends in smooth and clear. As with any SPF, apply it as the last step in your routine, and re-apply every two hours.

, as they tend to be made without harmful chemical ingredients such as oxybenzone, avobenzone and octinoxate. What to Expect moms love that this

offers more than SPF 30 coverage: It moisturizes the skin thanks to aloe leaf juice, and softens it with squalene. And, although many mineral sunscreens may leave a white cast behind, especially on deeper skin tones, community members emphasize that this one blends in smooth and clear. As with any SPF, apply it as the last step in your routine, and re-apply every two hours.

Community Reviews

"Doesn't cause acne and they have many different options/formulas for many skin types! Sits well on the face."

"It doesn’t feel greasy on the skin and feels lightweight."

"Non-greasy. High coverage. Looks good under makeup."

"Does not leave behind any gross residue."

"For a person with darker skin, it was the only mineral sunscreen I used that left no white cast. And believe me, I bought A TON."

Best Tinted Moisturizer

Ilia Super Serum Skin Tint

Why We Love It

For those looking for a light and dewy moisturizer that doubles as a foundation, the Ilia Super Serum Skin Tintis a favorite of the What to Expect community. The serum-like foundation melts into the skin offering the slightest tint of coverage to veil your complexion. The cherry on top is that it also offers SPF 40 protection.

is a favorite of the What to Expect community. The serum-like foundation melts into the skin offering the slightest tint of coverage to veil your complexion. The cherry on top is that it also offers SPF 40 protection.

The formula is a hydrating concoction of skin-tightening squalene, texture-smoothing niacinamide and plumping hyaluronic acid that community reviewers agree glides onto the skin easily. It’s available in 30 different shades. Before applying and blending into the skin, shake the bottle well and warm the serum with your fingertips.

Community Reviews

"Vegan/cruelty-free and get your SPF, coverage, and nice hydration all in one!"

"Great coverage, safe."

Best Makeup Primer

Honest Beauty Everything Glow Primer

Why We Love It

Why do you actually need a primer, you ask? It’s to set the stage for all the rest of your makeup. Primer goes on over your skincare products but underneath your makeup, and this one from Honest Beauty also has some skincare elements like hyaluronic acid and watermelon extract to prep the skin with some added hydration (primers can easily dry out the skin, but not this one). It’s tinted just enough to work with any complexion and give you the extra sun-kissed look.

Why do you actually need a primer, you ask? It’s to set the stage for all the rest of your makeup. Primer goes on over your skincare products but underneath your makeup, and this one from

also has some skincare elements like hyaluronic acid and watermelon extract to prep the skin with some added hydration (primers can easily dry out the skin, but not this one). It’s tinted just enough to work with any complexion and give you the extra sun-kissed look.

You can count on everything at Honest Beauty to be clean and cruelty-free too — this product, like most of their others, has no fragrance or parabens, so it’s pregnancy-friendly.

Community Reviews

"Lasts and has a good base."

"It’s an extremely well rated brand because of the ingredients being less damaging and harmful like most brands offer."

Best Foundation

Maybelline Fit Me Matte + Poreless Liquid Foundation

Why We Love It

You don’t have to spend a ton to get a foundation with solid coverage. This Maybelline Fit Me Matte Foundation is "poreless" and perfect for a clear complexion. It’s guaranteed to last 12 hours, mattifying normal or oily skin. It’s the best base to even out your skin before putting on a full face of makeup, and doesn’t feel chalky or leave skin dry.

You don’t have to spend a ton to get a foundation with solid coverage. This

is "poreless" and perfect for a clear complexion. It’s guaranteed to last 12 hours, mattifying normal or oily skin. It’s the best base to even out your skin before putting on a full face of makeup, and doesn’t feel chalky or leave skin dry.

We especially love that the Fit Me foundation has an inclusive 40-shade range. Our community commented on the accessibility of this shade range and the ability to find the exact right foundation to blend in with their skin tone. There are five different categories of shade families, ranging from deep to very light.

Community Reviews

"Looks great, not pricey, and stays on."

"Not a chalk feel."

"Affordable but gets the job done just as well as any expensive brand."

"It matches my skin tone perfectly."

"Love the dewy finish!"

Best Retinol Alternative

HERBIVORE Bakuchiol Retinol Alternative Smoothing Serum

Why We Love It

Retinol is such an important skincare multi-tasker: It has anti-aging, acne-banishing and scar-smoothing properties. But it’s off-limits for pregnancy, so you may want a comparable substitute for this powerhouse. The answer is bakuchiol, which is the key ingredient in this Herbivore Bakuchiol Retinol Alternative serum . This special plant-based extract is from the Bakuchi plant native to certain parts of Asia and, like retinol, acts as an anti-inflammatory, speeding along the process of cell turnover and stimulating collagen production to keep skin glowy and plump. The addition of tremella mushroom in the serum also helps skin lock in hydration. What to Expect community members rave about this serum, finding it just as effective as their retinol products and as well as being lightweight and fast-absorbing.

Community Reviews

"Lightweight, non irritating, and absorbs fast."

"Easy retinol treatment."

"Super effective retinol alternative."

"Been using this for years and I love it."

Best Concealer

Tarte Shape Tape Concealer

Why We Love It

Waterproof mascara is an absolute necessity, but you probably didn’t think as much about waterproof concealer. A three-time Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award winner, Tarte’s Shape Tape concealer can be worn all day without needing a touch-up; not only is that a testament to its sweat- and water-resistance, but also its ability to mask undereye darkness.

Waterproof mascara is an absolute necessity, but you probably didn’t think as much about waterproof concealer. A three-time Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award winner,

can be worn all day without needing a touch-up; not only is that a testament to its sweat- and water-resistance, but also its ability to mask undereye darkness.

To apply it seamlessly, use the plush doe-foot applicator or get out a wet beauty sponge and dab it on for sheerer coverage.

Community Reviews

"Good for my oily and acne prone skin. Doesn’t settle into my fine lines and lasts all day. Great full and buildable coverage."

"Lasts all day and doesn’t cake."

"Brightening and creamy so it doesn't settle in wrinkles. Tube lasts a long time, so it's worth the price."

"It is light and you can’t tell you are wearing it."

Best Cheek Color

NARS Blush/Bronzer Duo

Why We Love It

NARS is known for its light and silky powders that create an effortlessly gorgeous glow, and this blush and bronzer duo is no exception. What to Expect community members appreciate that it’s a two-for-one deal to cut down on getting ready time. Simply sweep the bronzer on the temples, under the cheekbones and the jawline, and swipe the blush onto your cheeks to enhance that natural pregnancy glow.

is no exception. What to Expect community members appreciate that it’s a two-for-one deal to cut down on getting ready time. Simply sweep the bronzer on the temples, under the cheekbones and the jawline, and swipe the blush onto your cheeks to enhance that natural pregnancy glow.

These compacts are offered in two classic shades that can work for a variety of skin tones. Apply it with a fluffy bronzer brush and a more condensed blush brush to get the best sheen.

Community Reviews

"It’s the perfect shade and it being a duo is so convenient to just throw in your purse."

"It’s pigmented and lasts all day."

"It's a 2-in-1 product, which makes getting ready easier."

"Love the NARS blush and bronzer for natural glow."

"Perfect duo for most skin colors."

Best Mascara

CoverGirl Lash Blast Clean Volume Mascara

Why We Love It

It’s not easy to find a "clean" mascara, especially one that works without flaking, caking or smudging. But this drugstore staple is a unicorn: CoverGirl’s Lash Blast Clean Volume Mascarafeatures a vegan formula free of all the chemicals you’d like to avoid during pregnancy, including parabens, sulfates, talc and mineral oil. Yet it’s still a high-performing mascara that lengthens and lifts your lashes.

It’s not easy to find a "clean" mascara, especially one that works without flaking, caking or smudging. But this drugstore staple is a unicorn:

features a vegan formula free of all the chemicals you’d like to avoid during pregnancy, including parabens, sulfates, talc and mineral oil. Yet it’s still a high-performing mascara that lengthens and lifts your lashes.

What to Expect community members tout its great lash separating powers, plus its ability to give the illusion of longer lashes. Plus, it adds volume without clumping and helps lashes feel more conditioned thanks to argan and marula oils.

Community Reviews

"Affordable and great lash separation."

"Doesn’t get all over my face and bleed like others."

"This is the first mascara that doesn’t irritate my eyes and it is long lasting!"

"Fluffs my lashes and makes them pop."

"My eyelashes are straight and hard to hold a curl but this mascara works great! Have always used Covergirl but their clean line is AMAZING."

Best Lip Treatment

Laneige Lip Sleeping Mask

Why We Love It

Color us (un)surprised that Laneige Lip Sleeping Mask , which has gone viral on TikTok, was the hands-down winner for the best, most nourishing lip treatment. Available in four scents, Laneige’s formula contains antioxidant-rich vitamin C, coconut oil, shea butter and seed butter from the Murumuru palm tree to smooth and plump your pout overnight. And all without the addition of chemicals like parabens.

, which has gone viral on TikTok, was the hands-down winner for the best, most nourishing lip treatment. Available in four scents, Laneige’s formula contains antioxidant-rich vitamin C, coconut oil, shea butter and seed butter from the Murumuru palm tree to smooth and plump your pout overnight. And all without the addition of chemicals like parabens.

If you’re waking up to other things like morning sickness, constipation or pure exhaustion, it’s nice to at least wake up with pillowy soft lips thanks to the mask you applied the night before. Community members also boast that the jar will go a long way, keeping your lips covered throughout your entire pregnancy and beyond.

Community Reviews

"I apply every night before bed and I wake up with SUCH smooth and soft lips! A little goes a long way and the little tub lasts forever!"

"Best lip product I have ever used. [It] makes your lips so soft and smells so good."

"No harsh smells and the moisture lasts all night!!!"

"It’s perfect! The texture and the moisture that leaves on your lips is absolutely amazing, and as a plus it actually make the lips look pretty."

"I’ve been obsessed with Laneige for years now. I love how it can take my lips at their very driest and the next morning make them soft and smooth again. The scents are yummy and the texture is to die for."

Best Lipstick

MAC Cosmetics Lipstick

Why We Love It

All the loyal MAC beauty lovers will be rejoicing knowing they can use their favorite shade all throughout pregnancy. Ingredients like castor seed oil and paraffin ensure you have a smooth, non-flaky swipe over your lips. And if you’re already a busy mom running after toddlers, this lipstick saves you the multiple reapplications, according to our community.

Whether you select one of their signature reds or more muted beiges or nudes like the "Hug Me" color, you can always expect highly pigmented color payoff with MAC lipstick .

Community Reviews

"Long lasting color! Hardly ever needs a touch up."

"Highly pigmented, smells good, and lasts all day."

"A classic that comes in multiple shades with a formula that lasts"

"Last longer even when eating or drinking, and the texture is nice too."

"Tried, tested, and true. A classic. Excellent colors and staying power."

Best Brow Product

Anastasia Beverly Hills Brow Wiz Precision Brow Pencil

Why We Love It

If you can’t make time to get your brows tinted and shaped given, the next best option is to fake it with Anastasia Beverly Hills Brow Wiz Precision Brow Pencil . A three-time Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award winner, this pencil-and-spoolie combo is beyond easy to use, even if you’re a makeup beginner. Start by using the spoolie side to brush hairs upward toward your forehead and into place. Then fill in sparse spots and define your arch with the pencil that What to Expect community members say is super precise, smudge-free, and has great color payoff.

. A three-time Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award winner, this pencil-and-spoolie combo is beyond easy to use, even if you’re a makeup beginner. Start by using the spoolie side to brush hairs upward toward your forehead and into place. Then fill in sparse spots and define your arch with the pencil that What to Expect community members say is super precise, smudge-free, and has great color payoff.

The pencil formula is vegan and made without parabens, sulfates and phthalates. It’s available in 12 different brow color shades, ranging from blondes to brunettes. Our community members rave about how seamlessly the product blends in to give you fluffy, natural-looking brows.

Community Reviews

"Long lasting, good color payoff, easy to travel with and use."

"It has a super thin point and the comb helps create the perfect brow."

"Easy to manage and doesn’t smudge like others."

"Precise application and great color match."

"It's easy to apply, isn't too dark on my brows, and lasts for hours."

Best Eyeshadow

ColourPop Pressed Powder Eye Shadow

Why We Love It

It’s not at all shocking that What to Expect readers love ColourPop’s eye shadows : Many swear that the product blends into lids easily due to the smooth texture and offers tons of long-lasting pigment. This particular palette features nine neutral hues, such as matte caramel, metallic gold and icy rose gold, in both creamy mattes and glimmering shades for a mix of bases and embellishing colors. Community members say the pigments highlight any color of eyes and skin tone, and the powder itself is long-lasting. At $14 a palette, ColourPop’s shadows are an affordable option that doesn’t sacrifice quality.

Community Reviews

"I really love the pigmentation of ColourPop shadow as well as the price!"

"The pigment and price is AMAZING! They are also a cruelty free brand!"

"Bright colors, smooth blending."

"It applies smoothly."

"I like a little glitter for an eye pop."

Best Eyeliner

NYX Professional Makeup Epic Ink Waterproof Eyeliner

Why We Love It

Widely available in drugstores, NYX’s waterproof liquid eyeliner stands out among others on the market for a variety of reasons. Its flexible precise tip received high marks from What to Expect community members because it can create an array of looks. Press down harder for a thicker line or less so for a thinner one, which is perfect for creating those outer-eye flicks.

stands out among others on the market for a variety of reasons. Its flexible precise tip received high marks from What to Expect community members because it can create an array of looks. Press down harder for a thicker line or less so for a thinner one, which is perfect for creating those outer-eye flicks.

Community members also say that it doesn’t drag and glides across the eyelids smoothly — a must in an eyeliner pen. This liquid liner does its job of staying put all day or night as a waterproof product should, but it doesn’t dry out like some eyeliner markers might. And it’s super affordable, so you can buy it in both brown and black without breaking the bank.

Community members also say that it doesn’t drag and glides across the eyelids smoothly — a must in an eyeliner pen. This liquid liner does its job of staying put all day or night as a waterproof product should, but it doesn’t dry out like some eyeliner markers might. And it’s super affordable, so you can buy it in both

Community Reviews

"Affordable and reliable."

"It doesn’t irritate my eyes like most eyeliners."

"Gives an amazing wing and is cost efficient."

"Easy to apply, comes in a variety of colors."

Best Shampoo and Conditioner

Olaplex Bond Maintenance Shampoo and Conditioner

Why We Love It

You may experience changes in your hair during pregnancy, which is why a good set of shampoo and conditioner can go a long way. A three-time Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award winner, Olaplex’s shampoo and conditioner are formulated to support and strengthen hair by repairing bonds, tackling heat damage and healing split ends. This duo also helps with frizziness in the hair and scalp area, making it an excellent choice for curlier hair.

during pregnancy, which is why a good set of shampoo and conditioner can go a long way. A three-time Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award winner, Olaplex’s

are formulated to support and strengthen hair by repairing bonds, tackling heat damage and healing split ends. This duo also helps with frizziness in the hair and scalp area, making it an excellent choice for curlier hair.

The vegan formula is safe to use on dyed strands and free of essential oils. The latter is important, as essential oils aren’t FDA-regulated and certain ones could potentially pose a risk to your baby’s health in the early developmental stages.

The vegan formula is safe to use on dyed strands and free of essential oils. The latter is important, as essential oils aren’t FDA-regulated and certain ones

to your baby’s health in the early developmental stages.

Community Reviews

"Makes my hair smooth and easy to care for."

"Cleans leftover residues, while not leaving any more behind. Conditioner takes the tangles out."

"My hair always comes out looking amazing after using Olaplex. Brings the life right back into it."

"Olaplex really helps to bring any chemically treated hair back to life and keep that life."

"Strengthens your hair before the onset of hair loss while breastfeeding."

Best Dry Shampoo

Amika Perk Up Talc-Free Dry Shampoo

Why We Love It

It’s not out-of-the-ordinary to experience an oily or greasy scalp when you’re pregnant, and a dry shampoo is a great way to keep your hair looking fresh between washes. Amika Perk Up Talc-Free Dry Shampoo isn’t just like any other dry shampoo, though. It features a vegan formula that will keep your hair oil-free and voluminous, thanks to ingredients such as sea buckthorn and rice starch that will add volume and texture while absorbing excess oil.

It’s not out-of-the-ordinary to experience an oily or greasy scalp when you’re pregnant, and a dry shampoo is a great way to keep your hair looking fresh between washes.

isn’t just like any other dry shampoo, though. It features a vegan formula that will keep your hair oil-free and voluminous, thanks to ingredients such as sea buckthorn and rice starch that will add volume and texture while absorbing excess oil.

You can even get it in a 1.8-ounce mini size for your gym bag or toiletry kit.

Community Reviews

"Blends in nicely without looking like you're using dry shampoo."

"Smells great, works well, and doesn’t leave behind [a cakey] residue."

"Smells amazing."

Best Shampoo and Conditioner for Natural Hair

Shea Moisture Intensive Hydration Shampoo and Conditioner

Why We Love It

Your natural curls deserve to be nourished and taken care of, and this Shea Moisture duo is the right set to do that. Made with thick Manuka honey to draw moisture back into dry hair, Shea Moisture’s Intensive Hydration Shampoo and Conditioner also contains the fatty acid-rich Mafura oil, which is derived from the evergreen, southern African native trichilia emetica tree and naturally restores moisture. The hair health benefits don’t end there: There’s soothing vitamin C to calm the skin of the scalp to encourage hair growth.

is the right set to do that. Made with thick Manuka honey to draw moisture back into dry hair, Shea Moisture’s Intensive Hydration Shampoo and Conditioner also contains the fatty acid-rich Mafura oil, which is derived from the evergreen, southern African native trichilia emetica tree and naturally restores moisture. The hair health benefits don’t end there: There’s soothing vitamin C to calm the skin of the scalp to encourage hair growth.

It’s also a plus that Shea Moisture is cruelty-free and doesn’t contain chemicals such as parabens, sulfates, and phthalates. Prepare for these 13-ounce bottles to last you quite a long time, according to our community.

Community Reviews

"Affordable and leaves hair super soft."

"Keeps hair healthy and rehydrated."

"It makes my hair smooth and silky."

"The deep conditioner is so moisturizing. A little goes a long way."

Best Hair Oil

OUAI Hair Oil

Why We Love It

There are many potential hair changes during pregnancy , from dry scalp, to more brittle hair than usual, which is why many What to Expect moms-to-be use this OUAI Hair Oil to condition, moisturize and protect their strands. This hair oil contains just about every nourishing oil out there, including olive oil, coconut oil, almond oil and rice oil, without having SLS, parabens, or phthalates on its ingredient list. Founded by top celebrity hairstylist Jen Atkin, OUAI is often touted as a favorite brand, and that’s no exception with this oil. Moms also noted that it leaves hair shiny and voluminous, perfect for a little lift before heading out for the day.

Community Reviews

"Good brand and replenishes the moisture when needed without feeling."

"I haven’t tried the others, but this smells nice and gets the job done."

"Makes my hair so shiny!!"

Best Hairspray

Amika Fluxus Touchable Hairspray

Why We Love It

Typically, hairspray in general is a no-go during pregnancy because it often contains phthalates that can be harmful for you to inhale. This Amika hairspray , however, uses sea buckthorn (which is also found in their dry shampoo we highlighted previously) to nourish every coil or strand of hair and has a light smell that reviewers rave about.

Typically, hairspray in general is a no-go during pregnancy because it often contains phthalates that can be harmful for you to inhale. This

, however, uses sea buckthorn (which is also found in their dry shampoo we highlighted previously) to nourish every coil or strand of hair and has a light smell that reviewers rave about.

The Amika Fluxus Touchable Hairspray is meant to give your blowout some volume and definition without that typical hairspray "crunch." One reviewer can get her curls to last "for days" after spritzing the hairspray.

Community Reviews

"Smells amazing."

"Helps my hairstyle last for days without feeling crunchy."

"Good product, safe for pregnancy."

"I just LOVE it."

Best Face Mask

Youth To The People Superberry Hydrate + Glow Dream Night Mask with Vitamin C

Why We Love It

This two-time Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award winner serves as a two-for-one: Put on a thick layer to use it as a mask, or apply a thin layer on to use it as a night cream. Either way you use it, the Youth To The People Dream Mask is guaranteed to leave skin feeling soft and smooth. As a mask, the prickly pear and vitamin C work together to combat redness and brighten your skin. As a cream, the hydrating squalene and hyaluronic acid hydrate your skin without clogging pores.

This two-time Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Award winner serves as a two-for-one: Put on a thick layer to use it as a mask, or apply a thin layer on to use it as a night cream. Either way you use it, the

is guaranteed to leave skin feeling soft and smooth. As a mask, the prickly pear and vitamin C work together to combat redness and brighten your skin. As a cream, the hydrating squalene and hyaluronic acid hydrate your skin without clogging pores.

The vegan formula also includes a blend of "superberries" to offer antioxidants that prevent tissue damage while delivering light fruity scent, which some community members rave about. The mask works well for most skin types, too.

Community Reviews

"Leaves skin hydrated and glowy."

"My face feels tight. I feel like a baby."

"Soft, clear skin every morning."

"Gives my face a good glow."

"It’s magic in a little jar."

Best Body Wash

Dove Sensitive Skin Hypoallergenic Body Wash

Why We Love It

Although some body washes could further aggravate itchy pregnancy skin , others can actually help alleviate symptoms of dryness or even eczema. Dove’s Irritation Care Body Wash , winner of Best Body Wash for a third year in a row, does just that. The formula includes probiotics to make it extra moisturizing for your skin’s microbiome. The wash is non-comedogenic so it won’t clog pores, reducing the chance of pregnancy acne appearing on your body. It’s also fragrance-free, which anyone who has scent-related morning sickness triggers will appreciate over the next nine months (plus, it’s also good for sensitive skin).

, others can actually help alleviate symptoms of dryness or even eczema.

, winner of Best Body Wash for a third year in a row, does just that. The formula includes probiotics to make it extra moisturizing for your skin’s microbiome. The wash is non-comedogenic so it won’t clog pores, reducing the chance of pregnancy acne appearing on your body. It’s also fragrance-free, which anyone who has scent-related morning sickness triggers will appreciate over the next nine months (plus, it’s also good for sensitive skin).

The creamy body wash is known to lather well, so feel free to use it as a shaving cream, too. At $9 a bottle for 22 ounces, it’s an affordable and readily available option.

Community Reviews

"Love dove, always left feeling soft like a baby butt."

"Hydrating, softening, and the smell didn’t affect my morning sickness (also the fragrance free version was good for that!)."

"The only body wash that doesn't make my skin itchy after showering!"

"Doves got the best lather, doesn’t need much to do the job."

Best Body Lotion

CeraVe Moisturizing Cream

Why We Love It

It’s not a surprise that What to Expect community members voted CeraVe’s moisturizing cream the Best Body Lotion again. After all, the drugstore favorite has continuously proven to work for dry, eczema-prone skin. The buttery formula consists of hydrating hyaluronic acid as well as three types of ceramides, all of which help strengthen the skin’s barrier to lock in moisture.

the Best Body Lotion again. After all, the drugstore favorite has continuously proven to work for dry, eczema-prone skin. The buttery formula consists of hydrating hyaluronic acid as well as three types of ceramides, all of which help strengthen the skin’s barrier to lock in moisture.

Though the texture is buttery, it still absorbs quickly into the skin without oiliness or greasiness; it’s great for anyone who needs a thicker body cream, especially those with eczema who have a lot of dry patches. Reviewers touted that it rubs in seamlessly, and many appreciate that it doesn’t have any sort of odor. Because it’s so gentle, it can be used on the face or the body.

Community Reviews

"I have chronically dry skin (and eczema) so I need a thicker daily lotion. This works great for me!"

"Good product that won’t leave you feeling greasy."

"100% best lotion. Fragrance free and does not irritate and I have very sensitive skin. Heals all sorts of dry skin issues and leaves no residue."

"The only moisturizer that saved my very dry third trimester pregnancy skin."

"Goes on thick but absorbs quickly."

Best Belly Oil

Bio-Oil Skincare Oil

Why We Love It

Bio-Oil’s body oil is as loved by celeb moms Kate Middleton and Kim Kardashian as it is by our community members. Part of that comes from its dual purpose: You can use it during pregnancy to rub on stretch marks and dry skin, then after birth to help reduce the appearance of scars (so you’re getting even more bang for your buck). It features a soothing blend of vitamin E, chamomile and lavender oil. Although this does mean it has a subtle scent, many people loved the aroma and described it as a "calming" one. It also helps with uneven skin tone, also known as hyperpigmentation, and dark spots.

is as loved by celeb moms Kate Middleton and Kim Kardashian as it is by our community members. Part of that comes from its dual purpose: You can use it during pregnancy to rub on stretch marks and dry skin, then after birth to help reduce the appearance of scars (so you’re getting even more bang for your buck). It features a soothing blend of vitamin E, chamomile and lavender oil. Although this does mean it has a subtle scent, many people loved the aroma and described it as a "calming" one. It also helps with uneven skin tone, also known as hyperpigmentation, and dark spots.

If the idea of applying oil makes you a bit nervous, note Bio-Oil’s formula doesn’t clog pores or stain clothes.

Community Reviews

"Smells good and dries fast, not too oily."

"Reduces stretch marks and scars."

"I use this on my face and hands even when I’m not pregnant."

"It truly works wonders! Awesome for anywhere on your body!"

"Have always trusted Bio-Oil for all my scarring/blemish needs."

Best Stretch Mark Cream

Palmer’s Cocoa Butter Formula Massage Lotion

Why We Love It

For years, moms-to-be have sworn by Palmer’s Cocoa Butter Formula Massage Lotion for Stretch Marks . (That probably explains why it won Best Stretch Mark Cream three years in a row!) The thick, hydrating body cream contains several powerful moisturizing ingredients, including cocoa butter, shea butter and lanolin. It also contains collagen and elastin, which help to strengthen the skin as it stretches along with your growing belly.

. (That probably explains why it won Best Stretch Mark Cream three years in a row!) The thick, hydrating body cream contains several powerful moisturizing ingredients, including cocoa butter, shea butter and lanolin. It also contains collagen and elastin, which help to strengthen the skin as it stretches along with your growing belly.

Although there’s no definitive research proving ingredients such as cocoa butter or olive oil can prevent stretch marks, it certainly can’t hurt to give your belly some extra moisture by using a stretch mark cream . Plus, many of our community members rave about how this lotion leaves skin nourished and super smooth.

. Plus, many of our community members rave about how this lotion leaves skin nourished and super smooth.

Community Reviews

"Did not irritate my skin and was very hydrating."

"While wearing this cream my belly felt soft and moisturized throughout the day! Love it."

"It does smooth out my marks even before my pregnancy."

"Smooth out the skin so nicely without the greasy."

"It’s very smooth and doesn’t leave an uncomfortable residue. It locks in moisture very well and I can’t say for sure if it’s the lotion, but I’m pregnant with baby number two (36 weeks) and no stretch marks and no itching!"

Best Nipple Cream

Earth Mama Organic Nipple Butter

Why We Love It

Breastfeeding parents have praised Earth Mama’s Organic Nipple Butter for years, but it’s not just for those who are nursing. The lanolin-free formula features a nourishing blend of olive oil, shea butter, beeswax and calendula flower extract to help calm the pain and tenderness caused by your ever-evolving pregnancy breasts. The soothing balm can be used on nipples (and, if you use it while nursing, it doesn’t need to be removed before baby latches), as well as lips, elbows and other dry skin patches.

for years, but it’s not just for those who are nursing. The lanolin-free formula features a nourishing blend of olive oil, shea butter, beeswax and calendula flower extract to help calm the pain and tenderness caused by your ever-evolving pregnancy breasts. The soothing balm can be used on nipples (and, if you use it while nursing, it doesn’t need to be removed before baby latches), as well as lips, elbows and other dry skin patches.

The price point is fair for a jar containing 100% organic ingredients. Not to mention a little goes a long way, so it’s sure to last for months. Though it’s a balm, it melts and spreads upon contact into more of an oily serum. This is great for application, but note that it could stain your bras and shirts.

Community Reviews

"I still use this for my little one’s lips and hands when they get chapped."

"Helped revive my cracked bleeding nipples, but also a great lipgloss and facial moisturizer."

"The best! You can use it in other places than just your nipples."

"All natural and doesn’t need to be washed off before feeding."

"I liked that I didn’t have to wipe it off before feeding."

Best Deodorant

Dove 0% Aluminum Deodorant

Why We Love It

Dove’s 0% alumninum deodorant is a drugstore staple that aims to be as clean as possible, without potentially harmful chemical ingredients like parabens. As for the aluminum, there has not been enough research to confirm that it poses a risk to human or fetal health — but many moms-to-be like to steer clear of aluminum deodorant until baby arrives just to err on the side of caution.

is a drugstore staple that aims to be as clean as possible, without potentially harmful chemical ingredients like parabens. As for the aluminum, there has not been enough research to confirm that it poses a risk to human or fetal health — but many moms-to-be like to steer clear of aluminum deodorant until baby arrives just to err on the side of caution.

Community reviewers note that it goes on clear and is "wallet-friendly and lasts all day." Plus, Dove offers delightful scents like this Cucumber & Green Tea as well as Coconut & Pink Jasmine.

Community Reviews

"Love the smell, doesn’t leave white marks on clothes."

"Does not irritate my skin."

"Armpits are soft and smooth."

"Dove is gentle and lasts all day!"

"Dove is the only brand I’ve found that actually helped me stop smelling like I’ve ran a marathon. Especially in the first trimester, hormones were all over the place and my underarms were constantly smelly!!"

Best Self-Tanner

Beauty by Earth Self Tanner Body Lotion

Why We Love It

Most self-tanners contain a lot of chemicals, which is how they give you that glow. But Beauty by Earth utilizes clean ingredients (think sugar beets and cranberry fruit extract) that don't leave an orange residue behind. There are three shades to choose between, and it shouldn’t leave patches or streaks. When you put it on, use a brush or mitt for the smoothest application.

Community Reviews

"Clean ingredients and did not make me orange. Easy to apply and works great!"

"Great color, easy to use."

Best Makeup Remover

Garnier SkinActive Micellar Water

Why We Love It

You’ll never go back to disposable makeup wipes after trying this micellar water. Safe for all skin types, Garnier’s Micellar Water essentially takes the place of both a cleanser and makeup remover. That’s because micelles, the lipid molecules that act as building blocks of micellar water, draw out dirt and oil like a magnet, removing even the most stubborn of mascara stains under your eyes.

You’ll never go back to disposable makeup wipes after trying this micellar water. Safe for all skin types,

essentially takes the place of both a cleanser and makeup remover. That’s because micelles, the lipid molecules that act as building blocks of micellar water, draw out dirt and oil like a magnet, removing even the most stubborn of mascara stains under your eyes.

This product is also a safe bet for pregnancy skin because it’s free of parabens, oil, alcohol or fragrance (which also means it isn’t going to irritate your eyes). It works well with reusable cotton pads , too.

Community Reviews

"It removes makeup without harsh scrubbing."

"It gets the job done and isn't oily on my skin."

"Cheap. Removes all traces of make up."

"Cheap. Removes all traces of make up."

"My face actually feels clean after taking off my makeup with this product. I can also use my reusable cotton pads which makes it a less wasteful option for me personally."

"Gets off even the most stubborn eye makeup without irritation."

Best Nail Polish

Olive & June Nail Polish

Why We Love It

There’s no at-home manicure quite like a color play session with Olive & June polishes . First of all, it’s headache-free, according to our community of reviewers. This is because Olive & June prides itself on being "15-free," meaning that it has nontoxic, pregnancy-safe ingredients and doesn’t include things like formaldehyde, BPA, parabens and phthalates in any of its formulas.

. First of all, it’s headache-free, according to our community of reviewers. This is because Olive & June prides itself on being "15-free," meaning that it has nontoxic, pregnancy-safe ingredients and doesn’t include things like formaldehyde, BPA, parabens and phthalates in any of its formulas.

You can shop around for an array of bright, cheery pastels, or find the perfect nude or pale pink to wear for everyday occasions. Olive & June guarantees a long-lasting manicure if you do it correctly, comparable to a gel mani at your local salon.

Community Reviews

"Stays on longer than most polishes and doesn’t give me a headache."

"It works even in my oily nails! No peeling and lasts long."

"Although kind of expensive, it lasts a while and they have such a wide range of beautiful colors without being overwhelming."

"So many cute colors and love the cuticle oil and drying oil."

Best Toothpaste

Native Premium Whitening Fluoride Toothpaste

Why We Love It

You might want to think about pregnancy safe-ingredients even during the most mundane moments, like brushing your teeth. Luckily, there are plenty of toothpastes that are free from the chemical sodium laureth sulfate (SLS), including this minty fresh option from Native.

You might want to think about pregnancy safe-ingredients even during the most mundane moments, like brushing your teeth. Luckily, there are plenty of toothpastes that are free from the chemical sodium laureth sulfate (SLS), including

It’s a favorite of our community because it has a strong mint flavor, but is also gentle enough with "sensitive mouths" to not cause inflammation or irritation. The toothpaste also contains fluoride for cavity prevention and for whitening purposes.

Community Reviews

"Not only is the toothpaste excellent, the brand in general makes great products, all great for sensitive skin and the product scent is long lasting."

"Helps with sensitive mouths, it’s affordable, and I’ve always used it and I love it. Would and will recommend to anyone."

"Clean ingredients, works well."

FAQs

Is fragrance safe during pregnancy?

“It’s safer to use fragrance-free because nothing is going to bug you,” Dr. Wechsler adds. “But you don’t have to.”

One of the most unexpected and debilitating aspects of your beauty routine during pregnancy can be fragrance. Hormonal changes can give you the nose of a dog. Those experiencing morning sickness may have it even worse.

“Fragrance is very individualized,” says Dr. Wechsler. “During pregnancy, our sense of smell is heightened and things that normally would not bother us, can. And vice versa — sometimes we’re drawn to certain fragrances. Like an orange. I love the smell of an orange but when I was pregnant, get it away from me. If there was orange extract in something, there was no way I would use it. It’s so individualized, and it changes trimester by trimester.”

Depending on your reaction, you may decide to create a completely unscented regimen for pregnancy. I had to as the majority of scents triggered my nausea during pregnancy.

Is it safe to wear sunscreen while pregnant?

“It’s important to wear sunscreen every day during pregnancy,” says Dr. Wechsler. (Of course, she notes it’s important for everyone to wear sunscreen every day.)

“During pregnancy, the skin is more prone to make dark marks or patches like melasma because the circulating estrogen level is higher,” Dr. Wechsler explains. “Estrogen plus sun equals dark marks.”

When it comes to choosing between chemical and mineral sunscreen, Dr. Wechsler prefers the latter. “I’m a big fan of mineral sunscreen because it works the moment you put it on,” she says. “It can go in any layer of your skin care routine—first, middle, or last. It’s inert. A mineral is not a chemical, it’s inert, so you can’t be allergic to it. It doesn’t clog your pores. It blocks the entire range of UVA and UVB if you’ve got a high enough concentration. It’s just super safe.”

Should I use clean beauty products during pregnancy?

Some choose to go “clean” and use products labeled “natural” or “organic” during pregnancy. This can be a fantastic philosophy for finding sustainable, healthy picks. On the flip side, there is no universal industry standard for what it means to be a “clean” beauty product, and certain experts call “BS” on these descriptors.

“It’s still not regulated,” Dr. Wechsler says of the clean beauty market. “We know what we’re talking about when it comes to food being organic. But there is no standardized regulation for skin care.”

Some of these “natural” ingredients can also be more irritating than their chemical counterparts. “Things that say they’re ‘clean’ or ‘green’ with skincare can be so irritating.” Dr. Wechsler echoes. “I’ll frequently see patients that have contact dermatitis, like a rash, to a new skincare product they’ve bought, which has like 30 plant extracts. Think about poison ivy: It's organic, but also one of the most irritating substances. Many plants are irritating to the skin. Just throwing them into a skin care products and calling it green — okay, why is that good for us if there’s no data?”

If you’re not irritated by the “clean,” “green,” “natural,” or “organic” products you’re using, then by all means keep using them. Sometimes these labels can also give you peace of mind!

“I think most skincare products that aren’t labeled as clean or green are totally fine and safe,” Dr. Wechsler says, speaking of anything from the Cetaphils to the Chanels of the beauty biz. “It’s personal preference on what you like — some people like the way they feel, some don’t. Some get a rash, some don’t. It’s a lot of trial and error.”

Robin Schaffran , M.D., board-certified dermatologist. National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, Fetal Retinoid Syndrome , June 2024. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline Plus, Melasma . U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Fragrances in Cosmetics , February 2022.

Your Next Read

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is it Safe to Get A Facial When You're Pregnant or Trying to Conceive? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

6 Stretch Mark Creams Moms-to-Be Can’t Stop Buying (and Derms Approve, Too) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Best Home Cleaning Products to Use During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Pregnancy Acne: Why It Happens and Safe Ways to Treat It Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Oily Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is Better Skin Hiding in Your Grocery Cart? What Dermatologists Want Pregnant Moms to Eat (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Why Pregnancy Can Leave Your Skin Feeling Parched Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is Acne a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Thinking About Botox During Pregnancy? Here's What to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window