37 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a canary melon.

At 37 weeks, you're 9 months pregnant with the end in sight.

Your baby is practicing special skills this week (like sucking his thumb and grasping) that he'll show off upon his arrival.

At your next prenatal appointment , your practitioner will likely check your cervix for clues about how you're progressing.

Your Baby at Week 37

At a Glance

Dress rehearsal

If your baby were born this week, he’d still be early term but will be full-term by week 39. He’s practicing for his grand entrance by inhaling and exhaling amniotic fluid, blinking, and turning from side to side.

Hang on!

Your baby has developed more dexterity in his fingers. He can now grasp onto smaller objects, like a toe or his nose.

More thumbsucking

Your baby is likely sucking his thumb a lot these days in preparation for his feeding sessions after birth.

37 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 37 weeks pregnant, you're in month 9 of your pregnancy. Only a few weeks left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 37 weeks?

At 37 weeks pregnant, your baby's still packing on about a half an ounce per day or half a pound a week. In fact, until the end of week 38, he’s technically considered “early term.” At this age, the average fetus weighs about 6 pounds — though boys are likely to be heavier at birth than girls.

Baby’s stretching and moving

It's a little crowded in your uterus, so he may not be kicking as much. Instead, your baby's probably stretching, rolling a bit, and wiggling — all of which you’ll be able to feel!

Practicing for birth

So what's keeping your little one busy while waiting it out until delivery day? Practice, practice, practice.

Right now, your tiny superstar is rehearsing for his big debut, simulating breathing by inhaling and exhaling amniotic fluid, sucking his thumb, blinking, and pivoting from side to side. One day you feel his bottom on the left side, the next it's flipped around to the right!

Baby’s head is huge!

Here's an interesting fact: At birth, your baby's head — which, by the way, is still growing — will be roughly the same circumference as his chest.

And guess what's making a quite-literal impression these days on those shoulders and hips? Fat — causing little dimples in those cute elbows, knees, and shoulders, along with creases and folds in the neck and wrists.

Your Body at Week 37

Dilation and effacement

It's anyone's guess when your baby will decide to make his appearance — will he be sociably early, fashionably late, or right on time? — but that doesn't stop your practitioner from guessing when labor will begin.

Just what is your doctor looking for? First, for dilation, or how far your cervix has opened . Specifically, your cervix needs to open to 10 centimeters for the baby to pass through into the birth canal.

Your health care provider is also looking cervical ripeness — aka the consistency of the cervix. It starts out being firm like the tip of your nose, then softens to the same texture as the inside of your cheek before labor.

Next, your practitioner will check for effacement, or how thin your cervix is; it'll be 100% effaced before you push your baby out.

The position of your cervix, which moves from the back to the front as labor approaches, will also be assessed. And last but not least, your doctor or midwife will measure the position of the baby in relation to your pelvis. The lower down your baby is, the closer you are to delivery.

Although it all sounds very scientific, it's actually not. These processes can occur gradually, over a period of weeks or even a month or more in some women — or overnight.

So while all these signs are clues that you're indeed progressing, they're far from sure bets when it comes to pinpointing the actual start of labor. You can be very dilated and not have your baby for weeks. Or your cervix can be high and closed during an exam one morning, only to be open and ready for business — and labor — by noon.

Perineal massage

You already know about the mind-body benefits of massage — but have you heard of perineal massage ?

Yes, it sounds — and can feel — a little awkward, but perineal massage may help to gently stretch your perineum, the area of skin between your vagina and rectum, which in turn can minimize the "stinging" that occurs when a baby's head crowns during childbirth. It may also help you avoid an episiotomy and tearing .

If you want to give it a shot, it's best not to DIY it the first time. Seek out a pelvic floor therapist, who can show you how to do it right. (Word to the wise: Be gentle.) Once you know what you're doing, you can keep up the good work — or have your practitioner take over during labor itself.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 37

Breast changes

Your innie probably became an outie weeks ago, but you may notice that your nipples are also popping now — all the better for a newborn to latch on when nursing.

Heartburn or indigestion

If your heartburn is getting worse these days, try eating a handful of almonds. Other home remedies that may banish the burn: a tablespoon of honey in warm milk or some dried papaya.

Pregnancy brain

There are so many things to keep track of now that it’s no wonder you’re walking around in a fog. Is the camera charged and packed? Do you have a baby outfit washed and ready to bring to the hospital? How many dinners are stocked in the freezer? Post reminders around the house and on your computer so you won’t forget anything important.

Insomnia

You’ve heard that pregnancy insomnia is Mother Nature’s way of preparing you for the sleepless nights ahead, but try to squeeze in some shut-eye so you have enough energy for childbirth and beyond. Sleep in a little longer, nap when you come home after work or on weekends, and give yourself a relaxing routine when it’s time for bed.

Pelvic pain

If your baby’s head is pressing into your pelvis, hips, and bladder, you’ll feel more pressure as the week wears on. If you feel really uncomfortable, invest in a sling that will support the weight of your tummy and take pressure off your back and pelvis.

Leg cramps

If leg cramps are making a misery of your nights, try drinking more fluids during the day and make sure you’re eating enough magnesium and calcium. And those almonds you’re munching for the heartburn? Those will come in handy here too.

Stretch marks

With your boobs and belly as big as they’ve ever been, you’ve probably noticed those classic marks of maternity by now. Don’t worry, they’ll fade and turn into a badge of pride (or at least motherhood!) a few months after childbirth.

Varicose veins

If the veins in your legs are acting up now, try sleeping on your left side, which is the best position for optimum circulation. Also try elevating your legs by putting a pillow under your feet. Both positions will keep the blood flowing.

Bloody show

A pink- or brown-tinged mucus discharge means that the blood vessels in the cervix are rupturing as the cervix dilates in preparation for labor and delivery — it won’t be long now!

Changes in fetal activity

By the time your baby’s head is engaged in your pelvis, he’ll have a lot less room for any more than a twist or squirm. What’s important is that you feel some movement every day. Remember, though, that your baby is behaving like a newborn now and has interludes of deep sleep, when he barely moves at all.

Tips for You This Week

Consider hiring a postpartum doula

Even if you aren’t hiring a doula for the delivery room, you may want to recruit one for the postpartum period. Postpartum doulas can help families transition from the third trimester to the fourth — helping to calm cranky infants, troubleshoot feeding problems, watching the baby while the parents rest, and more.

Even if you aren’t hiring a doula for the delivery room, you may want to recruit one for the postpartum period.

can help families transition from the third trimester to the fourth — helping to calm cranky infants, troubleshoot feeding problems, watching the baby while the parents rest, and more.

You don’t need to make a decision just yet — many couples wait until after the baby is born before hiring a doula. The costs vary by region and the type of care you may need, but you can expect to pay between $25 and $75 an hour.

Get ready for baby's hearing test

Don't be surprised to learn that your newborn's hearing will be tested before he even leaves the hospital (or in the first few days of life if he's born at home). And don't worry: Most babies pass with flying colors.

But it's important to get your baby's hearing checked as soon as possible since it's so critical to language development , which starts well before he says that adorable, much-anticipated first word .

If your baby doesn't pass the newborn hearing screening, don't fret — but do follow up as soon as possible with your pediatrician, who will likely refer you to an auditory specialist.

It's critical that you get any hearing issues taken care of early on to give your child the best chance at proper treatment , so he and those cute little ears can get the help they need from the get-go. Need more resources? The nonprofit Hearing First has a whole list of them.

Get an exercise ball

Looking for a good late-pregnancy workout? Get on the ball! An exercise ball is a safe and effective tool for strengthening your core muscles during pregnancy. And looking not-too-far ahead, it can also provide welcome relaxation and physical relief during pregnancy and labor.

Looking for a good late-pregnancy workout? Get on the ball! An exercise ball is a safe and effective tool for

during pregnancy. And looking not-too-far ahead, it can also provide welcome relaxation and physical relief during pregnancy and labor.

Choose a high-quality ball made from burst-resistant material, and be sure you buy the correct size for your height: 22 inches (55 centimeters) for those shorter than 5-foot-3, and 26 inches (65 centimeters) for those taller (though check the instructions to be sure).

Finish baby's nursery

If you haven’t finished setting up the nursery , now’s a good time to try.

Tackle the bigger tasks first, like assembling the crib or bassinet (it may take longer than you think), and setting up the rocking chair if you’re planning on nursing.

After that, try washing and putting on the bedding, practicing using/storing the car seat and stroller (a doll or stuffie can be your baby's placeholder), and arranging the changing area stocked with diapers and wipes. Get help with any of the heavy lifting from your partner, a family member, or a friend.

You don't have to stress or go overboard though. You have enough to do — and your baby won’t care what color the walls are painted.

Practice using your baby gear

You have the car seat, the stroller, the playard, and the rest of the baby gear — now all you need is an actual baby. Before your little one makes that big arrival, grab an unwitting (and willing) baby stand-in — a doll, stuffed animal, or even a very patient pet (within reason!) — and make a few practice runs.

Try strapping dolly into the car seat or strolling teddy around in your hallway, holding the little bundle in one hand while folding up the stroller in the other. If you feel silly using a faux baby, don't use anything at all. But do practice. You'll feel more prepared when it's showtime!

in the other. If you feel silly using a faux baby, don't use anything at all. But do practice. You'll feel more prepared when it's showtime!

Meanwhile, you'll also want to be prepared to track your baby's feedings and diaper changes, which is easier said than done when you're taking care of a newborn on very little sleep. The solution? There's an app for that — more specifically, an app baby tracker for that. Trust us, it will help you seamlessly stay on top of how often to feed and change baby.

Stretch out your meals

Feeling more bloated than ever? You can blame the pregnancy hormone progesterone for slowing down your digestion — which then leads to bloating and cramping .

Feeling more bloated than ever? You can blame the

One way to beat the bloat: Eat your meals slowly. When you scarf down your lunch, you swallow more than just food. You also take in a lot of air, which will then settle into your stomach as gas bubbles.

Here are some things you can do if you're on bed rest: Stock a mini-fridge or cooler with lots of water, fruit, yogurt, cheese, and sandwiches. Be sure the phone, magazines, books, and TV remote are all within arm’s reach.

Try to establish a routine — even if the highlight is a soak in a tepid tub , then a nap or a morning on the couch, then an afternoon in bed. You’ll feel a little better if you give the day some sort of structure.

, then a nap or a morning on the couch, then an afternoon in bed. You’ll feel a little better if you give the day some sort of structure.

Keep your eye on the prize. Frame one of your ultrasound pictures and know that you are simply starting the parenting process a little earlier than most, doing what’s best for your child even if it’s a hardship for you.

Remember: Every day you stay in bed or off your feet gives your baby the best chance at being born as healthy and strong as possible.