38 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a mini watermelon.

With 38 weeks in the books, month 9 of pregnancy is about halfway done.

Your baby's lungs are stronger, and she's getting ready to announce her entrance into the world.

It may come sooner than you think, especially if you experience a heads-up in the form of your mucus plug or bloody show .

Your Baby at Week 38

At a Glance

I see you!

Your baby’s eyes right now are blue, gray, or brown, but once they’re exposed to light, they may change color or shade. By the time your baby turns 1, you’ll know their true color.

Shedding hair

The lanugo, the fine downy hair that covered your little one's body for warmth, is falling off in preparation for delivery.

Ready to cry

Your baby’s lungs have strengthened and the vocal cords have developed, which means she’s ready to communicate through wails and cries.

38 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 38 weeks pregnant, you're in month 9 of your pregnancy. Only a few weeks left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 38 weeks?

Your little one isn't quite so little anymore, weighing about 7 pounds and measuring 20 inches in length, give or take an inch or two. Only two more weeks — four max — before your baby makes her appearance!

Baby's preparing for birth

At 38 weeks pregnant, all systems are almost go! As you prepare for baby's ETA, she's getting ready too, big-time, and continues to shed vernix and lanugo.

Your baby is also swallowing amniotic fluid, some of which winds up in her intestines, where it — along with other shed cells, bile, and waste products — will turn into your baby's first bowel movement ( meconium ) and perhaps your first diaper change.

Her lungs are still maturing and producing more and more surfactant, a substance that prevents the air sacs in the lungs from sticking to each other once she starts to breathe.

Most other changes this week are small but important: She's continuing to add fat and fine-tune her brain and nervous system — that way, she can deal with all the stimulation that awaits her once she makes her entrance into the world.

Your Body at Week 38

The final countdown

Two weeks and counting — unless, of course, your little bean decides to make a late entrance. Just as your baby is preparing for life outside the womb, at 38 weeks pregnant, your body is tending to its own final touches before the big day.

Some you're aware of, like your baby dropping into your pelvis — easier breathing, more pelvic pressure — and others you're probably not, like cervical dilation and effacement.

Colostrum

While you're waiting for your baby to arrive, think of these last weeks as a dress rehearsal for life with your new arrival. Sleepless nights, a little anxiety, and leaky breasts .

Huh? Leaky breasts? Yes, it's true: Many pregnant women find that they start leaking colostrum — a thin, yellowish liquid that's the precursor to breast milk — sometime in the third trimester.

Full of antibodies that protect your newborn, it has more protein and less fat and sugar, which is better for baby's digestive system than the milk that arrives later. If you are leaking colostrum, you may want to consider wearing nursing pads in your bra to protect your clothes — and get used to it, since this is just foreshadowing of what's to come.

Not all women experience it though. If not, no need to fret — your breasts are still producing colostrum for your baby when the time comes if you plan to breastfeed .

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 38

More frequent urination

If you're going to the bathroom a lot these days, it's likely that your baby's head is in your pelvis, making less room for your bladder. You may want to skip caffeine and any other diuretic drinks now. Just don't cut out liquids altogether — you need fluids now so you can stay hydrated as you get closer to delivering.

Insomnia

Your mind is racing so much you can't sleep. Don't turn on the computer to search for info on labor and delivery. That will just keep you up longer when you do go to bed. Instead, grab something low-tech — a book or a magazine — and read for a bit. That will soothe you to sleep faster.

Diarrhea

Think of loose bowel movements as nature’s way of making enough room for the baby to emerge. So if you’re having diarrhea this week, it may mean that labor is imminent (yay!). Drink lots of water and eat lightly — broth, toast, and iced fruit pops are the way to go now. Skip fatty foods or anything that’s loaded with insoluble fiber.

Braxton Hicks contractions

These practice contractions may be getting more intense now. This is a good time to go over your breathing and visualization techniques. If your partner is around, do them together.

Itchy belly

One way to soothe an itchy belly? Slather on vitamin E oil. In fact, you might want to stock up on an extra bottle of vitamin E capsules — it's also great for sore nipples, which are in your near future if you're planning to breastfeed. Be sure to check with your doctor before taking extra vitamin E though.

Edema (swelling in feet and ankles)

If swollen ankles and feet are getting you down, now's the time for some support — hose, that is. Make sure the tops aren't too tight if you're going for the knee- or thigh-high variety. Put them on in the morning before the daily swelling starts.

Leaky breasts

Your breasts may be bigger than they’ve ever been — though they’ll grow even more! — and leaking colostrum. If they’re not, though, don’t worry. Neither is a sign that you’ll have difficulty breastfeeding, if that’s what you plan to do.

Nesting instinct

A change in energy levels is pretty common this week. You may be increasingly exhausted or you may get a burst of energy, also known as the nesting instinct, as you try to organize and clean the house before the baby comes. Go ahead and clean, but don’t wear yourself out. Save that energy for childbirth instead of squandering it on a clean closet.

Bloody show

Vaginal discharge can be tinged pink or brown as the blood vessels in the cervix rupture during dilation and effacement. Once your underwear or toilet paper has that hint of color, it could mean you’ll be face-to-face with your baby sooner rather than later.

Mucus plug

You may be experiencing more discharge now and you may even pass the mucus plug — a clear, yellow, or brown glob of mucus that’s been corking your cervix throughout your pregnancy — as you become dilated. Does this mean that labor is imminent? Maybe. But it could be days or even weeks away.

Tips for You This Week

Think about postpartum meals

Have visions of yourself whipping up easy and delicious meals in those postpartum weeks? Dream on. Cooking will be the last thing on your mind or your to-do list during those first few weeks — or even months — after delivery.

With the help of a partner, loved one, or friend, try stocking your freezer with individually packaged, simple heat-and-serve options. Label everything carefully, so you won't be left with UFOs (unidentified frozen objects).

with individually packaged, simple heat-and-serve options. Label everything carefully, so you won't be left with UFOs (unidentified frozen objects).

Good candidates for the freezer include hearty soups, stews, casseroles, and mini meatloafs. Or stash away several trays of bran muffins — they'll come in handy. Now’s also the time to find some good takeout spots, if you haven’t already.

Double-check your hospital bag

Make sure all the items you stashed in your hospital bag still fit you. The PJs you bought at 30 weeks may now be too snug.

still fit you. The PJs you bought at 30 weeks may now be too snug.

If you’re bringing snacks, just know that some practitioners give a thumbs-down to eating during labor . If you do get the green light to eat, opt for light foods like small granola bars, plain saltine or club crackers, or little packets of applesauce.

Go for a stroll

Walking is easy on your knees and ankles, which makes it one of the best exercises during pregnancy .

And there's another benefit to walking — though at this point, it might be better termed "waddling." The side-to-side sway of your hips during walking … or waddling … may ease your baby's head into your pelvis, giving you a leg up on labor.

— though at this point, it might be better termed "waddling." The side-to-side sway of your hips during walking … or waddling … may ease your baby's head into your pelvis, giving you a leg up on labor.

Speaking of labor, there are those who swear that a long walk can actually bring on contractions . So keep your sneaks handy as you near your due date — or round the corner past it.

Run through your labor distractions

Childbirth education programs generally teach you to cope with labor discomfort by using distraction techniques.

Relaxation, meditation, and visualization — like imagining your cervix is blooming like a flower (dilating, that is) — are often useful between contractions, whereas breathing exercises can help during them.

Some people are relaxed and preoccupied by music — anything from opera to hard rock, or whatever gets your groove on and your mind off the pain — and others by watching TV or a movie, or playing a game on their phone.

Staying rested, relaxed, and positive will help you stay more comfortable. Tell yourself that the pain of a contraction is actually accomplishing something, as each one gets you closer to your baby. And remember, it won’t last forever!

Wear loose, cool clothing

Perpetually damp these days? Here come those hormones again. Their effects, along with increased blood flow to the skin and increased metabolism during pregnancy, can make you sweat like a linebacker, even in colder weather.

To stay cool, wear loose, light clothing or dress in layers (a lightweight cardigan can be worn post-baby and be surprisingly nursing-friendly, if you plan on breastfeeding). Be sure to also drink plenty of water and crack some windows or crank up the AC.

or dress in layers (a lightweight cardigan can be worn post-baby and be surprisingly nursing-friendly, if you plan on breastfeeding). Be sure to also drink plenty of water and crack some windows or crank up the AC.

Lastly, use a sprinkle of talc-free powder to absorb some moisture — and help prevent a heat rash that could crop up underneath all that sweat.

Manage frequent urination

Gotta go (and go, and go, and go …)? Now that you’re at the end of the third trimester, your baby has likely dropped into your pelvis, pressing squarely on that bladder.

Gotta go (and go, and go, and go …)? Now that you’re at the end of the third trimester, your

into your pelvis, pressing squarely on that bladder.

The next time you take a trip to the toilet, try to empty your bladder completely by leaning forward as you urinate.

Salt, but don’t oversalt, your food

Wondering if cutting back on salt will help ease the puff? That depends on how much salt you're eating in the first place. Doctors used to recommend a low-sodium diet during pregnancy — which made it hard to satisfy those pickles-and-ice-cream cravings — but thankfully they no longer do.

will help ease the puff? That depends on how much salt you're eating in the first place. Doctors used to recommend a low-sodium diet during pregnancy — which made it hard to satisfy those

A moderate amount of salt — for example, adding iodized table salt to your meals and eating lightly salted foods— actually helps your body regulate fluids. Plus, dramatically cutting back on sodium isn't good for the baby.

to your meals and eating lightly salted foods— actually helps your body regulate fluids. Plus, dramatically cutting back on sodium isn't good for the baby.

But before you polish off that pickle jar, keep in mind that too much salt isn't healthy for anyone, pregnant or not, and can even pump up the puffing.

The bottom line? Salt, but don't oversalt, your food. Give yourself a one- or two-pickle-per-sitting limit, skip the heavily salted snacks, and get into the habit of tasting before sprinkling.