39 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a jackfruit.

Congrats are in order: Your baby is considered full-term now that month 9 is drawing to a close!

Though your adorable baby isn't aware that you're expecting his arrival any day now, you can count on the fact that he's likely reached his birth weight (or close!) at this point, and when he's ready, he'll make that long-awaited appearance.

At 39 weeks, you'll want to watch out for signs of labor — and get that hospital bag packed, if it isn't already.

Your Baby at Week 39

At a Glance

Big baby brain

While your baby’s body isn’t growing as much, his brain is. It’s already 30% bigger than it was just four weeks ago.

Pink skin turns white

Your baby’s pinkish skin has turned whitish or whitish-grayish and won’t have pigment, no matter what his eventual skin color will be, until shortly after birth.

Baby's at his birth weight!

Your baby has likely reached his birth weight of somewhere between 6 and 9 pounds, about a third of which is accounted for by his head.

39 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 39 weeks pregnant, you're in month 9 of your pregnancy. Only a week or two left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 39 weeks?

At 39 weeks pregnant, you've got what is officially considered a full-term baby. Your baby now weighs around 7 to 8 pounds and measures 19 to 21 inches.

Those measurements won't fluctuate much from now on, but his brain is still growing at an astonishing rate — a pace that will continue for the first three years of life — with changes you'll be able to recognize firsthand as your baby's skill-packed bag of tricks expands almost daily.

No tears just yet

Heard that babies cry a lot? There's definitely truth to that rumor — as you'll find out soon enough, usually in the middle of the night.

But what you may not have heard is that tiny babies don't produce tiny tears when they cry, since their tear ducts aren't fully open for business yet. While you'll be consoling your crying baby right from the get-go, it won't be until sometime after the first month that you'll be wiping tears off those chubby cheeks.

Baby's skin is white

Your baby's skin has now finally changed from pink-tinted to white, no matter what its eventual color will be. (Pigmentation will occur soon after birth.) That's because a thicker fat layer has been deposited over the blood vessels, making your baby's cheeks pinchably and kissably round.

Your Body at Week 39

Almost go-time

The end — and a whole new beginning! — is in sight at 39 weeks pregnant. These last few days, or last couple of weeks if your baby is late, may seem to speed by or drag out.

You're probably feeling increasingly uncomfortable by now, as you lug around your ever-heavier uterus and its contents — plus your pelvis is feeling achier and achier as your baby bears down. Braxton Hicks contractions are likely increasing in strength and frequency — and that's a good thing, since it means your body's gearing up for the big event.

Signs of labor

Knowing that you can go any day, you should be watching out for signs of labor .

These include the rupture of the membranes that contain your amniotic fluid (also known as your water breaking); diarrhea or nausea, which many women experience just before the onset of labor; spurts of energy, aka the nesting instinct; the loss of the mucus plug , which is the "cork" of mucus that seals the opening of the uterus; and bloody show , which arrives when your capillaries rupture from the dilation and effacement of your cervix, causing any discharge to appear pink- or red-tinged.

Once you've seen bloody show, labor is probably just a day or two away — though don't try to set your watch to it, since it's not a definite timetable. Just make sure your bag is packed!

Preparing for a C-section

Many hospitals and birthing centers are increasingly sensitive to an expectant mother's desire to be awake, comfortable, and with loved ones both during and after delivery — even if that delivery is via C-section .

Whether you have a scheduled C-section or induction , or are already in labor, these days most places will try to accommodate as many of your requests as possible in a non-emergency situation.

Ask if you can use a mirror or clear screen so you can see your baby emerge. You may also be able to listen to music during delivery, have your hands free to touch your baby after birth, have your partner cut the cord, and breastfeed in the recovery room. This is one of those times when it can't hurt to ask for what you want.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 39

Backaches

Your backaches could be worse now as you count down the final weeks. You can soothe a sore back by getting into the shower and letting the warm water pulse onto the tender spots.

Heartburn or indigestion

Your heartburn may be at its peak at this point. Don't worry, relief is around the corner when you deliver. For now, limit triggers like spicy foods and caffeine, and don't eat too much in one sitting.

Diarrhea

As your body gets ready for childbirth, the muscles may loosen in your rectum, resulting in loose bowel movements.

Braxton Hicks contractions

If you've been experiencing these practice contractions, they may be getting stronger now. But if you haven't had one yet, don't worry. Braxton Hicks contractions are more common in second — and subsequent — pregnancies.

Pelvic pain

Your baby's head is putting pressure on your pelvis, making you feel uncomfortable. Other symptoms of discomfort could include menstrual-like cramps and indigestion, which can also be early signs of labor.

Hemorrhoids

If you're experiencing diarrhea, your hemorrhoids may actually be less painful now since you're not straining to move your bowels the way you did when you were constipated. Just be aware that pushing during labor can aggravate hemorrhoids, so stock up on all the soothers that brought you relief.

Change in fetal activity

As your baby’s living quarters become more cramped, you may notice changes in fetal movement. Your baby’s coordination has improved and he’s less likely to make involuntary jabs and kicks, so they’ll feel more like twists and turns now. But you should still track his movements every day.

Loss of mucus plug

This week your mucus plug may fall out — and into the toilet — though you may not notice it. Losing it isn’t a sign that childbirth is hours away, but it does mean it’s around the corner.

Bloody show

The discharge from your vagina might be tinged with either pinkish or brownish blood as the blood vessels in the cervix rupture. Don’t worry — it’s a sign that your cervix is dilating or opening up, and that’s a good thing.

Water breaking

Another sign that labor is near — your amniotic sac breaks and fluid trickles out. But don’t worry about your water breaking while you’re standing in the grocery checkout line. Despite what you’ve seen in movies, most women are in labor and in the hospital by the time their water breaks. If yours does happen to break ahead of time, call your practitioner.

Tips for You This Week

Has your water broken?

Not sure if your water has broken yet? If you wake up in a pool of fluid that smells like ammonia, and the flow has stopped, it’s probably urine, not amniotic fluid, which has no odor.

If your water breaks , liquid will continue to trickle out and you won’t be able to stop it as you would if you were going to the bathroom, so call your provider for further instructions. If you’re told to wait for contractions to start, you’ll want to wear panty liners or maxi pads (not tampons) to protect yourself and your baby against infection.

, liquid will continue to trickle out and you won’t be able to stop it as you would if you were going to the bathroom, so call your provider for further instructions. If you’re told to wait for contractions to start, you’ll want to wear panty liners or maxi pads (not tampons) to protect yourself and your baby against infection.

If you tested positive for group B strep , you’ll probably need to go to the hospital right away, since there’s a risk of infection.

Try an at-home facial

If your complexion needs a boost, or if you're just trying to pass the time while you wait for your baby's arrival, treat yourself to an at-home facial mask .

One simple method is to take a cup of plain yogurt and add a few key ingredients according to your skin type: avocado and honey for dry skin, strawberries and lemon juice for oily skin .

For maximum benefit, steam your face for five minutes before applying, and leave the mixture on for 20 minutes.

If you're in need of a quick exfoliating scrub, add warm water to some oatmeal until it forms a paste, then massage the mix into your skin. Rinse, and voila! — skin as soft as your baby's.

Eating during labor

Research has shown that women who are allowed eating privileges have shorter labors — up to 16 minutes shorter.

After all, labor lives up to its name — it's hard work, and hard work requires fuel. Laboring on empty can make it tough to summon up the strength for those last pushes .

After all, labor lives up to its name — it's hard work, and hard work requires fuel. Laboring on empty can make it tough to summon up the strength for those

If your practitioner gives you the go-ahead to eat during labor , think small, and if your health care team has suggestions, try to stick with them. In general, light snacks can keep your energy up and liquids will keep you hydrated.

Stick with broth, toast with jam, plain pasta, ice pops, sorbet, applesauce, or Jell-O.

Take a nap

Take it easy! Your body is working overtime to support the full-grown baby in your tummy. Nap whenever you can and let others help you with chores.

Lightning crotch is a thing

Feeling pains that shoot from your vagina down your legs? Don't worry, that's just "lightning crotch," which is possibly caused by your baby pressing on pelvic nerves.

Feeling pains that shoot from your vagina down your legs? Don't worry, that's just "

," which is possibly caused by your baby pressing on pelvic nerves.

The good news is that it isn’t dangerous, nor is it a sign that there’s a problem. There’s not always much you can do for relief, but you can try changing positions to get baby off your nerves (literally), by sitting down if you’re standing up, or standing up if you’re sitting down.

Wearing a belly support garment can also help lighten the load on your pelvis.

Snack away

With your uterus crowding your insides, you may find your appetite waning . Try to eat regular, small snacks , like a bite of a banana with almond butter, or hummus and whole wheat crackers, instead of big meals.

Expect electronic fetal monitoring during labor

Chances are, your baby is eager to enter the world — and will sail right through with few, if any, problems. But after nine months of floating peacefully inside your uterus, some babies don’t take to the tight squeeze through the pelvis.

If there’s a change in your baby’s heart rate during labor — a rapid acceleration or a slowed-down movement — you’ll likely be hooked up to an electronic fetal monitor so your doctors can continue to monitor how your baby is handling childbirth.

And your practitioner may decide to hook you up to a fetal monitor beforehand too, in the days and weeks leading up to (or after) your due date, to see how things are going in there.