4 Common Myths About Chickenpox

by Thomas Clark, M.D. | May 4, 2023

chickenpox myths, little toddler girl and mom at doctor's office

Here are some myths about chickenpox, the truth behind them, and why the chickenpox vaccine is so important.

Being a parent isn’t easy. Worrying about how to keep children safe and healthy is something we all experience. When it comes to childhood vaccinations , here are a few common myths about chickenpox — and the truth about why the chickenpox vaccine is so important.

Myth #1: Some people think chickenpox isn’t that serious

Truth: Chickenpox can be very serious, and even life-threatening

Each year before the chickenpox vaccine was introduced, more than 4 million people, mostly children, got chickenpox. Chickenpox also caused more than 10,000 hospitalizations and up to 150 deaths.

During pregnancy, you have a higher chance of having a serious infection from chickenpox . An infection during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy can lead to birth defects known as congenital varicella syndrome.

Myth #2: Chickenpox is just a small problem affecting a kid

Truth: Chickenpox affects not just the person who is sick, but the entire family and community

Parents can miss work if their child has chickenpox, while siblings and friends can miss school if exposed.

Vaccines not only keep your child healthy, but they also keep others around them safe . This protection is especially important for people who cannot get vaccinated, or for whom vaccines might not work as well, such as those with a weakened immune system (i.e. the body’s lowered ability to fight germs and sickness).

Myth #3: Having chickenpox itself builds better immunity than the vaccine

Truth: Exposing a child who is not vaccinated to the chickenpox virus is not a safe and effective way to build immunity

Not only is there no way to know who will have a mild or serious case, but having chickenpox puts your child at risk of having shingles later in life.

Only by getting the chickenpox shot will your child be safely protected from chickenpox without the risk of serious complications of the disease or of shingles in the future.

Myth #4: The chickenpox vaccine can give you chickenpox

Truth: You cannot get chickenpox from the vaccine

The virus spreads through close contact with someone who has chickenpox. Some people may still get the disease after they have been vaccinated. However, for vaccinated people, the symptoms are usually milder with fewer or no blisters, and most have mild or no fever. The risk of getting chickenpox after two doses of the chickenpox vaccine is lower than after getting only one dose.

Talk to your doctor about getting your child the chickenpox vaccine to help protect your family and your community from this vaccine-preventable illness.

Learn more:

U.S. Chickenpox Vaccination Program | CDC

Chickenpox Vaccines for Children | CDC

Shingles (Herpes Zoster) | CDC