Developmental Differences Between Boys and Girls

boy girl differences, pink and blue blocks on yellow background

Are you wondering what to expect if you're expecting a son or daughter? Actually, sex differences aren't that significant — though a few start in the womb and continue through childhood.

The difference between boys and girls is pretty obvious when it comes to anatomy. But what about developing gross motor skills , talking and meeting other major milestones?

As it turns out, in many areas the disparities between the two sexes are actually pretty small. In fact, behavior and development have more to do with a child’s genetics and life experiences than they do with sex.

And, of course, every child is an individual who will grow and develop at his or her own pace. So, in order for your tot to reach his or her full potential, your cutie needs lots of attention and encouragement from the get-go.

Read on to learn about where (and how much) your child’s sex plays a role in development, from walking and talking to potty training .

Walking

When it comes to boys versus girls in the walking department, this one is a draw. Anecdotally, many parents say boys reach gross-motor milestones like sitting up, cruising and walking earlier than girls, but some pediatricians swear the opposite.

Yet both are wrong: Studies show no significant differences between boys and girls when it comes to these motor skills in infancy. Both sexes generally start walking independently after turning 1, often around month 14.

Still, some parents believe boys start sooner. One study found that mothers of 11-month-old infants overestimated their boys’ motor skills and underestimated their daughters’. This belief could be related to physical size since boys tend to be heavier than girls between 8 and 12 months.

How you can help

Build up your baby’s muscles by giving your little guy or gal plenty of tummy time in the early months — and making sure your tot doesn’t spend too much time confined to the stroller, car seat or play yard.

Physical size and growth

Right from the start, boys tend to weigh more at birth and this trend continues as babies age, with girls measuring about a half pound less. But girls catch right up as the toddler years approach.

Most of them reach half their adult height by 19 months of age . Boys, on the other hand, achieve this size when they’re closer to 2 years old.

Of course, each child is different, from infancy to toddlerhood to puberty. Growth spurts vary, and in general, both boys and girls spend middle childhood about the same size.

When adolescence begins, girls typically start outpacing their brethren. In middle school, girls are usually taller, though males catch up and typically measure taller than some girls in a year or two.

How you can help

No matter your child’s weight or height, make a point of offering healthy meals and snacks as often as you can. Focus on fruits, veggies, whole grains, lean protein and low-fat dairy products, depending on your child’s age, current weight and health status.

Your pediatrician can offer important nutrition and allergy guidelines .

Talking

One milestone that consistently differs between boys and girls is talking . Some research has found that sons are more likely to be late talkers and that girl babies tend to have larger vocabularies than boy babies as early as 18 months.

But sex only explains a small part of the differences in toddlers’ verbal skills. Other socioeconomic factors and opportunities also influence how soon they talk.

Exposure to language and a child’s environment can make a huge difference in the number of words they learn — and science backs this up. Research has found an association between larger vocabularies by the age of 4 and the number and variety of words kids heard during the first three years of life.

How you can help

Talk, talk and talk some more! Parents should narrate the day, sing songs and read to their babies consistently, whether they’re girls or boys.

Studies have shown that reading to your child helps him or her achieve strong language skills well into their school years. Avoid screens (including TV, phones, computers and tablets) as much as possible — except for video chatting with family and friends.

Potty training

If you’re wondering when the diaper stage will end, expect it to happen sooner with daughters than sons. Girls usually ditch their diapers faster.

While most girls start toilet training anytime from 22 to 30 months, boys can take approximately six months longer. But a child’s desire and ability to potty train varies widely, so it’s helpful to try and spot the signs of readiness.

For example, girls can often sleep through the night without having a bowel movement around 22 months of age , while boys often do so by 25 months. And when it comes to pulling up underwear or training pants, girls usually master it by 29 months versus 33 months for boys.

How you can help

Even if your little boy takes more time to get the hang of potty training, bring out the potty around his second birthday and just let him have fun with it. Set it up and let your tot sit in it, both with clothes and without.

Offer loads of praise (or something tangible like stickers) when success comes, but be patient when those inevitable accidents occur.