40 Hilarious Halloween Jokes That Will Tickle Your Toddler's Funny Bone

halloween jokes, jack-o'-lanternon a yellow background

Little ones will go batty over these Halloween jokes for kids.

You've scoured the internet for the best family Halloween costumes , mapped out a safe trick-or-treating route and done more fall activities with your kids than you can count. What now? Make the most candy-licious holiday of all even more entertaining with funny fall jokes that'll make your family scream with glee!

Whether your at-home audience prefers Halloween dad jokes, cute pumpkin jokes or knock-knock jokes, we've rounded up some of the best for even the littlest ears. Make no bones about it — the skeleton jokes will crack them up and the ghost jokes are hauntingly good. No matter witch kind they prefer, these Halloween jokes for kids will have everyone cackling! (Vampire teeth smiles are recommended, but not required.)

Halloween knock-knock jokes

Knock, knock. Who's there? Olive. Olive who? Olive Halloween so much!

Knock, knock. Who's there? Sadie. Sadie who? Sadie magic words and I'll give you some candy.

Knock, knock. Who's there? Fangs. Fangs who? Fangs you for opening the door. I was going batty out here.

Knock, knock. Who's there? Emma. Emma who? Emma 'fraid of the dark. Let me in!

Knock, knock. Who's there? Disguise. Disguise who? Disguise costume is perfect for trick-or-treating.

Knock, knock. Who's there? Interrupting ghost. Interrupting gho– BOO!

Halloween dad jokes

Is that a seed falling out of the jack-o'-lantern's nose? No, it's snot.

Why did the vampire go to the doctor? He couldn't stop coffin.

How did the zombie get her hair to stay curly? She used a lot of scare-spray.

Why did the werewolf raise his hand in class? He was paw-sitive that he knew the answer.

Why did the scarecrow skip dinner? He was already so stuffed.

What kind of music does a mummy love the most? Wrapping.

How can you tell a spider is bored? They start climbing the walls.

Pumpkin jokes

What did the pumpkin say when asked if it wanted a haircut? No thanks, it's vine.

Why was the jack-o'-lantern so strong? He had been pumpkin iron at the gym for months.

What do you call the biggest pumpkin in the patch? A plumpkin.

What do you call a pumpkin who works security? An armored gourd.

Why was the jack-o'-lantern so sad? He felt hollow inside.

Why was everyone staring at the pumpkin? It was absolutely gourd-geous.

Ghost jokes

What do you call a tiny ghost's paper cut? A little boo's boo-boo.

Why did the ghost pick her nose? Because she had a boo-ger.

How did the ghost get caught lying? Because his mom saw right through him.

Why are ghosts so good at playing the organ? They can read sheet music.

How do you know one ghost really likes another ghost? He calls her his ghoul-friend.

What is a ghost's favorite dessert? I scream.

Skeleton jokes

What is a skeleton's favorite kind of art? Skull-ptures

Why do skeletons use so much lotion? Their hands are always bone dry.

How did I know the skeleton was a detective? He kept spine on me.

Why was the skeleton so bored? He had no body to play with.

What did the skeleton say to the person he was mad at? I have a bone to pick with you!

Why did the skeleton tell so many jokes? She loved ribbing on people.

What's a skeleton's favorite movie? Jaws.

What's a skeleton's favorite pasta? Elbow macaroni.

Why didn't the skeleton take any chances? She didn't have the guts.

More funny Halloween jokes

What does a vampire like to do in the winter? Give frostbites.

Why did the wizard fall over? He had a dizzy spell.

Why did the zombie ask for help? He had a grave problem.

What do witches eat for breakfast? Bagels with scream cheese.

Why did the zombie go to the butcher? She was craving spare ribs.

Why did the vampire get put in time out? He was being a pain in the neck.

Your Next Read

50 Hilarious Fall Jokes That Will Crack Up Your Kids Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

45 Hilarious Thanksgiving Jokes to Tell at the Dinner Table Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Thanksgiving Crafts to Inspire Gratitude in Your Kids Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Diwali Activities to Get Your Kids in on This Fun-Filled Celebration Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Great Goodie Bag Ideas for Toddlers and Preschoolers That Aren't Junk Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Halloween Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your New Boo Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Toddler Dinner Ideas Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Toddler Afraid of the Dark? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

10 Funny Pregnancy Announcements That Are Sure to Amuse Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

8 Walking Safety Tips for Toddlers to Keep Spills and Hazards at Bay Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

15 of Your Biggest Toddler Birthday Party Questions — Answered Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Common Toddler Sleep Problems and What to Do About Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Toddler Nightmares Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Quotes About Twins and Multiples — From Laugh-Out-Loud Funny to Super Sweet Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window