40 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a small pumpkin.

Now that you're 40 weeks pregnant, you're still technically in month 9 of pregnancy (even if it feels like longer).

Your little one is fully prepped for life outside the womb, with all systems (including organs and reflexes) a go.

You're in good company if you've passed your due date: About 1 in 3 pregnancies will hit the 41-week mark!

Your Baby at Week 40

At a Glance

Dry skin alert

Since your baby has already shed most of her vernix, the waxy coating that acted as a moisturizer, some dry spots may appear on the skin.

Past your due date?

If baby hasn't arrived this week, you're in good company: An estimated 30% of pregnancies proceed past the 40-week mark.

Talk to baby

Be sure that you and your partner talk to your little bundle a lot after baby makes her grand entrance. She'll likely recognize the sound of your voices!

40 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 40 weeks pregnant, you're in month 9 of your pregnancy. It's almost time! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 40 weeks?

Right now, your baby probably weighs anywhere from 6 to 9 pounds and measures between 19 and 22 inches — though tons of perfectly healthy babies are born smaller or bigger.

The end of pregnancy

At 40 weeks pregnant, you’re at the official end of your pregnancy. You, or actually the placenta , are still providing the antibodies she'll need to fight off infections for the first six months of her life.

But if you plan on breastfeeding, your milk will provide more antibodies to boost the immune system — especially colostrum , a thin, yellowish precursor to breast milk that's super rich in antibodies and feeds your baby for the first few days postpartum.

Meeting your baby

The first thing you're likely to look for when your new arrival makes that dramatic — and possibly fashionably late — entrance: proof positive that your baby is actually a boy or a girl.

That major mystery solved once and for all, you'll also notice that baby, besides being cute as can be, is wearing a little leftover travel dust consisting of blood, vernix, lanugo, and amniotic fluid.

From your baby's perspective, you'll look a bit blurry — at birth, babies' central vision is still developing — but that's okay. Just be sure to say hello to your new arrival, since your baby will very likely recognize the sound of your voice and your partner's.

Your newborn may love being swaddled

You'll notice your little one is still curled in the fetal position, although her arms and legs may flail a bit. That's because after nine months in such cramped quarters, it'll take a while before your baby realizes she has room to spread out.

And because it's the only position she has really known, it's a comforting one to be in. That's also why so many newborns (though not all!) like to be swaddled — it reminds them of your uterus.

Your Body at Week 40

Will you go past your due date?

When will your body know it's time to deliver this baby? Just because your due date is marked with pen on your practitioner's chart and red marker on your calendar doesn't mean that Mother Nature's gotten the memo.

About 30% of all pregnancies last longer than 40 weeks, and it's anyone's guess when yours might end. Thankfully, your practitioner probably won't let it go longer than 41 weeks.

When (and if) your water will break

One event that's not guaranteed before the onset of labor is your water breaking — the rupture of the amniotic sac surrounding your baby the last nine months.

By now, you've no doubt lost a night or two's sleep over when and where it will happen. You've probably heard or seen horror stories about an inconvenient — no, make that humiliating — time and place where someone's water broke, like in the middle of a busy sidewalk at lunch hour or at a jam-packed mall on a Saturday morning. But your reality show will probably be a little different.

First, fewer than 15% of women experience a rupture of the membranes before labor begins, and second, if your water does break in public, it's less likely to come as a torrential tidal wave and more likely to come as a slow leak, trickle, or small gush.

One thing you can be pretty sure of if your water breaks before your contractions have started: Labor will likely begin in earnest within 24 hours. Either that or your practitioner will start it for you within 24 hours.

How can you tell if your amniotic sac has ruptured? Amniotic fluid is usually colorless and odorless. If you notice fluid that looks yellowish and smells of ammonia, you're probably leaking urine. Another test: You can try to stem the flow of the fluid by squeezing your pelvic muscles (Kegel exercises). If the flow stops, it's urine. If it doesn't, it's amniotic fluid.

If your water breaks and the fluid is green or brown, be sure to call your practitioner right away. It could mean that your baby has had a bowel movement ( meconium ) in utero.

Labor fears

Many women share an unfounded fear of not being able to actually birth their baby . It does seem implausible that something so big — a 6- or 7-plus-pound watermelon — could squeeze through such a little space, but that's exactly what happens most of the time.

Mother Nature knows the drill, and the majority of newborns are pretty well-matched to the size of their moms.

And your vagina knows what to do too — it stretches considerably during childbirth and then, miraculously, tightens up again. You can help that process along by doing your Kegels faithfully both before and after you deliver. Even your baby knows what to do — by molding that still-pliable head to fit through that tight squeeze. So don't worry!

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 40

Insomnia

As tempting as it is to try herbal supplements or other over-the-counter sleep aids, don't. Instead, ask your partner for a relaxing massage.

Diarrhea

Your bowels take a beating during pregnancy — and it seems as if they go from sluggish to loose. This week, loose bowel movements may be a sign that your labor is imminent.

Braxton Hicks contractions

Wondering if those contractions you're feeling this week are the practice Braxton Hicks contractions or the real thing? If they don't increase in frequency or severity, or if they subside when you walk around or change position, they're probably just practice contractions.

Pelvic pain

If your baby has dropped this week, the uncomfortable feeling in your pelvis may be traced to a certain someone's little head bumping up against your hips and bladder. If you have the time, schedule a massage with a certified prenatal massage therapist; it'll soothe the discomfort.

Leg cramps

While no one really knows what causes those painful spasms in your legs, it’s a good bet that carrying around all that pregnancy weight — especially this week! — is a pain in the legs. When a spasm hits, gently flexing your ankle and toes back toward your shin can help.

Cervical dilation or effacement

Although you won’t feel your cervix opening or thinning out, it is probably happening this week. Dilation is measured in centimeters and effacement in percentages; after an internal exam, your practitioner will probably give you the measurements. The cervix will continue to dilate and efface through early and active labor.

Changes in fetal activity

Even though your baby’s movements may have changed or even slowed down a bit, she still should be moving around in there. How much movement is normal? You should be able to count about 10 flutters, wiggles, or rolls in an hour or two, though it can vary. Your regular kick counts can help you get to know what's normal for your baby.

Nesting instinct

Changes in energy levels are pretty common this week. Maybe you've been hit by the nesting instinct or maybe you just have an urge to slump in front of the TV and veg out. Don't worry — both are completely normal, as is alternating between the two states.

Tips for You This Week

Ask about inducing labor

Talk to your health care provider about when, why, and how you might be induced . Unless there are health or medical reasons to induce, it's not typically recommended before week 39 or 40 of pregnancy. Many doctors induce around week 41.

Home births can be safe for those with low-risk pregnancies, but if you need to be induced — or if you or your baby need more medical assistance — you may need to go to a hospital after all.

can be safe for those with low-risk pregnancies, but if you need to be induced — or if you or your baby need more medical assistance — you may need to go to a hospital after all.

If you do want a home birth, talk to your practitioner about when you might need to be transferred to a medical setting, and how the delivery will proceed from there.

Shave safely

Feeling a little extra furry these days? Shave those legs with caution — and a lot of nick-protecting shaving gel — since a), your balance may be off, and b), you probably can't see beyond your belly.

Feeling a little extra furry these days?

with caution — and a lot of nick-protecting shaving gel — since a), your balance may be off, and b), you probably can't see beyond your belly.

Make sure the razor you use isn't brand new or super sharp, so you'll be less likely to draw blood.

A definite no-no: shaving in the shower, where a slip-up could be serious.

Think about hydrotherapy

Like hypnobirthing and massage, hydrotherapy is a complementary or alternative pain reliever that’s used to relieve pregnancy aches and pains and can also come in handy during labor.

is a complementary or alternative pain reliever that’s used to relieve pregnancy aches and pains and can also come in handy during labor.

When you start having contractions , you may want to soak in a warm bath or shower, or have warm or cold compresses placed on your lower back or pelvis. Or you may choose to labor in an actual tub and let the warm water soften your contractions.

Once it’s time to start pushing, however, you’ll want to climb out of the bath. Babies born underwater are at risk of several potentially serious complications.

Do a mini workout

Don't have the energy for a full sweat session? Try a mini workout instead.

Turn from side to side, slowly twisting at the waist, letting your arms swing freely. You can also clench your butt and hold for a count of two, then release.

Try doing 15 or 20 arm swings and butt clenches — it'll make the time pass and tone your muscles in the process.

Know what to expect during labor

Try to stay relaxed and comfortable, know those signs of labor, and don't be shy about asking your coach for whatever you need to stay that way, whether it's a back rub, ice chips, or a washcloth to cool your face.

Remember, your partner or coach is going to have a hard time anticipating your needs — especially if this is your first go-around with labor and delivery.

When your contractions become too strong for you to talk through them, you'll start your breathing exercises, if you're using them.

In between contractions, try to change positions . Staff at the hospital will be on hand to time your contractions and monitor the baby's position and progress.

If you get an epidural , you'll be hooked up to an IV to maintain your fluids after it’s administered and potentially a continuous fetal monitor.

Unless you have a walking epidural, you may not be able to move your legs very much, but try to change positions regularly if you can.

Try to relax when it's go-time

Of course you're as excited and nervous as can be, but it's important to try to relax as much as you can during the first phase of labor — you'll need to save your strength for later on.

— you'll need to save your strength for later on.

If it's nighttime, do what you can to get some sleep, since you won’t be able to when your contractions become more insistent.

If it's daytime, keep yourself busy. Try taking a walk, which might even kick up the contractions a notch. Just don't stray too far from home, and don't go anywhere without a phone.

Don't worry about obsessively timing contractions at this point — you may just get frustrated if you try — but do check periodically to see whether they're getting closer together. Most people head to the hospital as the first phase of labor ends and the second phase begins.