41 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a pumpkin.

Get ready: At 41 weeks, you're due any day now (and your original due date may well have been a little off).

The upside? Your baby will arrive a little more alert — and with longer fingernails!

You've likely spoken with your practititioner about labor induction , but stay tuned for contractions or other signs that labor is near.

Your Baby at Week 41

At a Glance

Baby manicure

Your baby’s nails will definitely need a manicure and pedicure with a pair of baby nail clippers or nail file after birth. By now, they’ve grown well past his fingertips.

You're not overdue yet!

Don’t worry, your baby is not considered overdue until 42 weeks gestation. Fewer than 5% of babies arrive on their due date.

Heart check

Your baby’s heartbeat will likely be monitored this week through nonstress tests. His heart rate should quicken each time he moves.

41 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 41 weeks pregnant, you're in month 9 of your pregnancy. It's almost time! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 41 weeks?

At 41 weeks, your baby measures between 19 and 22 inches — about the size of a pumpkin!

Overdue baby?

It seems like your baby has opted for a late checkout, quite a popular option judging by the numbers. Fewer than 5% of babies are born on their actual due dates — and around 10% decide to overstay their welcome in Hotel Uterus.

Remember, too, that most of the time an overdue baby isn't overdue at all — it's just that the due date was miscalculated. That's okay — there's still work to be done at 41 weeks pregnant.

Why fetal stress hormones can be good

Gearing up for the big day is your baby's endocrine system, which is responsible for hormone production. Researchers theorize that baby actually sends some chemical signals (aka hormones) to the placenta to help trigger labor to begin — as in: "Get me out of here, Mom!"

Other hormones are standing by too. During childbirth, your baby will produce more stress hormones than any other time in his life. And you thought you were stressed out now!

But those hormones will actually help your baby adjust rapidly to life outside the womb and help all those survival instincts kick in as he becomes untethered from the placenta that has provided support for the past nine months.

Baby's first breath

Another big milestone ahead for your baby will be taking that first breath of air. In fact, the first breath at birth requires considerably more effort than any breath your baby will ever take again. That's because the tiny air sacs in the lungs need to be inflated for the first time so that they expand to fully do their job of breathing for a lifetime.

Your Body at Week 41

Ready, set, go!

Meanwhile, your body is as ready for birth as it will ever be. By the time you're 41 weeks pregnant, your practitioner has probably discussed labor induction with you, but that doesn't mean that you won't still go into labor on your own; some babies just need to take their time.

But here's the question you keep asking yourself: Will you know labor when you feel it?

Labor contractions

Chances are, you'll know it. But just in case you don't, here's a quick primer. Your water may break (though it may not) and you may notice pink- or red-tinged mucus, aka bloody show , just before labor begins.

Then you'll feel labor contractions — rhythmical waves of hardening and softening of your uterus — which can come on quickly and suddenly for some women, and slowly and steadily for others. Typically, though not always, they start out further apart and then get progressively closer together.

Your first true contractions might feel like menstrual cramps or a low backache. Many times, the pain will begin in your back and radiate toward your front.

But just as no two pregnancies are the same, no two labors are the same. And though there are such things as textbook labors, many break a surprising number of rules.

If you're feeling contractions but aren't sure they're the real thing, call your practitioner and describe them. It's likely that your doctor or midwife will be able to tell by the sound of your voice and a good description of your symptoms whether you're in labor.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 41

More frequent urination

Now that your baby has dropped down into your pelvis toward the birth canal — with his head most likely right on your bladder — you may be feeling more of an urge to pee than ever before. Or you may even start leaking when you cough or sneeze. Continue to do Kegel exercises to strengthen those pelvic floor muscles, and consider wearing a panty liner to stay dry in the meantime.

Diarrhea

Starting to get the runs? It’s very common to experience diarrhea or even nausea shortly before you go into labor. That’s because your muscles, including those in your intestines and rectum, are loosening in preparation for childbirth.

Pelvic pain

No doubt you're feeling heaviness and stress in the pelvic region now that your baby has dropped down toward the birth canal. To ease the pressure, try to relax by lying down with your hips elevated.

Hemorrhoids

If the bulging veins in your rectum are causing you pain — thanks in large part to the increased blood flow to your pelvic area and the pressure your uterus is putting on your rectum — try soaking in a warm sitz bath for 15 to 20 minutes to soothe your aching bum. And don’t forget to ask your practitioner before using any medication for hemorrhoids.

Bloody show

You may notice a pink- or brown-tinged mucus discharge in your underpants or the toilet. The passage of this mucus means that blood vessels in the cervix are rupturing as it’s beginning to open up in preparation for labor, which could be today or several days from now.

Nesting instinct

If you can’t seem to find the oomph to get off the couch these days, that’s understandable — after all, your late load is weighing you down. On the other hand, you may notice a sudden burst of energy now and then. If you’ve felt an immediate urge to, say, organize the nursery closet, that’s the nesting instinct kicking into high gear, which is nature’s way of helping you to prepare for your impending arrival.

Changes in fetal activity

Many babies have a change in activity in utero at this late stage in the game, mainly because they become too cramped in the uterus to keep up all those kicks and pokes. After all, they’re at their full size and weight now. You should still feel rolls, flutters, and twists every day though. If there’s a sudden decrease in movement, give your doctor a call right away or head to the nearest emergency room or maternity ward.

Cervical dilation or effacement

During an internal exam, your practitioner will probably tell you how much your cervix is dilated (opened) and effaced (thinned). This opening and thinning of the cervix mean that it’s getting ready to make way for baby. For some women, dilation and effacement are very gradual — over weeks — and for others, they can happen overnight.

Tips for You This Week

Overdue? Don't stress

You've passed 40 weeks, but that doesn't necessarily mean you're overdue . In fact, an estimated 70% of post-term pregnancies aren't actually late at all, but a miscalculation of the date of conception and, as a result, the due date.

. In fact, an estimated 70% of post-term pregnancies aren't actually late at all, but a miscalculation of the date of conception and, as a result, the due date.

Try doing some meditation or deep breathing, which can help lower your cortisol levels while also boosting your endorphins (the “feel-good” chemicals in your brain that can improve your mood).

You might lose some weight

If you've reached the end of pregnancy, you've also pretty much reached the end of pregnancy weight gain . At 41 weeks, the numbers on the scale may not be going anywhere — or may even be going down.

. At 41 weeks, the numbers on the scale may not be going anywhere — or may even be going down.

This slowdown (or standstill) is actually one way that your body gets ready for labor — a sign that all systems are gearing up for the big event.

Your body is busily ridding itself of fluid it won't need once its baby-making factory shuts down, which includes a drop in amniotic fluid as well as an increase in pee (and possibly poop).

You may also be losing weight because you’re sweating more — a habit that will pick up in the weeks after delivery. The first postpartum week, especially, will be a very damp one as your body steps up the sweat production to flush out all the fluid that’s accumulated over the past nine months.

Think about an epidural

About 2 in 3 women who deliver at a hospital opt for an epidural during labor and delivery. A mainstay of pregnancy pain relief, epidurals are numbing agents that can combine analgesics (pain relievers without the loss of muscle movement) with anesthetics (pain relief with a loss of sensation).

and delivery. A mainstay of pregnancy pain relief, epidurals are numbing agents that can combine analgesics (pain relievers without the loss of muscle movement) with anesthetics (pain relief with a loss of sensation).

Usually, an epidural can be given as soon as you ask for it (and an anesthesiologist arrives to give you one), but because the shot will have to be given between contractions, it’s a good idea to ask for it relatively early in the labor process.

Sample some labor-inducing foods

Now that your due date has come and gone, you're probably willing to do or eat anything to get to that million-dollar prize (your baby) more quickly. Unfortunately, at least as far as medical science is concerned, there is no miracle meal that will bring on labor.

In the category of "can't hurt, might help" are foods such as eggplant, balsamic vinegar, and anything spicy. While there's no proof that any of these have labor-inducing qualities , plenty of people swear by them.

In the category of "can't hurt, might help" are foods such as eggplant, balsamic vinegar, and anything spicy. While there's no proof that any of these have

If your stomach can take the heat (late-pregnancy heartburn can be a killer!), there's no harm in trying, as long as the so-called magic foods don't crowd out healthy choices in your diet.

Ask for ice chips

There’s a reason ice chips have long been a staple on the delivery-room menu — you’re allowed to have them during labor even if your practitioner has instituted an eating ban.

Bonus: You may also find they’re easier to stomach than a glass of water of fruit juice once you’re in the throes of labor .

Minimize backaches in bed

A firm mattress can do wonders for an aching back . If yours is on the softer side, try getting help placing a board under your side of the bed for the rest of your pregnancy.

. If yours is on the softer side, try getting help placing a board under your side of the bed for the rest of your pregnancy.

Using a pregnancy pillow or a body pillow that’s at least 5 feet long — which can take the ache out of certain sleep positions — can also help you get comfy at night.

Take it easy while you wait

You’re likely chomping at the bit now that your due date has come and gone. But be good to yourself. Rest and relax as much as possible. Get out for some fresh air and exercise every day if you can, but don’t push yourself too much — or worry too much, either.

As long as you’re in close contact with your doctor and have a plan in case your little one needs a little nudge out into the world, all is fine. Pretty soon, you’ll be looking back on these days of freedom wistfully. So get in as much “me time” as you can now.