42 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a watermelon.

Whew, week 42 is here — and this really is the end of your pregnancy.

Your baby will probably get some extra monitoring in advance of your late-comer's debut.

Meanwhile, your doctor may recommend inducing labor to get the process moving along — and your little one (finally!) in your arms.

Your Baby at Week 42

At a Glance

Helping labor along

To induce labor, your doctor may use a drug called Pitocin, which is safe for you and baby and helps start contractions.

Time to be induced?

Since there's a chance your placenta may not provide as much oxygen and nutrients to your baby, your doctor might recommend inducing labor to be safe.

Checking up on baby

Though most babies continue to thrive well past week 40, your doctor will continue to monitor baby with a biophysical profile: an ultrasound to assess the baby, plus a nonstress test.

42 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 42 weeks pregnant, you're in month 9 of your pregnancy. It's almost time! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 42 weeks?

At the 42-week mark, your watermelon-sized baby is measuring around 19 to 22 inches and 7 and 9 pounds.

Baby will be monitored

Although it's perfectly normal for a baby to arrive past the due date , you and your baby will get some extra attention this week. To be sure all is well, your practitioner will likely monitor your overdue baby with tests like nonstress tests or ultrasounds.

When this late-comer finally makes a debut, chances are baby's skin will be dry, cracked, peeling, or wrinkled — all completely temporary. That's because the protective vernix was shed weeks ago in anticipation of a delivery date that came and went.

A tardy baby will also have longer nails, possibly longer hair, and little or none of that baby fuzz (lanugo). She’ll also be more alert: “Hi, Mommy!”

Late delivery

Well, the due date's come and gone … two weeks ago. You're still as pregnant as ever — make that more pregnant than ever — and your baby is still happily ensconced in that uterine home.

At 42 weeks pregnant, you're not alone in your frustration, and neither is your baby when it comes to tardiness.

Most babies have their own timetables for delivery; fewer than 5% are actually born on their due date. Many babies continue to thrive well past week 40, though you may have lost that "thriving" feeling long ago — but just to be sure, your practitioner is likely to monitor your baby through nonstress tests and biophysical profiles .

There's one thing for sure: Whenever your baby chooses to arrive, you'll be meeting that little bundle of joy with open arms. Happy cuddling!

Your Body at Week 42

Take heart

While you may feel as if this pregnancy has been going on forever, studies show that an estimated 70% of post-term pregnancies aren't post-term at all.

The frustrating mix-up is typically due to a miscalculation of the date of conception , usually thanks to irregular ovulation or a mom's uncertainty about the exact date of the last menstrual period.

Even if you do end up among the approximately 2% of women who are truly overdue, know that before this week is over, labor will begin naturally — or when your practitioner induces it .

Of course, you're probably sick of everyone calling to see if you've had the baby yet. But here's something to focus on as you wait: By this time next week, you'll be snuggling with your newborn.

Past your due date?

Okay, after all those weeks of preparation, do you sort of have that hurry-up-and-wait feeling? At 42 weeks pregnant, you know why they call you an expectant mother — and why now, in your 42nd long, long week, you may be calling yourself an overexpectant mother.

Don't be discouraged — and don't call the folks at Guinness to put yourself down as the longest pregnancy on record. It may be helpful to keep in mind that your estimated due date was just that — estimated.

So even though your baby seems to be overdue, there's a chance your dates, and not your baby, are just a little off the mark, especially if you didn't have an early ultrasound (before week 14) to date your pregnancy.

So hang in there and continue to watch for signs of impending labor — or get ready for an impending induction if your practitioner goes that route.

One prelabor sign to look for may be loose bowel movements. Some women experience mild diarrhea just prior to the onset of labor. Think of it as nature's enema — a way to empty your intestines to make room for the baby's passage through the birth canal.

Here's a happier thought: By this time next week, you'll have a brand new beautiful baby to cuddle in your arms and keep you up at night. Good luck!

Postpartum doula

Once the baby comes home, a new mom can expect to be exhausted and overwhelmed. (So can a new dad, by the way.) Who do you call? A certified postpartum doula !

A doula will provide care for you and your baby, including breastfeeding advice, cooking, child care, errands, and light cleaning. This miracle worker will teach and support you and your partner without judgment — and a doula won't laugh at your beginner attempts at swaddling .

Such a pregnancy and postpartum helper knows all about emotional and physical recovery, infant soothing, coping skills, feeding, diapering — anything and everything that eases the tricky transition into parenthood.

The best way to find a postpartum doula is through word of mouth, so ask your pediatrician and your friends or check with DONA International .

Keep in mind that most doulas charge an hourly rate, so you can be flexible about when and how often your pregnancy companion comes to help. A few hours a day for the first couple of weeks might mean the difference between a mommy and a zombie.

Learn more about what to ask a doula before you hire one .

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 42

Insomnia

It’s very possible that anxiety and discomfort are making it hard for you to get enough shut-eye lately — and then there’s the urge to pee every five minutes throughout the night. Consider talking to your partner before bed or writing down your worries so that you can rest easier emotionally. Then do what you can to make your bedroom as comfortable as possible — for instance, open a window to prevent stuffiness or use a body pillow for extra support.

Diarrhea

Abdominal discomfort and diarrhea may be signs that labor is imminent; intestinal muscles relax before childbirth. Drink plenty of fluids to stay hydrated, and eat lightly to keep up your strength.

More frequent Braxton Hicks contractions

At this late stage in the game, you’ll likely be feeling more frequent Braxton Hicks contractions — aka “practice” contractions that make your uterus feel hard — as your body gets ready for labor. If you start to notice a regular pattern to the contractions, they may be the real thing.

Edema (swelling in feet and ankles)

Your bodily fluids are at their peak volume, and you may be at your most immobile. That extra weight and discomfort can bring on even more swelling in your feet and ankles. But don’t forget to drink plenty of water to keep fluids circulating through your system, and try to sit or lie down with your feet elevated to prevent fluid from pooling there.

Leaky breasts

Many women find that toward the end of pregnancy, they begin to leak colostrum from their nipples — a thin, yellowish fluid that is the precursor to mature breast milk. If you're uncomfortable or wet, wear nursing pads in your bra.

Bloody show

As your cervix opens up in preparation for labor, you may see a pink or brown discharge. This is perfectly normal and means that labor could happen within the next several days — but if the discharge is heavy (more than 2 tablespoons or so) or is bright red, call your practitioner as soon as you can since this bleeding could be a sign of placenta previa or placental abruption.

Water breaking

If you feel a gush, or even a steady trickle, of clear, odorless fluid, your amniotic sac has probably broken, allowing amniotic fluid to leak out. Let your practitioner know and follow the instructions on labor and delivery. Even though only about 15% of women experience their water breaking before labor begins, you may be giving birth soon.

Cervical dilation or effacement

Your practitioner has probably told you how dilated (open) and effaced (thinned out) your cervix is as it prepares for your baby to pass through the birth canal. While there's nothing you can do to speed it up, if your practitioner feels there is a need to induce your labor, there are medications that can move the process along.

Tips for You This Week

Talk to your practitioner about inducing

Baby is now officially late. Since your uterus is likely becoming less hospitable, if you don't go into labor on your own, your practitioner will likely schedule you to be induced sometime this week.

Baby is now officially late. Since your uterus is likely becoming less hospitable, if you don't go into labor on your own, your practitioner will likely

During an induction, your doctor can use a topical hormone to ripen your cervix, which allows baby to enter the birth canal, or jump-start your contractions by breaking your water or administering Pitocin .

Time your contractions

Monitor and take notes on your contractions . If they're strong, last at least 45 seconds, and are coming more often than every five minutes, call the doctor! Baby could well be on the way.

. If they're strong, last at least 45 seconds, and are coming more often than every five minutes, call the doctor! Baby could well be on the way.

If you’re having regular contractions , but you aren’t sure if you’re in real labor, call your practitioner anyway — it’s best to err on the side of caution.

Expect some tests

Now that you’ve passed your due date, your doctor will likely want to check your baby’s heart rate, size, and position.

You may receive a nonstress test , which monitors the fetal heart rate, or a biophysical profile , an ultrasound test that monitors fetal breathing, movement, and tone, as well as the amount of amniotic fluid surrounding your baby.

Note any bowel changes

Believe it or not, diarrhea is one of the early signs of labor — it's your body's way of clearing out the area. Track your bowel movements with an app, try to stay hydrated with plenty of fluids, and eat lightly (think: chicken broth and toast with jam or fruit).

— it's your body's way of clearing out the area. Track your bowel movements with an app, try to stay hydrated with plenty of fluids, and eat lightly (think: chicken broth and toast with jam or fruit).

Try to keep your head up, even if you can’t keep the toilet lid down. Diarrhea is just another short-lived symptom that means your baby will be here very soon.

Massage your perineum

Minimize the "sting" of birth with perineal massage (but get your practitioner's okay first).

Here's how: Insert clean, lubricated thumbs into your vagina. Press down and slide across your perineum (the area between your vagina and rectum) and back continuously for five minutes. Repeat daily.

Second time in labor? Good news

This isn't your first labor? Second and subsequent labors and deliveries are usually — though not always — easier and shorter. Hooray!

At this point, you're about as overdue as you can get. One thing you aren’t, though, is alone. About 5 in 100 pregnancies are “post-term” and extend beyond 42 weeks.

as you can get. One thing you aren’t, though, is alone. About 5 in 100 pregnancies are “post-term” and extend beyond 42 weeks.

Stay in touch with your practitioner, who will take into account the results of any tests you’ve had lately (nonstress, biophysical profile) to come up with a plan. Get ready: Your little bundle is almost here!