45 Hilarious Thanksgiving Jokes to Tell at the Dinner Table

thanksgiving jokes, young girl wearing silly turkey themed sunglasses

We're cooking up some big laughs for your little kids!

Late November is the perfect time for gathering family and friends around a table for a delicious meal, great conversation and gratitude for time spent together. Make it even more memorable by serving some of the funniest Thanksgiving jokes for kids in between courses! We're stuffing this list with the baste of the baste in turkey jokes, corny Thanksgiving dad jokes and football jokes everyone will get a kick out of (punt intended).

Whether you want to distract curious relatives from a baby bump you're not ready to reveal or keep the kids entertained while serving dessert , the funny Thanksgiving jokes below are sure to bring out the giggles. Need a few more? Check out our fall jokes and Halloween jokes for kids that they'll gobble right up. Enjoy!

Thanksgiving dad jokes

How does a spice rack welcome visitors on Thanksgiving? With seasoning's greetings.

What's the best-smelling thing at a Thanksgiving dinner? Your nose.

How did the potato get to Thanksgiving dinner? It took the gravy train.

What do you call a rainstorm on Thanksgiving? Fowl weather.

What do you call a can of cranberry sauce rolling away? Fast food.

What do you call a bowl of cranberry sauce falling off the table? A flying saucer.

Which purple vegetable should we serve at Thanksgiving? Beets me.

When does New Year's Eve come before Thanksgiving? In the dictionary.

When is a cranberry not a cranberry? When it's a blueberry.

What should you never pick at the Thanksgiving dinner table? Your nose.

What did the orange potato say to the red potato? I yam what I yam.

Turkey jokes

What should you do if you don't know any Thanksgiving jokes? Just wing it.

What instrument do turkeys play? Percussion, because they already have drumsticks.

Why was the turkey in time out? He used fowl language.

Why are turkeys so bad at baseball? They'll do anything to avoid first baste.

Which side of a turkey has the most feathers? The outside.

What kind of key doesn't fit in your pocket? A turkey.

How does a turkey know she's getting a call? Her phone starts winging.

Why did the turkey cross the road? To prove he wasn't chicken.

What's the difference between chickens and turkeys? Chickens look forward to Thanksgiving.

What did the Grandpa say when Mom caught him eating a second helping of leftovers? "Sorry, but I just can't quit cold turkey."

Football jokes

Which bug never makes the cut at football tryouts? The fumble-bee.

Where do football players go to replace their uniforms? New Jersey.

What kind of penalties do dogs get playing football? Unnecessary ruff-ness.

Why did the pumpkin turn the football game off? He'd rather be watching squash.

Why did the football coach go to the bank? He needed his quarterback.

Why was Cinderella's team so bad at football? Her coach was a pumpkin.

Which candy bar do football coaches not let their players have? Butterfingers.

Why do ghosts make the best cheerleaders? They have a lot of team spirit.

Why was the football laughing at the punter? It got a kick out of him.

How do football players say, "No thank you?" "I'll pass."

What are football players' favorite beauty products? Face masks.

How do you cool off a football player? Let them stand closer to the fans.

Why did the football look so bummed out? It was feeling deflated.

How did the receiver say goodbye to the football? Catch you later.

More funny Thanksgiving jokes

Knock, knock. Who's there? Arthur. Arthur who? Arthur any leftovers? I'm still hungry!

Knock, knock. Who's there? Norma Lee. Norma Lee who? Norma Lee I don't eat this much, but everything is so yummy.

Knock, knock . Who's there? Venice. Venice who? Venice it time for dessert?

Why were the potatoes blushing? They accidentally saw the turkey dressing.

Why was the side dish so expensive? It was 24 carrots.

What is a scarecrow's favorite Thanksgiving dessert? Straw-berry pie.

Why was the apple pie crying? Its peelings were hurt.

How do you know the pumpkin bread isn't feeling well? It looks crummy.

What did the baby corn say to the mommy corn? Where's popcorn?

What is the very best thing to put into a pie? Your teeth.

Your Next Read

40 Hilarious Halloween Jokes That Will Tickle Your Toddler's Funny Bone Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

50 Hilarious Fall Jokes That Will Crack Up Your Kids Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Thanksgiving Crafts to Inspire Gratitude in Your Kids Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Best Thanksgiving Movies to Watch With the Fam Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Thanksgiving Pregnancy Announcements That All Parents-to-Be Will Fall For Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Toddler Dinner Ideas Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

10 Funny Pregnancy Announcements That Are Sure to Amuse Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

11 Fall Pregnancy Announcements That Are Pure Autumnal Bliss Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window