5 Best Formula Dispensers That You Can Safely Stash in Your Diaper Bag

best formula dispensers

Quick Summary

The best formula dispenser is the Phillips AVENT Powder Formula Dispenser, according to testers in the What to Expect community. When choosing a formula dispenser, parents say to look for ones that are portable and easy to use and clean.

Formula powder usually comes in bulky containers that aren’t easy to use on the go, and it’s not uncommon for catastrophe to strike when prying the lid off. In fact, I can confirm that sweeping up spilled formula powder off the kitchen floor in the middle of the night is a literal nightmare. That’s where baby formula dispensers come in.

Typically, these are containers that allow you to pre-portion out formula powder, so all you have to do is pour it into a bottle , add water and voila — happy, fed baby. Many of them easily fit into a diaper bag for on-the-go convenience. They’re most often used for traveling, but you can easily keep them in the kitchen or baby’s room for quick nighttime feedings. Whatever way you decide to use it, finding the best formula dispenser for you is one way to make feedings a little bit simpler.

How We Chose the Best Formula Dispensers

The best formula dispensers are easy to use and clean and convenient to bring with you outside of the house. That being said, each dispenser is a little different from the rest. In order to help you find the best option for your family, we utilized feedback from What to Expect staff and the parent community to find what features are most important in a formula dispenser. Based on this information, we ensured that all the dispensers selected met the following criteria:

Portability: Any formula dispenser you choose should be designed to be easily transported. Most importantly, it should seal tightly to avoid powder from spilling out into your diaper bag. You’ll also want to consider how much space the container will take up and whether or not the weight of the container will be cumbersome.

Easy to use: There are two main dispenser styles: cup or tripod. The former requires turning the cup over to shake out the formula, while the latter allows for gravity to go to work by dispensing the formula into your baby’s bottle. Some dispensers require a lot of shaking to get all of the formula out, which can be tedious when you’re in a rush or half-sleeping through a middle-of-the-night feeding. Look for dispensers with smooth edges so that the formula is less likely to get stuck when you pour it out.

Easy to clean: It’s super handy to be able to throw your formula dispenser into the dishwasher to clean, but some have multiple parts that must be hand-washed, so be sure to check whether or not this is the case when you’re shopping. You should also look out for small corners or crevices where the formula can get stuck and sticky, which might require some extra scrubbing.

Each of the formula dispensers on this list has received overwhelmingly positive reviews from What to Expect staff and community members for this criteria.

Best Overall Formula Dispenser

Philips AVENT Powder Formula Dispenser

Affordable

Long-lasting

Dishwasher-safe

Rotating cap can be hard to turn

Capacity: Holds formula for up to three 9-ounce feeds

Size: ‎4 x 5 x 7 inches

Why We Love It

This Avent formula dispenser is one of the best basic dispensers available. It’s one of the highest-rated picks on many retail sites and was an absolute diaper bag staple with my own babies. In fact, I had three — one that I kept on the kitchen counter for middle-of-the-night feedings, one that I kept in the diaper bag and one that lived at grandma’s house. After my kids outgrew the formula stage, the dispensers held up great through years of toddler and preschooler snacking.

The only small complaint some parents noted is that the rotating cap on top can be difficult to turn at times, but this was not my experience. When it’s time to clean, just remove the interior compartment and put it in the dishwasher. For sterilizing and snacking, it’s also microwave-safe. Overall, it’s easy to refill, use on the go and clean, making it an all-around workhorse of a baby accessory with no frills or special skills required.

Community Reviews

TLeedesma “I recently got this to try and I love it so much I’m going to order a couple more to use for extended outings and one to use overnight so it saves time. I just pre-fill bottles with water and then measure out 3 bottles of formula in the container, the lid slides around so only one section is open at a time. It’s so easy to pour over into the bottle with no mess!! The part that separates the formula into 3 separate bottles comes out as well so once they are older you can use it as a snack cup.

ImZsMama “The [Avent] formula dispensers are fantastic and were such a lifesaver when I [flew] from nyc to fl and any time we are at my parents or out for a few hours.”

Best Travel Formula Dispenser

Tommee Tippee Closer to Nature Baby Bottle Formula Dispensers

Takes up no extra space

Easy to pour

No small parts so easy to hand-wash

Single-serving only

Not dishwasher-safe

Capacity: Holds up to 8 scoops of formula per dispenser

Size: n/a

Why We Love It

These individual formula dispensers are designed to be stored inside of the 9-ounce Tommee Tippee bottles, which makes them super convenient for traveling. When it’s time to feed, just unscrew the top, pour the formula through the no-mess funneled top and add water. Even if you aren’t using Tommee Tippee brand bottles, the convenience of having one small container of pre-measured formula on hand makes these a top pick for traveling parents to have on hand. Sold in a set of six, you may need to throw more than one in your diaper bag if you are out and about for a while, but they’re small and don’t take up much space.

Community Reviews

“I use the Tommee Tippee formula dispensers to pre-measure the formula that I need. I also put the water that I’ll need in the individual bottles. (The water is boiled Brita water.) I throw an ice pack in with the bottles :) I just bought a bigger insulated water bottle so I can pour more water in there and forgo the ice pack on hot days.”

“Love that these nest inside the bottle even with water. Definitely saves space in the bag!”

“We have the tommee tippee formula containers which are little individual containers and just have those measured out with the amount we need and it’s quicker especially when she’s fussy waiting to warm up premade bottles.”

Best Stackable Formula Dispenser

Accmor Baby Milk Powder Formula Dispenser

Easy to pour

Space-saving design

Includes two sets

Formula powder can make the twist top sticky

Capacity: Holds 3 servings of approximately 2 ounces of powder each

Size: ‎3.2 x 3.2 x 7.1 inches

Why We Love It

This stackable formula dispenser had an overwhelming number of positive reviews from parents on the What to Expect community. They love how easy this convenient item is to use, thanks to the funnel-shaped top on each level. Sold in packs of two, each dispenser has three stacked levels for storing one bottle’s worth of formula powder. Best of all, they make fantastic snack containers for holding puffs, cereal and other small items on the go once baby starts on solids. As for potential drawbacks, some parents say that the powder can gunk up the interlocking areas, making them stick together on occasion. However, it wasn’t a widely-reported problem, and thorough cleaning after each use should help.

Community Reviews

“When we go places we bring a thermos with warm water (she’s picky and only likes it warm) empty bottle and we got a stackable container for pre measured formula from Amazon. Makes it so easy! Has a funnel attached to the top and everything!”

“These are the best at nights.”

“We use these and I really like them. So much better than the 3 compartment thing (which I never could get all of the formula out of any compartment).”

Best Large Formula Dispenser

Termichy Portable Formula Dispenser Container

Holds a large supply of formula

Includes travel strap

Airtight seal

Must use a scoop

Capacity: 250 grams inner capactiy, servings for six 8-ounce bottles

Size: 4.72 x 3.27 x 3.94 inches

Why We Love It

Whether you’re taking a day trip, going on a long-haul flight or you simply want to have plenty of formula on-hand at all times in case of emergencies, this large-capacity formula dispenser is a great option. It has a sleek design with a flat top, plus an interior silicone ring and locking buckle closure so that powder won’t spill out inside your diaper bag. The internal reservoir holds enough powdered formula to make six 8-ounce bottles. Though it’s not sectioned off like other formula dispensers, there is a spot inside the lid to hold a scoop. However, some parents note that the included scoop does not match the size of the one that comes with their baby’s formula, so that’s something to be aware of if you decide to purchase.

Community Reviews

kurso2 “I got the super nice formula dispenser to keep in the diaper bag for when baby is at the sitter or when we go somewhere. I love it and anyone who has used it for her says how cool it is. I provided the link and a couple pictures. It’s so much better than the other thing I had that you shake the formula out. It comes in pink and blue.”

kenelyse “We’ve had it from day one - it’s super nice and comes in white as well (that’s the one we have). HOWEVER, the formula scoop is not the same size as the scoop that comes with a can of formula. We took that scoop out and just keep a regular scoop in it. It doesn’t fit in the scoop tray so it sits inside the formula but better to have a proper measurement.”

Best Tripod Formula Dispenser

Boon Tripod Baby Formula Dispenser

Easy to pour

Fits directly into narrow neck bottles

Dishwasher-safe

Some worry caps could fall off in diaper bag

Capacity: Holds formula for up to three 8-ounce bottles

Size: 3.68 x 3.68 x 4.58 inches

Why We Love It

For another type of dispenser that many parents love, you can try this Boon tripod option . Instead of tipping the container over, you simply line up one of the legs and let the contents pour out right into a bottle. Many parents report that the shape makes it easy to get all of the formula powder out, and there are no crevices for it to get stuck in. Although the shape is sort of awkward, many report that it’s easy to toss in your bag and takes up little room. And despite some parents’ worries that the caps will come loose in their diaper bag, they make a snap sound when locked in place so you know that they’re on correctly.

Community Reviews

lalalalalalala “Boon Tripod is fantastic for transporting servings of formula to make on the go. It’s much easier to use and get all the powder out than the standard dispenser style .

Our Research

I applied my own experience using formula dispensers as a parent of two who formula-fed both babies.

We also canvassed the What to Expect community boards to learn which formula dispensers parents liked best and found the most convenient for on-the-go feedings.

Best Formula Dispensers

Are formula dispensers worth it?

If you’re feeding your baby powdered formula, a formula dispenser is a convenient accessory to have on hand. As someone who formula-fed both of my babies, I can personally say that a formula dispenser is a must-have for your diaper bag. We didn’t really use ours at home, but anytime we were out and about, our trusty formula dispenser came along for the ride. Unless you want to lug around a giant can of formula powder, you’ll want to have a formula dispenser.

How long can you keep formula in a dispenser?

Powdered baby formula should generally be used within 30 days once it has been opened. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends formula be stored in a cool, dry place with the lid tightly closed. You should follow the same guidelines when using a formula dispenser, and be sure to check the manufacturer's guidelines for any additional storage recommendations to maintain freshness.

WhatToExpect.com, How Long Is Formula Good For? , June 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics, How to Prepare and Store Powdered Formula , June 2023. American Academy of Pediatrics, How to Safely Prepare Baby Formula With Water , May 2022. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Infant Formula Preparation and Storage , May 2023.

Your Next Read

Best Bottles for Preemie Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Best Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

How Long Is Formula Good For? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Formula-Feeding Your Baby? Here’s What You Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Homemade Baby Formula Isn't Safe Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 7 Best Baby Nasal Aspirators for Stuffy Little Noses Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Your Ultimate Guide to Traveling While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Supplementing With Formula (Combo Feeding) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Protect Your Formula-Fed Baby From Cronobacter Medically Reviewed by Florencia Segura, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Should You Buy European Baby Formula During the Formula Shortage? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window