5 Easy Ways to Tell Your Newborn Twin Babies Apart

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

ways to tell newborn twin babies apart, twin babies' in different colored onesies

Feel like you're seeing double? These simple tips will help you identify your adorable duo from the get-go.

You've been looking forward to your twins' debut and now the precious bundles are here. But wait, who's who?

It can be tricky at first for you to tell your two newborns apart. After all, you don't yet know each baby's personality or other traits that may distinguish one from the other. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsExpert Tips on Parenting MultiplesSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsExpert Tips on Parenting MultiplesSee All Sources

As you become more familiar with your amazing duo, don't worry — that will change. In the meantime, here's how to tell your newborn twin babies apart and what to do to avoid confusing them with each other.

Key Takeaways

To tell your newborn twins apart, try some quick ID tricks. For example, you might dress each twin in distinct colors or patterns, or use tiny markings like toenail polish.

Spotting physical differences can help too. Look for subtle distinctions such as birthmarks or head shape, and jot them down to remember during those sleep-deprived early days.

Spend one-on-one time with each baby to notice unique personalities and behaviors — over time, their differences will make identification second nature.

Dress your babies in different colors

Once your little ones come home from the hospital and the hospital ID bracelets come off, try dressing each twin in different colors.

Some parents outfit one twin in warm colors (pinks, reds, oranges, yellows, and browns) and the other in cool colors (purples, blues, greens, and grays). Or you could dress one twin in patterns and the other in solids. You can also label their diapers (one can be "A" and the other "B") so you know which twin is which.

"I have identical boys, and we always keep baby A in blue and baby B in whatever other color we have," says What to Expect Community parent losdouglases.

Whatever you choose, having a system in place will give you a quick visual cue. Trusted SourceTwins MagazineWho%u2019s Who? Foolproof strategies for telling identical twins apartSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceTwins MagazineWho%u2019s Who? Foolproof strategies for telling identical twins apartSee All Sources

Try toenail polish

A tiny marking on one toenail may be all you need to keep your twins straight. When your newborns' adorable tootsies are all bundled up, just slip off the appropriate sock and you'll be all set.

"I used the nail polish trick," says What to Expect Community member Pebbles1313. "Their bottles were the same color as their nail polish, and one had pink-based outfits, the other had purple-based."

Photograph them consistently

You'll take so many photos of your cutie pies. Those first yawns and smiles — all the little and big things your babies will do every day will amaze you.

For those less spontaneous, posed snaps, it can be helpful to always place one twin on the left and the other on the right. That way, you don't have to mark each image to identify who's who.

Want more tips from parents of multiples? Open the What to Expect app for a detailed guide to parenting twins and multiples, plus connect with moms who have been there.

Memorize their physical differences

While identical twins generally look very similar, certain characteristics — the shape of the head or the facial features, for example — can be ever-so-slightly unique. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursParenting MultiplesSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursParenting MultiplesSee All Sources

Notice any birthmarks, freckles, or moles on one or the other baby? Those can help too. Don't hesitate to write down the traits you notice in a baby book. You'd be surprised at how easy it is to forget which ones belong to which baby (hello, lack of sleep!).

"One of mine has an ear tag, which is our main way of telling them apart," says What to Expect Community user Robyn2201. "Her head is also slightly more round. But there are definitely times when I just glance over at them and I get them mixed up."

Get to know each twin's personality

At first you may notice different types of physical movements, mannerisms, and facial expressions. Over time, you'll pick up on so much more. One twin may be outgoing and always on the move, while the other may be more reserved and sensitive.

To get better acquainted, carve out one-on-one parent-and-me time with each of your babies. Skin-on-skin contact when they're newborns can begin to build natural bonds. If they're in the neonatal intensive care unit , use the opportunity to help with changing, feeding, and bathing each twin separately — before you're adjusting to life at home with them.

Once you and your babies come home, keep up the amazing work. While you'll be eager to get your twins on a similar schedule , you can still find sweet moments to read to one while your partner reads to the other, or alternate bath nights.

And while twins love to spend time together, getting out of the house with one twin and leaving the other with your partner, a family member, or a babysitter also gives you an opportunity to focus all your attention on each baby separately.

As your babies get older and their different personalities begin to shine through, you can hone in on doing what each twin loves to do, whether it's going to the park, aquarium, or beach. Before you know it, you'll soon realize it's not difficult at all to tell your two children apart.