These shower games and trivia templates will be winners among your guests. Grab a pencil, and get ready to play.

Are you throwing a baby shower or in charge of putting together some fun baby shower games ? Organized games are a great way for guests to get to know each other and have some fun with the mom-to-be.

The good thing about printable baby shower games is that they're a snap to prepare, and they're really budget-friendly, too. All you need is a printer, enough copies for all of the guests (plus a few extras, just in case) and some pencils or pens to jot down answers. If you're really getting fancy, providing small prizes for the winners, such as gift cards, candles or mini bottles of wine, will amp up the competition — but that definitely isn't necessary.

These five printable baby shower games test your mom-to-be IQ, your celebrity baby know-how, your creativity and more. Have fun with it!

1. How Well Do You Know Mom?

Test guests on how well they know the mom-to-be with this open-ended quiz. (Ask the guest of honor to supply answers ahead of time for easy scoring!)

how well do you know mom printable baby shower game

2. The Celebrity Baby Name Game

Match these notable baby names with their A-list moms.

celebrity baby name game printable baby shower game

3. The Price Is Right

For this game show-inspired activity, generate an answer key ahead of time by recording a recent price for ten common baby items . Then tally up the total. At the shower, have guests or an assigned scorer add up their guesses. Whoever has the closest number without going over wins.

the price is right printable baby shower game

4. Guess Who

This game's great for coed baby showers where both parents plan to attend. Ahead of the shower, ask the couple to fill out their predictions. Then see if their friends and family agree!

guess who printable baby shower game

5. Baby Mad Libs

This game requires one double-sided page or two sheets of paper per person, but it's a great choice for an ice breaker or a slightly longer activity that'll keep guests entertained.

Ask each attendee to fill out the numbered list first, Mad Libs-style. Then, have them pop their answers into the fill-in-the-blanks and read their nonsense baby advice aloud. Optional: Have guests vote on their favorite story, and award a small prize to the winner!

mad libs baby shower game 2

mad libs baby shower game 1

What to Expect When You're Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, 20 Fun Baby Shower Games , December 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Baby Registry Checklist: Exactly What to Put on a Baby Registry , April 2023. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a Baby Shower , December 2023.