How to Handle a Strong-Willed Toddler

strong-willed toddler crossing her arms

If your stubborn toddler refuses to get in her car seat, take medicine or go to bed on time, she clearly has no interest in being told what to do (and what toddler does?). But like it or not, she's going to give in at some point — here's how to get her on board.

We've all seen it: A grim-faced parent trying to buckle a howling toddler into a car seat, or the stubborn tot who wildly protests any attempts to get her into a restaurant booster chair. If these situations sound a little too familiar, you too may have a strong-willed toddler on your hands.

The good (or at least reassuring) news is this behavior is a common part of toddler development. However, you may need to get a bit creative when it's time to lay down the law. Here's how to get your tot to follow the rules without quashing her growing sense of independence.

Signs of a strong-willed toddler

You may have already figured out that you have a strong-willed toddler. (They tend to make themselves known!) But here are some of the classic signs to look out for:

Asking why. Your toddler's curiosity may seem insatiable, or it may even serve a stalling technique. "Because I said so" or "I don't know" just doesn't cut it for her.

Testing the limits. Does your toddler view rules as challenges to surmount? Have selective hearing when it comes to anything she doesn't agree with? Or maybe she just has a talent for pushing your buttons?

Putting up power struggles. Strong-willed toddlers know what they want, and they're often too stubborn to give up. The problem is they don't necessarily know what's good for them. Cue the fights about buckling up in the car seat and taking medicine when they're sick. They also have fewer qualms about bossing around their peers or parents to achieve their goals.

Figuring things out the hard way. No matter how often you explain the safe or efficient way of doing something, your toddler seems to do the opposite. How do you deal with a very stubborn toddler who insists on doing it the hard way, whether it's touching a hot stove to find out if it's hot or resisting potty training ?

Refusing to comply. When your toddler digs her heels in a losing battle or quickly jumps from frustration to a full-blown tantrum, you may find yourself at loose ends with how to deal with her.

Why is my child so strong-willed?

Being strong-willed or stubborn is a common part of toddlerhood. Toddlers are very curious and want to explore the physics of their world. They're in the process of testing the limits: of their environment, their parents and themselves. Coupled with this adventurous drive are developing (and sometimes insufficient) communication and physical skills, which can ramp up the frustration.

How to deal with a stubborn toddler

Figuring out how to get through to a stubborn child involves both long-term parenting strategies and some creative problem-solving in the moment. Over time, most kids do grow more independent and mature. But until then, they're still toddlers, so expect at least some shenanigans.

Offer safe choices

Giving your strong-willed toddler choices gives her a sense of empowerment and control over her life. Of course, you get to manufacture the choices so that the end goal is still the same. Ask your tot if she wants to hold her stuffy while you buckle her in or after you buckle her in. She's still getting buckled in that car seat either way, but she got to have a say.

If taking medicine becomes a frequent struggle, you could keep a supply of different delivery methods (cup, spoon, dropper) and different flavors (bubblegum, cherry, berry) on hand. Allow your toddler to pick the delivery method or medicine color.

Give her age-appropriate tasks

Harness your toddler's independent spirit by encouraging her to participate in age-appropriate chores and self-care such as picking out clothes, dressing herself, folding washcloths or helping clean up. And encourage curiosity within reason: Rude or unsafe behavior still isn't okay.

Be consistent

Consistently reinforce good behavior with praise: when she shares her favorite toy with a friend, cleans up her blocks or gets dressed by herself. Make being a good (house) citizen the most exciting news of the day. You can even try making a sticker chart for some extra positive reinforcement .

Likewise, you'll need to enforce the house rules consistently with the same consequences. Splashing all of the bathwater out the tub, for example, might mean an early bedtime.

Just remember that at this age, toddlers are still learning about the connection between actions and consequences. Patience, repetition and calm but firm enforcement of the rules of the road will help your toddler learn the boundaries and routines of her daily life. While she may test these boundaries, the consistency provides a sense of safety and security.

Create a distraction

Novelty works wonders when your child is unhappy, whether she's in a stroller, grocery cart or high chair .

If your stubborn toddler won't quiet down at the supermarket, hand her a magazine from a rack near the cashier. It may engage her long enough for you to finish your errand. Or offer her something new to eat — it's a lot harder to scream when chewing on some animal crackers. The cashier will happily ring it up even if the box is half demolished.

What if you're dealing with a tantrum in a restaurant from your high chair-bound tot? Pass her packets of sugar to play with, a mini bottle of ketchup or a toy you've stashed in the diaper bag — anything to occupy her hands and mind.

Provide motivation

Reserve certain beloved toys, snacks or treats for those times when your tot simply must sit still. Just remember the strategy: Dangle the bait first, then reel 'em in. If you wait till your stubborn toddler is already hysterical in the car seat, handing over a baggie filled with Goldfish will get you exactly nothing (except, maybe, those same Goldfish flung at the back of your head).

So, show your toddler the bait (a beloved juice box or Elmo), and entice her into the car or stroller with it. Or tell her she can have it when she's buckled in — she may settle down in order to get it.

Even without offering a physical reward, you can motivate your toddler by making it a game: "Let's race to see who can get our shoes on and to the car first!"

Invent a rule

For example, tell your toddler that the car won't start unless she's buckled up. If you're on your way to a playdate, the park or someplace else your kid really wants to go, this just might work.

Your toddler puts up a fight getting into the car? "Uh oh. The car is broken. The only way we can fix it is if we all fasten our seat belts!" If your toddler really wants to get moving, she'll oblige. Keep in mind that this won't always work, especially if you need to get somewhere fast, but it's worth a shot.

Grin and bear it

If all else fails, simply suffer through it. Yes, it's horrible to drive with a screaming kid in the back of the car. But it happens to every parent sometimes, so try to roll with it. Put your window down, turn on some music and try to ignore your noisy passenger.

What about when you're on a crowded airplane and your stubborn toddler's howls of protest won't quit, despite all of your tactics? Consider it a venerable rite of parental passage, and know that for every scowling fellow traveler, there are at least three sympathetic people who've been there before. Eventually the plane will land, your kid will tire out or the nice lady across the aisle will make a funny face that will somehow break the spell.