5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

things you can do while pregnant, pregnant mom on sofa

You may be all too familiar with the long list of no-no's during pregnancy, but you might be surprised by some of the things you can (and in some cases, should) still do.

Sorry, Mama, you'll have to shelve the skis, miss out on the margaritas, and say sayonara to sushi for the next nine months. But before you feel too deprived, remember that with all of those don'ts come a whole lot of do's — some of which you might not expect.

Look no further than these suggestions, which are completely pregnancy-friendly and just might help you weather the wait for your wee one.

Key Takeaways

Not everything is a no-go. You can definitely enjoy (in moderation) some of the pre-pregnancy things you loved, like a good cup of coffee and a prenatal yoga class.

Low-impact exercise is good for you. Keep it light and easy when working out and you'll reap the rewards, like less stress, fewer aches, and a body ready for labor.

Treat yo' self! You don't have to toss out the pampering while pregnant. A prenatal massage, mani-pedi, or facial for moms-to-be are part of the self-care you deserve.

Keep sipping that cup of coffee

You may have thought your beloved espresso was a no-go just when you needed it most. ( Pregnancy can leave you exhausted , for sure). But the most recent recommendation by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) is that moderate amounts of caffeine should be safe for moms-to-be to drink. Their suggested serving size: Less than 200 milligrams a day.

As far as your mug of choice goes, keep in mind that the average 8-ounce cup of coffee is about 95 milligrams of caffeine, while tea is around 47 milligrams, soft drinks are around 33 to 44 milligrams for a 12- or 16-ounce can or bottle, and hot cocoa is 8 to 12 milligrams. So while you shouldn't chug caffeinated drinks all day long, you can still enjoy a cup or two of your favorite pick-me-up while you're pregnant.

"I cut my caffeine intake to one cup a day," says What to Expect Community parent addi285, who's normally a five-cup-a-day gal.

Get moving

Pregnancy doesn't come with a handwritten note getting you out of gym class for nine months. In fact, exercise during pregnancy helps reduce some of the most unpleasant symptoms, like backaches, constipation, bloating, and swelling.

Plus, it improves posture, muscle tone, and endurance (something you'll definitely need during labor and delivery).

Low-intensity options like walking, swimming, biking, and prenatal yoga or dance classes will give you all the benefits (and still seem doable once pregnancy fatigue sets in). If you were a runner before you were expecting, you can usually keep at it, though you should talk to your doc about adjusting your routine.

No matter what exercise you choose, stay hydrated, wear a super-supportive bra, and listen to your body: If you're feeling faint, overheated, or in pain, stop.

Want more self-care ideas or safe exercise options during pregnancy? The What to Expect app has you covered with expert info and smart tips.

Say yes to sex

You may not be in the mood much, or you may be especially hot to trot (both ends of the spectrum are normal). But sex while expecting is usually especially enjoyable. For one thing, all that extra blood flow can pump up your pelvic region. And many mamas-to-be find it liberating to be free of the stress of actively trying to prevent a baby — or creating one.

If you or your partner are concerned sex isn't safe for your baby, relax: Your peanut is totally protected by the amniotic sac.

Maintain a meat-free diet

For all of the foods that are off-limits while you're expecting, there are just as many that should be on your pregnancy menu. So while iron-rich meats are recommended for moms-to-be, it's perfectly all right to pass on the burgers and stick to a healthy vegetarian diet during pregnancy .

Not only are you able to fill up on even more of the good-for-you food groups like fruit, veggies, and whole grains, but studies show that vegetarians tend to have lower cholesterol levels, blood pressure and rates of hypertension, and they are less likely to develop type 2 diabetes. Just be sure to find the iron your growing baby needs in other foods, like legumes, iron-fortified cereals, and prune juice.

Are you a meat-eater thinking of dipping your toes in vegetarian waters (especially after hearing all of those pros)? Try going meatless one or two days a week and substitute with other protein sources such as beans, nuts, and eggs.

Whether you're already a vegetarian or are considering cutting meat from your diet, you may need additional supplements such as vitamin B12, so consult with your doctor or a registered dietitian to make sure you're getting everything you and your growing baby need.

Indulge in a spa day

While spa treatments that raise body temperature such as seaweed wraps or saunas are a no-no, there are plenty of spa staples that are still on the table for moms-to-be. If pregnancy hormones are taking a toll on your skin, schedule a facial — just avoid abrasive treatments (like microdermabrasion) and anything that involves heat or chemicals.

Manis and pedis are fine too, but pre-screen the place to make sure it's well ventilated, make sure the tools and basins are sterilized (or bring your own), and ask them to use a pumice stone on calluses rather than anything with a sharp metal blade that could potentially cut you or lead to an infection.

And there's no doubt you'd welcome a prenatal massage . Check in with your doctor first, and choose a therapist trained in prenatal techniques. (Let the masseuse know you're pregnant if you're not yet showing.) They will likely have you lie on your side, not face-down or flat on your back — and then help work away those pregnancy aches and pains.