5 Things I Wish Other Moms Told Me About Postpartum Body Image

shattered pieces of gypsum sphere in a row on blue background

When my friend was around eight weeks postpartum , she posted to a local moms group: "Any tips on how to lose this weight?" My heart dropped a bit when I saw it. Not only had I been there (five times), but I grieved for her that we live in a world where we feel we have to get "back" to our old bodies right after giving birth.

In recent years, we've learned that the idea of "bouncing back" isn't really helpful to anyone, and that we're all moving forward with our new bodies, including stretch marks , extra belly skin and, for some, a few more pounds than before. We finally hear that it isn't a "good" or "bad" thing, but simply, postpartum.

Yet Millennial and Gen Z moms are still fighting decades of body shaming instilled in them from diet culture and glossy magazines of the '90s, not to mention Instagram scrolling in more recent years. Here's what I told my friend, and what I want all of the other moms struggling to accept their postpartum bodies to know.

At first, it makes sense.

Many women are shocked that they still look pregnant after giving birth, with their postpartum belly retaining that bowling ball-style bump after leaving the hospital. It seems we are a bit more forgiving of ourselves in those first few days. The miracle of birth is still fresh, and those oxytocin hormones are pumping love (and tears) all around.

To new moms, I'd say: Marvel at your postpartum body and at your baby — and how one grew and nurtured the other.

But then the newness wears off.

For me, irritation about my body kicked in around the time I stopped bleeding and resumed exercising a bit. Why did I still have so much fluff around my baby's former apartment? And would it be permanent? Moms who had C-sections often start to worry about their C-section "shelf," or the protruding skin below the scar .

To new moms, I'd say: This is not permanent. It feels permanent, but it most likely won't be. You still just gave birth — even if society thinks you are "healed" and past the "fourth trimester."

It gets tougher before it gets easier.

When I headed back to work around three months postpartum, I tried to squeeze back into my work pants, got angry, and pulled my maternity pants back on. I shook my head, frustrated, at how pregnant they made me look still. I scrolled for pants with tummy support, bought higher-rise underwear, and tried to tuck in the remains of my baby apartment. It wasn't cute or fresh anymore, and it seemed to be taking so long to "go back" to "normal."

To new moms, I'd say: Months three to 12-ish, especially if you're nursing, doesn't have much "bouncing back" to them. In fact, it feels like a long grind. You're expected to get dressed, do normal things and even look semi-put together some days, but you still feel uncomfortable in your new body. That's okay. Again, it's not permanent, even a year postpartum and beyond.

You might have to rethink your relationship with movement and food.

For me, when I wasn't growing a baby or recovering from birthing one, movement and food were all wrapped around looking better — slimmer, stronger, smaller. But, postpartum, my relationship with each of those changed. Now, I was trying to find enough protein to feel full as a breastfeeding mom. I was trying to swap some of the grab-and-go bars that were convenient for some prepared meat and vegetables. And, I was trying to nourish myself on no sleep, no shower and no stamina — not a small ask.

Embrace whatever made you feel great that day.

Similarly, movement might go from rigorous, heart-pounding pre-pregnancy workouts to an after-dinner walk through the neighborhood with your baby. The goal changes from muscle definition to simply moving. And maybe that's not always a bad thing.

To new moms, I'd say: Sometimes a rigorous workout is the opposite of what your already stressed body needs (especially on no sleep). And the last thing you need is to be massively restricting calories or obsessing about macros when you really just want a home-cooked meal that you don't have to microwave five times. Start with that.

Then suddenly, yet gradually, you come back to yourself.

How can something happen suddenly and gradually? Not sure. But that's exactly what it is. All of a sudden, you pass your reflection in a store window and go, "Damn, I look great." Or, you don't, but you realize it's been a few hours or days or months you've gone without self-criticizing, retucking your belly in or comparing yourself to others who have seemingly popped a baby out and carried on with their lives and hard-core workouts. It's gradual, but then it's sudden.

I didn't lose any weight — and I do mean any — until I stopped nursing , a super fun phenomenon my OB/GYN explained happens to around one in five women in her personal experience, though it obviously varies. If I knew this the first time, I'd have enjoyed my nursing years a bit more. I'd let my nursing baby grab on to my belly rolls with a little less self criticism.

To new moms I'd say: Dive all the way into those moments when you don't hate how your post-baby body looks or feels. Embrace whatever made you feel great that day. Maybe you worked some movement into your crazy schedule. Maybe you stopped trying to find jeans with a button that bothers your scar and found flattering pull-on pants instead. Maybe you remembered you like earrings and bought some fun new ones. Lean into those feelings and actions and away from "bouncing back" and the perfect body. You already have it — and a baby that came from it.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

On the Outside, I Looked Like a Happy New Mom. But I Was Breaking on the Inside — And My Camera Caught the Truth By Mariah Maddox

Losing the Baby Weight: The Truth About Postpartum Weight Loss Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Your Postpartum Belly: What Will Your Stomach Look Like After Giving Birth? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

What I Wish I Knew About Intrusive Thoughts as a New Parent Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

What I Wish Someone Told Me About Pelvic Floor Recovery Before I Gave Birth Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Postpartum Fitness Tips for New Moms Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

15 Moms Share What Breastfeeding Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

You Made It Through Birth — Now Comes the Beautiful, Bumpy Postpartum Ride (Aka The '4th Trimester') Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

13 Moms Share What Sex After Birth Feels Like Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

I Survived 3 Weddings Newly Postpartum. Here Are My Hacks to Actually Enjoy the Night By Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window