5 Tips for Traveling with Baby

Traveling with a baby can be tough. Here are some mom-tested tips for surviving - and even enjoying - the journey!

1. Ditch the Stroller

"Wearing baby keeps him calm and is easier to maneuver through crowds." --AdventureKate

2. Reserve an airplane bassinet.

"The bassinet makes all the difference in the world! It literally was our lifesaver!" -- AnoshkaMKhan

3. Dress for Success

"Dress baby in comfy fleece pajamas since it gets pretty cold on the plane. Pack a change of clothes for both of you in case of any mishaps during your travels." -- MamaDesperado

4. Avoid Earaches

"Have him suck on something (paci/bottle/breast) during take-off and landing." -- vr1

5. Be Good to Fellow Travelers

"My baby likes to yell, so I'm making a double-sided 'sorry!' sign to raise as needed." --Soudie

What to Read Next:

Hotel-Safety Smarts for Families

Your Next Read

13 Tips to Make Flying and Traveling With Twins Less Stressful Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

What to Pack When Traveling With Baby Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

11 Tips to Make Flying With a Toddler Go More Smoothly Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Smart Tips for Getting Your Baby to Sleep Anywhere (Yep, Even on Vacation) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Products You Can Take On a Plane By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

Soothing Sleep Across Time Zones? Learn How to Ease Jet Lag in Babies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Should You Bring Your Child’s Car Seat on an Airplane? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Ultimate Guide to Traveling While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

What to Do When Your Baby Hates the Car Seat, Bouncer or Stroller Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Every Mom Needs to Know Before Bringing a Baby to a Sporting Event Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

'Airplane Goodie Bags' Have Parents Divided Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Is It Safe for Babies to Sleep in Car Seats? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Reasons Your Baby Won't Sleep and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Soothe a Crying Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window