50 Vintage Baby Names That Are Making a Comeback

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

Vintage Baby Names Are Making A Comeback

Antique names like Rosemary and Hank will stand the test of time.

Picking a name for your baby-to-be is one of the biggest, most permanent decisions that moms and dads have to make on the journey to parenthood. Some expecting parents like to buck tradition when it comes to naming their new bundle of joy, coming up with uncommon monikers like Crispin or Reverie. Others take to trendy, hipster names that sound cool and feel very of-the-moment, like Axel, Presley, or Wyatt.

Still others find that relying on traditional names is a safe bet when it comes to choosing a baby name that will truly stand the test of time. But even these conventional options have been gaining popularity recently.

The U.S. government has taken notice by releasing a list of the top 1,000 names for boys and girls that have become much more common in the past few years. Trusted SourceSocial Security AdministrationTop 10 Baby Names of 2024See All Sources [1] Among the group are some vintage baby names that you might not have considered if you're currently scouring modern naming books and sites. A classic, old-fashioned baby name that was popular in decades past may strike the perfect balance between modern sensibilities and time-honored traditions.

Trusted SourceSocial Security AdministrationTop 10 Baby Names of 2024See All Sources

Eager to see what's making the rounds? Here are some of the top vintage baby names for boys and girls that are rising in the charts. Vintage baby names may not be right for everyone, but it's good to know which ones are making a comeback!

Vintage boy names

Ezra

Ezekiel

Jasper

Grant

Theo

Emerson

Ellis

Atticus

Edgar

Otto

Hank

Isaac

Leonard

Nathaniel

Otis

Raymond

Earl

Ralph

Harold

Howard

Paul

Leroy

Alfred

Eugene

Hugh

Vintage girl names

Charlotte

Scarlett

Cora

Clara

Rose

Margaret

Esther

Adaline

June

Ada

Ruth

Lucille

Miriam

Millie

Maeve

Felicity

Mabel

Rosemary

Edith

Beatrice

Dorothy

Coraline

Mildred

Doris

Edna

Still searching for the perfect name? Open the What to Expect app for even more name ideas for your little one, plus tips from parents who have navigated this big decision too.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Whitney Harris is a Texas-based writer and editor who has written for New York Family magazine , StrollerTraffic and Dallas Child . She enjoys running long distances, reading witty short stories and cooking meatless meals. Visit her at WhitneyHarris.com .

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

Sources

Top 10 Baby Names of 2024

Show in the article