6 Best Stroller Fans to Keep Little Ones Cool, According to a Mom of Three

Five portable stroller fans from right to left: one clipped on a stroller with a kid, one with three tripod legs, one bladeless model, one larger model, and one with foam blades

Quick Summary

The best stroller fan is the WiHoo Mini Handheld Stroller Fan , according to parents. It nails the trifecta of a long-lasting battery life, a flexible mounting system and an affordable price tag.

, according to parents. It nails the trifecta of a long-lasting battery life, a flexible mounting system and an affordable price tag.

Stroller walks — or just getting outside in general — provide physical and mental health benefits for both parent and baby. While keeping infants indoors on hot days is ideal, as a mom of three, I know that’s not always possible. I often had to bring my baby along to my older kids’ outings, like swim classes and park playdates. In those instances, I’d always bring a stroller fan (or sometimes two!) to keep my youngest cool and safe.

But even if you have a stroller fan at the ready, it’s important to keep an eye out for signs of overheating when temperatures start to soar later this year. Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P. , a board-certified pediatrician practicing at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California, warns that sweating, tiredness and clammy skin are all indicators of a heat-related illness.

How I Chose the Best Stroller Fans

Thanks to the wide selection of portable fans available — miniature clip-ons, bladeless styles and foam propellers — finding the right one for you and your baby (and stroller!) can be overwhelming. I narrowed down my top picks based on the following criteria:

Durability and ease of operation

Battery duration

Accessibility to a power supply

Price range and availability

I also spoke with Steven Abelowitz, M.D., F.A.A.P. , a board-certified pediatrician and medical director of Ocean Pediatrics in Orange County, California, to learn if stroller fans are actually helpful (spoiler alert: they are), what features to look for and other heat-protecting measures parents can take.

This still left me with dozens of very similar-looking choices, however, so I dug a little deeper into the What to Expect community to see which stroller fans parents were recommending and how effective they found them. I also relied on my personal experience with multiple brands as a longtime parenting editor and mom of three who lives in a city that can be unbearably hot in the summer months.

Best Overall Stroller Fan

Wihoo Mini Stroller Fan

Multiple color options

Rechargeable battery

Flexible mount

Top-heavy design

Mounting legs could be more durable

Dimensions: 4.2 x 3.5 x 11.2 inches

Power Source: Rechargeable 5,200 mAh battery (included)

Blade Type: Traditional

Mount Type: Flexible tripod

Battery Life: 6-15 hours, depending on operating speed

Fan Speeds: 3 speeds

Why We Love It

This portable fan continues to be a top-bought product each month among What to Expect parents. It receives high marks for its long-lasting battery life (between six to 15 hours on a full charge, depending on operating speed) and its flexible mounting system. Each tripod leg can be twisted and wrapped around a stroller handle for a snug fit or configured to be free-standing.

While the fan head remains in a fixed position (meaning it does not swivel or oscillate), it is small and lightweight enough to reposition as needed. Just make sure your baby can’t reach out and grab it — while the front fan slats are super narrow, little fingers might be able to fit through the back side.

Community Reviews

I have the city select and I’m thinking of getting this fan. I like the concept of those flexible arms to hold it on things.

“I was very surprised with how powerful it can get. It also is very sturdy.”

“We have two and use it for about 30 minutes every day with no issues.”

Best Clip-On Stroller Fan

SkyGenius Clip-On Mini Fan

Strong base clip for sturdy placement

360-degree fan head rotation

Comes with USB cord

Speed settings limited while fan charges

Loud

Dimensions: 7.48 x 5.9 x 3.94 inches

Power Source: Rechargeable 2,600 mAh battery (included)

Blade Type: Traditional

Mount Type: Clip-on

Battery Life: 2.5-6 hours

Fan Speeds: Multiple — adjustable by turning a dial

Why We Love It

As one of the larger fans on our list, the SkyGenius clip-on fan features a generously sized 6-inch wide fan enclosure and 360-degree rotation — vertically and horizontally — from the solid clip-on base. The included battery is rechargeable via USB cable (also included!), which can be plugged into a power source to operate the fan. With up to six hours of battery life available on a full charge, that’s more than enough time for a visit to the park.

Community Reviews

We got the SkyGenius on amazon… for our trip to Miami and it’s been great. Now we’ve only used it for a couple weeks so I can’t attest to longevity but so far we’ve been happy. It lasts most of the day and is easily charged at night and even keeps her cool while she naps in the stroller outside

As far as help with the heat get the sky genius stroller fan on Amazon. I'm also in Tx and it really helps with the heat.

“I just ordered a fan on Amazon since I live in a really hot place and even without the baby here I love using it! It has a chargeable battery too so no need to keep buying batteries.”

Best Foam Stroller Fan

Dreambaby EZY-Fit Clip-On Fan

Simple on/off switch

Soft foam blades

Single fan speed

Foam blades susceptible to breakage

Dimensions: 8.74 x 4.72 x 2.75 inches

Power Source: Two AA batteries (not included)

Blade Type: Bladeless

Mount Type: Clip-on

Battery Life: N/A

Fan Speeds: One

Why We Love It

Soft foam-bladed fans are a good option for parents who are concerned about injuries resulting from kids inadvertently putting themselves in contact with hard-bladed fans. The only downside is more limited airflow. The Dreambaby EZY-Fit Clip-On Fan is lightweight and utilitarian, featuring a wide and sturdy base clip as well as a flexible neck, allowing for more detailed positioning. Some parents might also appreciate that it’s AA battery-powered, so you don’t need to worry about charging it (just replacing the batteries when the time comes).

Soft foam-bladed fans are a good option for parents who are concerned about injuries resulting from kids inadvertently putting themselves in contact with hard-bladed fans. The only downside is more limited airflow. The

is lightweight and utilitarian, featuring a wide and sturdy base clip as well as a flexible neck, allowing for more detailed positioning. Some parents might also appreciate that it’s AA battery-powered, so you don’t need to worry about charging it (just replacing the batteries when the time comes).

Community Reviews

5oclocksomewhere I use a little clip on battery powered stroller fan. The blade part is just super soft foam. … It actually provides a good breeze. … Love it.

Best Bladeless Stroller Fan

Skip Hop Stroll & Connect Bladeless Stroller Fan

No blades

Ultra compact

Easy controls

Fan automatically turns off after an hour to save energy

Not as powerful as bladed counterparts

Dimensions: 3.75 inches x 3.58 inches x 5.71 inches

Power Source: USB/1 Lithium Ion battery (included)

Blade Type: Bladeless

Mount Type: Universal hub/Clip-on

Battery Life: 2-8 hours

Fan Speeds: Three

Why We Love It

If you’re worried about potential blade-related injuries, a bladeless fan may be the way to go. The Skip Hop Stroll & Connect Bladeless Stroller Fan not only looks as unobtrusive as a stroller fan can possibly look, its compact rectangular frame makes it easy to pack for traveling or to toss into a diaper bag. The universal hub mount makes it easy to attach to any part of the stroller without having to fumble around with a massive claw clip-type mount that I’ve found refuses to stay put.

If you’re worried about potential blade-related injuries, a bladeless fan may be the way to go. The

not only looks as unobtrusive as a stroller fan can possibly look, its compact rectangular frame makes it easy to pack for traveling or to toss into a diaper bag. The universal hub mount makes it easy to attach to any part of the stroller without having to fumble around with a massive claw clip-type mount that I’ve found refuses to stay put.

This portable fan recharges with the complimentary USB cord, although using it at higher speeds will drain the battery faster, so you may want to carry around a portable charger for longer outings.

Best Stroller Fan for Day Trips

Momcozy Portable Stroller Fan

Ultra-long battery life

Compact

Available in 6 colors

LED light for nighttime use

Bulkier than other portable fans

Dimensions: 6.18 inches x 3.98 inches x 6.14 inches

Power Source: Rechargeable 8000mAh battery (included)

Blade Type: Traditional

Mount Type: Flexible tripod

Battery Life: 12 to 27 hours

Fan Speeds: Four

Why We Love It

With up to 27 hours of battery life, the Momcozy Portable Stroller Fan is your best bet for an excursion to Disney or a day trip to the beach. The flexible tripod mount firmly wraps around bumper bars or handles, while smaller gaps between the fan openings make it safer for curious kids trying to poke their fingers in. Even at maximum speed, this fan is relatively quiet and won’t disturb your child’s stroller nap. It even has an LED light for when the sun goes down at Disneyland — you’ll be able to keep an eye on your little one and they won’t be scared of the dark. All these features make Momcozy one of the best travel stroller fans, in my opinion.

is your best bet for an excursion to Disney or a day trip to the beach. The flexible tripod mount firmly wraps around bumper bars or handles, while smaller gaps between the fan openings make it safer for curious kids trying to poke their fingers in. Even at maximum speed, this fan is relatively quiet and won’t disturb your child’s stroller nap. It even has an LED light for when the sun goes down at Disneyland — you’ll be able to keep an eye on your little one and they won’t be scared of the dark. All these features make Momcozy one of the best travel stroller fans, in my opinion.

Community Reviews

ldl20 “I got the momcozy brand ordered it on Amazon. It’s rechargeable. I like it.”

Best Quiet Stroller Fan

SmartDevil Clip-On Stroller Fan

Very quiet for sleeping babies

Clip has a strong grip

Head rotates 360-degrees

Takes long time to recharge

Clip may be difficult to use on really thick bars

Dimensions: 4.37 inches x 11.3 inches x 3.15 inches

Power Source: Rechargeable 3000mAh battery (included)

Blade Type: Traditional

Mount Type: Clip-on

Battery Life: 2 to 8 hours

Fan Speeds: Three

Why We Love It

When my child falls asleep in the stroller, I want nothing — and I mean nothing — to wake them , including a noisy stroller fan (can you tell this has happened to me multiple times?). Thanks to a brushless motor, the SmartDevil Clip-On Stroller Fan only has a 40-decibel noise level (about what you’d expect in a library, according to IAC Acoustics ), making it one of the quietest portable fans out there. It’s both USB- and battery-powered, so even if the charge runs out, there won’t be an interruption in air circulation or sound. I love that it’s small enough to fit into a purse or toss in the stroller so it’s always ready to cool the baby down.

— to wake them , including a noisy stroller fan (can you tell this has happened to me multiple times?). Thanks to a brushless motor, the

), making it one of the quietest portable fans out there. It’s both USB- and battery-powered, so even if the charge runs out, there won’t be an interruption in air circulation or sound. I love that it’s small enough to fit into a purse or toss in the stroller so it’s always ready to cool the baby down.

Kipp Jarecke-Cheng contributed to this article.

Community Reviews

“I got this one because you can adjust so it holds on to anything.”

“I actually just ordered another one of these! I was using the one from my registry at my desk at work. I love it, can be charged via USB or battery. Has different speeds and wraps around. So far so good. I live in FL so we use stroller fans all year.”

“I love this one! It is super powerful and I like that you can wrap the legs around anything.”

Tips For Buying a Stroller Fan

Selecting the right portable fan for your baby’s stroller can come down to personal taste, but it may help to keep the following features in mind when you’re shopping:

Solid construction: The most common materials used to make portable fans are hard plastic, silicone and metal. For fans made with foam blades, the foam should be soft and pliable but solid (read: doesn’t feel as if it will fall apart). The fan enclosure should be sturdy and the slats or grill openings should be wide enough for good airflow, but narrow enough to prevent small hands and fingers from sliding in.

Accessible, portable power supply: Unlike standard fans that have outlet plugs, portable fans are powered by replaceable or rechargeable batteries, and sometimes USB ports.

No sharp edges: Rounded designs and minimally exposed joints are preferred, with metal components covered or concealed.

Secure mounting system: Whether using clip-on or flexible wrapping legs, the mounting system should be secure and stable. If you’re planning on running often or walking on uneven terrain with the stroller, you may prefer a flexible leg mount as I find they can often be attached tighter than clip-on counterparts.

FAQ Stroller Fans

What are the different types of stroller fans worth considering?

A wide variety of manufacturers produce small, portable fans that can be used with strollers. These portable fans primarily fall into three categories:

Standard portable fans: These fans are miniature versions of traditional fans, with blades that create air movement blown through a self-contained frame or cage.

“Bladeless” fans: Rather than having standard revolving fan blades, “bladeless” fans are equipped with a cylindrical drum that has multiple leaves that create air movement when spun and blown through a slotted enclosure.

Foam-bladed fans: Whether they are housed in an enclosure or are fully open, these fans have soft, bendable foam blades that don’t hurt or cut skin when touched during operation.

There are also four main portable fan mounting styles:

Clip-on mount: These use a squeeze clip to secure the portable fan.

Flexible wrapping legs, either tripod or monopod: These are a common mounting style and allow for the most customizable setup on a stroller.

Handheld: Mini, portable handheld fans are useful for older kids and adults, not so much for babies for obvious reasons

Around the neck: This collar-style fan typically has two cooling elements that hang around the neck and would only be suitable for older children and adults.

Are stroller fans a good idea?

Stroller fans are definitely not a must-have, but experts agree that “stroller fans can be beneficial, especially on hotter days in warmer climates,” says Dr. Abelowitz, because they circulate the air around your little one, he says.

It’s important to note, though, that while fans can provide comfort, they won’t prevent heat-related illness when temps near three digits, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) . Fans don’t actually cool the air, and shouldn’t be used in extreme heat. Plus, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) warns that when the temperature is higher than your body temp, it may even cause you to gain heat rather than lose it .

Dr. Abelowitz adds that children at any age should avoid being out in the heat for extended periods during very warm temperatures — especially at a heat index at or above 90 degrees Fahrenheit, which can pose a significant risk to kids. And make sure to follow other important tips for protecting your little one in hot weather , like dressing them in lightweight clothing and keeping them hydrated.

Do I need a stroller fan?

While Dr. Abelowtiz and Dr. Posner agree that a portable stroller fan isn’t absolutely required, they can be helpful for a stroller-bound baby or toddler in a number of ways, such as circulating extra air around them and providing comfort in an otherwise uncomfortably hot situation.

That said, keep these considerations in mind when you’re using a stroller fan:

Make sure the portable fan is mounted securely and in the appropriate position so that it doesn’t accidentally fall out of place or blow air directly on your little one, as it might dry out her mouth and nostrils or circulate any allergens.

Make sure the fan’s slats or grill openings are narrow enough so that small hands or fingers can’t get through and cause injury.

And of course, a child should never be left unattended in a stroller or car seat under any circumstances — even if there’s a fan running.

Where is the best place to put the fan on my stroller?

Where you place the fan depends largely on your stroller. Many parents choose to attach clip-on stroller fans to the belly bar or snack tray bar since the canopy will often be too flimsy to support the weight of the fan. Portable fans with flexible legs can possibly be attached onto the canopy frame as well as the handlebars.

If the stroller seat is front-facing, you can attach the fan to either the parent handlebar or parent stroller organizer.

Steven Abelowitz, M.D., F.A.A.P., Board-Certified Pediatrician and Regional Medical Director of Coastal Kids Pediatrics , Newport Beach, California. Gina Posner , M.D., F.A.A.P., Board-Certified Pediatrician and Member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board, MemorialCare Medical Group, Fountain Valley, California. American Academy of Pediatrics, Core Concepts: Thermoregulation in the Newborn, Part II: Prevention of Aberrant Body Temperature , May 2013. American Academy of Pediatrics, Extreme Heat: Keeping Kids Safe When Temperatures Soar , August 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Services, Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) About Extreme Heat , June 2012. KidsHealth from Nemours, Heat Illness , August 2019. Seattle Children’s, Heat Exposure and Reactions , April 2022. The University of Tennessee Knoxville, Portable Fans , June 2017.

Your Next Read

The 10 Best Stroller Footmuffs To Keep Your Baby Warm on the Coldest Winter Walks Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Most-Bought Prime Day Baby Deals: Sunscreen, Stroller Fans, and More Summer Essentials By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

How to Buy a Baby Stroller By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

How to Find the Best Stroller for Your Family: A Comprehensive Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Stroller Travel Systems That Parents Say Make Life Easier Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Our 10 Favorite Doctor-Approved Humidifiers to Help Your Baby During Sick Season Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Protect Babies and Toddlers in the Heat Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 7 Best Baby Nasal Aspirators for Stuffy Little Noses Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

What Every Mom Needs to Know Before Bringing a Baby to a Sporting Event Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Prepare for a Rainy Day Walk With Baby Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window