The 6 Best Baby Registries in 2026 for Perks and Freebies

A pregnant woman at her baby shower smiling as she opens a gift

Quick Summary

According to hundreds of parents-to-be, the best baby registry is the Amazon Baby Registry , due to its massive selection of products, great freebies, and flexible return policy.

There are so many baby registries that you might be tempted to skip one altogether. I almost did — and that would have been a huge mistake.

A registry isn’t just a wishlist for loved ones (though it does help prevent those well-meaning but not-quite-your-style gifts). It’s also a personal baby gear checklist , a way to score discounts , and, in some cases, your ticket to a box full of free baby samples .

So… what’s the best baby registry? Well, that depends on your needs. Luckily, I’ve done the legwork — between two pregnancies, years of testing, and reviewing gear for What to Expect, plus plenty of conversations with other parents — to break down the pros, cons, and perks of each.

Pro tip: You don’t have to commit to just one registry. In fact, doubling up can mean double the perks!

How I Tested and Chose the Best Baby Registries

To find the best baby registries for different kinds of parents, I:

Tested multiple registries myself during each of my two pregnancies, tracking ease of use, product selection, and perks.

Spoke with three What to Expect staffers who’ve built registries during their own pregnancies to learn what worked — and what they’d change.

Scoured the What to Expect Community boards for registry reviews, focusing on their feedback about building and ordering from each one.

Whether you choose just one or decide to go with a few, you can’t go wrong with these choices. And if you're still unsure which registries to sign up for What to Expect's Baby Registry Builder for personalized suggestions based on your preferences.

for personalized suggestions based on your preferences.

Best Baby Registry for Wide Product Selection

Amazon Baby Registry

Massive selection

Great freebies and discounts

Excellent return policy

You won't have the opportunity to see and try products before you register

Why We Love It

Based on the advice of hundreds of What to Expect parents, I chose Amazon Baby Registry as my primary registry. In addition to the wide selection of products, I appreciated that I could add anything to my registry, even if it’s not strictly baby-related.

as my primary registry. In addition to the wide selection of products, I appreciated that I could add anything to my registry, even if it’s not strictly baby-related.

Since I received a lot of hand-me-downs, I included some household essentials on my registry — things like paper towels, laundry detergent, and even high-protein snacks to keep me fueled while breastfeeding. This was a huge sanity-saver during those early newborn days when my brain was scattered, and neither my husband nor I could leave the house.

to keep me fueled while breastfeeding. This was a huge sanity-saver during those early newborn days when my brain was scattered, and neither my husband nor I could leave the house.

Sarah Darby , What to Expect's Senior SEO Content Strategist, created an Amazon registry during her second pregnancy to take advantage of the amazing perks, rather than to share with friends and family. "I loved the welcome kit, the vast array of options, the completion discount, and the ease of getting everything shipped right to me," she says.

But if you do share your registry with others, Amazon’s Baby Registry is super easy to use. It’s likely your loved ones already have an account, making it easy for them to buy gifts from your list while shopping for themselves. The simpler you make it for them, the more likely you are to get everything you asked for (fingers crossed!).

Used by Leah Rocketto , soon-to-be mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Shopping Director:

“With Amazon's wide selection of products, it was easy to find exactly what I wanted, like a car seat and stroller.”

Amazon baby registry features and perks:

Read our full Amazon baby registry review »

Community Reviews

"I used Amazon for my first and was blessed that everything was bought. No one expressed any issues and we plan to use Amazon again."

"I used Babylist for my baby shower, and then created my own Amazon registry for all my post partum items and random things. Anything that wasn’t purchased on Babylist, I added to my Amazon registry to use the completion discount. I continued using the Amazon registry for diapers and all those middle of the night purchases. The completion discount is great!!"

"I prefer buying from Amazon registries just because I thought it was annoying that baby list sent me away from the site and I had to like go back and forth to get the address, submit the order number, mark as bought…etc"

Best Baby Registry For Discounts

Target Baby Registry

Ability to look at items in person

15 percent completion discount

impressive return policy

Less tech-savvy loved ones may have difficulty navigating it online

Why We Love It

I love how easy it is to use Target’s baby registry , especially when pregnancy brain kicks in. You have to join Target Circle first (don’t worry — it’s free) before you can create a registry. Once you do, an "Add to Registry" button appears on every product to ease registry inclusion. There’s also a cute calendar icon with your due date and a spot for a custom message that everyone sees when they visit your registry. I personally appreciated that I could let people know which products were most important by labeling them "most wanted."

, especially when pregnancy brain kicks in. You have to join Target Circle first (don’t worry — it’s free) before you can create a registry. Once you do, an "Add to Registry" button appears on every product to ease registry inclusion. There’s also a cute calendar icon with your due date and a spot for a custom message that everyone sees when they visit your registry. I personally appreciated that I could let people know which products were most important by labeling them "most wanted."

Another big selling point: the sheer number of Target locations across the country — about 1,900 stores — means I could check out products in person before committing, rather than relying solely on online reviews. Sarah used Target's registry during her first pregnancy and also appreciated the in-person option.

One potential downside to the Target baby registry is that their selection of strollers and car seats is more limited compared to Amazon. For instance, my stroller of choice, the UppaBaby Vista V2, wasn’t available at Target. So, if I had chosen to stick with only one registry, I would have had to pick a different option or buy it myself.

Another thing to note: Target offers two 15% discounts, which are automatically added to your Target Circle account and applied to your next purchase. If you don’t want to use it right away, be sure to deselect “Offer Saved” in your Target Circle Offers page to temporarily deactivate the coupon. That said, having a Target registry gives you access to exclusive deals on baby items — up to 20% off! — for up to a year after your due date. This was huge when I was running low on diapers and wipes, and Sarah found it helpful postpartum.

"As a first-time mom, I didn't really know what I needed until I needed it, so being able to save even after my completion discount ended was helpful," she says.

Used by Sarah Darby , mom of two and What to Expect Senior SEO Strategist:

"I noticed that my 'more wise' family members did shop in store, while most people shopped online but it was nice to have both options. I actually went to the store to buy most of what I didn't get at my shower, which was a really fun and exciting experience as a first-time mom."

Target baby registry features and perks:

Registry items can be returned up to a year after your due date.

— 15% each — plus exclusive deals for a full year after your due date.

after adding 10 items and making a $10 purchase (availability varies by store).

Read our full Target baby registry review »

Community Reviews

"I have a target registry as well. It’s not one I share and I only use it for returns. For example, I had a lot of size 1 diapers gifted my last pregnancy and no receipt. Target carried them so I could add them to the registry, mark as “purchased”, then exchange in store for the size I needed! It was sooo helpful."

"Amazon and target have been my favorites"

"I liked it, but if you have other stuff you want/need from target, just put $35 worth of stuff in your cart to order and then add the welcome kit and you'll get free shipping. That's what I did"

Best Baby Registry for Affordable Essentials

Walmart Baby Registry

90-day return policy

already-low prices

cute baby clothes

You can only register for gear from Walmart

returns must be done in-store

Why We Love It

Want to save your friends and family money on their gifts for baby? A Walmart registry is the way to go. The store's famously low prices extend to baby and toddler gear, so you'll know you're getting a great deal on everything from diapers and baby clothes to strollers and car seats.

Want to save your friends and family money on their gifts for baby? A

is the way to go. The store's famously low prices extend to baby and toddler gear, so you'll know you're getting a great deal on everything from diapers and baby clothes to strollers and car seats.

And if Walmart doesn’t have the best price? Simply bring proof that one of their online competitors offers a lower price on the exact same, in-stock product, and Walmart will price match. (This applies to one item per day.)

Don’t sleep on Walmart for baby clothes either. Since my daughter was born, Walmart has been my go-to for cute, high-quality clothing. Seriously, their Garanimals line is on par with Cat & Jack! Plus, the retailer partners with brands like Carter's, Monica + Andy, Gerber and others to create exclusive, affordable lines.

Walmart Baby Registry Features and Perks:

Freebies : Walmart’s Welcome Box is available once you’ve created your registry, it’s been live for a week, and a $25 purchase has been made. It’s filled with samples you can use once baby arrives, plus coupons to save money on baby gear later.

Read our full Walmart baby registry review »

Best Universal Baby Registry

Babylist Baby Registry

Lengthy time period for returns

ability to add products from different retailers

Gift-buyers sometimes find the checkout process frustrating

Have to manually mark when things are purchased

Why We Love It

Parents-to-be love Babylist because, in addition to purchasing products directly from Babylist, it gives you (and gift-givers) the option to buy from other retailers. It also allows you to add anything to your registry from any store on the web.

because, in addition to purchasing products directly from Babylist, it gives you (and gift-givers) the option to buy from other retailers. It also allows you to add anything to your registry from any store on the web.

“When I was pregnant with Lou, I had no idea where to start with a registry and felt totally overwhelmed,” says Liz Buxton , What to Expect's Shopping Director and mom of one . “I went with Babylist because I could corral everything I actually wanted — from everyday Amazon basics to random Etsy finds — in one easy-to-share spot.”

. “I went with Babylist because I could corral everything I actually wanted — from everyday Amazon basics to random Etsy finds — in one easy-to-share spot.”

Beyond products, you can even register for cash funds (college, diapers) or request help from friends and family.

“I liked that Babylist had the option to add non-monetary things like ‘walking the dog’ or ‘home-cooked meal,’” says Jeanne Beacom, What to Expect’s Sr. Campaign Manager, speaking to Babylist’s versatility. “I added links to sewing patterns if people wanted to sew something for baby and maternal health charities to my registry.”

Babylist also offers plenty of sample registries to help you get started, keeping in mind that no two parents will need the exact same things. They provide examples for second-time moms, parents expecting multiples, adoptive parents of older babies, and single moms, explaining why each product fits these parents' specific needs.

The only downside to Babylist is that some gift-givers can get frustrated with the checkout process. If someone buys a gift from a store other than Babylist, they have to leave the site and then return to mark the gift as purchased. That said, it’s your baby registry, and Babylist's logistical challenges are minor in the grand scheme.

Used by Liz Buxton , mom of one and What to Expect's Shopping Director :

“With Babylist, I liked being able to compare prices, link other registries, and add things to my list during a middle-of-the-night scroll.”

Babylist baby registry features and perks:

Return Babylist-purchased gifts within nine months; other retailers follow their own policy.

15% discount starting 60 days before your due date, valid for six months (Babylist purchases only).

is packed with samples and offers, but requires $30 Babylist Shop purchase.

Read our full Babylist baby registry review »

Best Baby Registry for Cash and Service Gifts

MyRegistry.com

Ability to register from all kinds of retailers

There is an extra 5 percent "handling fee" for cash gifts

Why We Love It

This is your do-it-all baby registry resource. First, you can choose gifts from any store in the world and add them to your registry here. Already have a registry or two? Sync multiple registries you already have — Target, Amazon, Pottery Barn Kids, Walmart — which makes it way easier to streamline the whole process and simple when it comes to getting the word out about where to find your wish lists. You can also add a cash registry.

But the ultimate perk parents are loving: Costco is a partner with MyRegistry.com , so you can add all of your favorites from the wholesale store to your list. Costco has a ton of awesome stuff beyond endless supplies of diapers and wipes (though those will come in handy, too).

, so you can add all of your favorites from the wholesale store to your list. Costco has a ton of awesome stuff beyond endless supplies of diapers and wipes (though those will come in handy, too).

One great feature is the link that allows you to see the popular items people are adding to their registries, so you can stay in-the-know when it comes to the latest and greatest. There are also various sample registries and an ultimate baby checklist so you won’t be left without any essentials. Inspiration boards provide even more ideas for building the best — and chicest — registry possible. Don’t forget to download the app so you can scan barcodes of things you see on-the-go that you think would be perfect for your future babe.

MyRegistry.com baby registry features and perks:

Because MyRegistry.com isn't a retailer, you won't get any specific discounts or freebies. Instead, it's a helpful place to keep track of all your baby registries.

isn't a retailer, you won't get any specific discounts or freebies. Instead, it's a helpful place to keep track of all your baby registries.

Group gifting: Yes

Universal registry: Yes

Community Reviews

alxkrs "MyRegistry! I love it. Used it for my wedding shower too."

nsouza27 "Reminds me a lot of the Knot with the linked registries - which I loved for my wedding"

Best Baby Registry for Premium, Personalized Gear

Pottery Barn Kids Baby Registry

15 percent completion discount

high-quality items

You can only register for items from Pottery Barn Kids and sister stores

products tend to be expensive

some parents say there can delivery delays

Why We Love It

Pottery Barn is known for its beautifully designed products, and Pottery Barn Kidsis no different. Here, you can find organic crib bedding, chic nursery furniture, cute toys and more. Even better, Pottery Barn Kids will personalize many items. (A relative gave me a rocking horse with my daughter’s name engraved on it, and it was stunning.)

is no different. Here, you can find organic crib bedding, chic nursery furniture, cute toys and more. Even better, Pottery Barn Kids will personalize many items. (A relative gave me a rocking horse with my daughter’s name engraved on it, and it was stunning.)

That said, Pottery Barn is a haven for big-ticket items. So not only will you need to create a second registry for more practical items, but you may be hesitant to share it with others. Especially since Pottery Barn doesn’t offer group gifting. That said, you can add Pottery Barn Kids gift cards to your registry, which you can use for purchases now or later.

For stylish parents-to-be, Pottery Barn Kids is the perfect place to find personalized, high-end decor and furniture.

Used by Tika Fender , What to Expect’s Senior Art Director and mom of one:

“I had a Pottery Barn registry just to get the completion discount. I didn't share it with anyone because I didn't want my loved ones to spend so much money on furniture for my baby.”

Pottery Barn Kids baby registry features and perks:

Return or exchange registry items within 90 days from the event date or purchase date (whichever is later).

is valid 60 days before and 180 days after your due date.

Although you can't use it on baby gear, which isn't super helpful.

No welcome box, but free design team appointments.

Universal registry: No, but you can add items from Pottery Barn's family of brands, which include West Elm and Williams Sonoma.

Read our full Pottery Barn Kids Baby Registry review »

Baby Registry FAQs

Should I set up more than one baby registry?

I recommend signing up for more than one baby registry. Not only will you score extra discounts (hello, more savings on baby gear!), but you can also opt in to multiple welcome boxes — meaning more free baby samples for you and your little one.

It can be a lot to keep track of, which is why I suggest using What to Expect's Baby Registry Builder . It keeps all your registries in one place, so you can spend less time juggling lists and more time dreaming about those newborn snuggles.

What’s the best universal registry?

The best universal registry is Babylist, which allows you to add items from Amazon, Target, and directly from brands.

Can I add services like housecleaning or cash funds to my registry?

Babylist and MyRegistry allow you to add services or cash funds.

When should I create my registry and how early?

Most parents-to-be start their baby registry somewhere between 12 and 20 weeks of pregnancy. That sweet spot gives you plenty of time to browse, compare, and daydream about all the tiny things you’ll soon be using — without feeling rushed. Plus, your list will be ready to go before those baby shower invites head out, so loved ones have plenty of time to shop for your little one’s soon-to-be favorite things.

Your Next Read

Target Baby Registry Review Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Free Baby Samples? Yes, Please! How to Score Diapers, Formula and More By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Baby Registry Checklist: Exactly What to Put on a Baby Registry Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

I Got the Babylist Welcome Box — Here’s What’s Inside the $8.95 Box Everyone Talks About By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Last-Call Prime Day Baby Deals I'm Snagging As a Mom of Two — and How I'm Saving Even More Before Midnight By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Amazon Who? 10 Prime Day Alternative Sales That Give You More Chances to Save By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

What to Put on Your Baby Sprinkle Registry Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Overwhelmed by Baby Gear? Here's What You Really Need (and What You Don't) Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Most-Bought Prime Day Baby Deals: Sunscreen, Stroller Fans, and More Summer Essentials By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Creating a Nursery on a Budget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window