6 Best Standing Toys to Help Your Baby Meet a Milestone

Best Standing Toys

Quick Summary

The best standing toy is the Baby Einstein Curiosity Table, according to expert criteria and parent reviews. When choosing a standing toy, it's important to consider the toy's sturdiness, interactivity and longevity.

One day your baby is struggling to roll, and the next they're pulling themself up to stand at the coffee table. At least, that’s how fast it feels. When your little one starts showing interest in wanting to stand — usually somewhere between 9 to 12 months — you might want to look into buying one of the best standing toys to help them practice and develop important core and leg muscles.

How We Chose the Best Standing Toys

We spoke to a pediatrician and pediatric physical therapist to learn about the safety elements and entertainment features to look for in standing toys. Per their guidance, we evaluated toys based on the following factors:

Safety: Your child will likely fall as they learn to stand, but the toy helping them master the skill shouldn’t pose fall risks. For this reason, you should avoid seated baby walkers , which have been found to pose fall risks and can delay baby’s motor development, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Additionally, the standing component of your toy should be appropriate for children between 9 and 12 months old, the age when most children start to stand, and should be sturdy enough to hold your child's weight. Finally, the toy shouldn’t contain any removable small parts that could pose a choking hazard.

Versatility: To get the most for your money, you’ll want a toy that provides multiple ways to play. A sit-to-stand walker, for example, may have a removable activity board that young babies can play with while sitting. Other toys, like activity tables, allow children to practice fine motor skills with buttons to press and levers to pull. Even a standing toy that teaches your child colors, letters and more is a worthwhile investment.

Interactivity: A toy is useless if it doesn’t keep your child entertained. A good standing toy will have a variety of interactive elements, such as playing music and sounds or using lights to grab baby’s attention and engage with their senses. However, if your child gets overstimulated or is sensitive to sound, you may want to consider a non-electronic standing toy.

Each of the toys on this list meets or exceeds the safety standards, and has received overwhelmingly positive reviews from What to Expect community members for the other criteria.

Best Overall Standing Toy

Baby Einstein Curiosity Table

Can be used on ground

includes lights and sounds

has removable dry erase board

Large

Why We Love It

Baby Einstein’s Curiosity Table has so many components, your child will never be bored. One side of the table is geared towards STEM play, with spinning gears and a kid-friendly circuit that makes lights glow. On the other side, you’ll find a dry erase board and props that encourage creative play. The table’s lights and sounds capture baby’s attention, while the activities keep him entertained.

Parents especially liked that there is a lot to offer children of different ages: Older babies might want to draw on the whiteboard, while younger babies may be more entertained by the pretend paint pots. And at 2 feet by 18 inches, there’s more than enough space for two kids to play. Plus, many parents feel the table’s size added to the sturdiness, making it safe for little ones pulling themselves up.

Dimensions: 23.5 x 17.5 x 27.6 inches

Weight: 5 pounds

Power: ‎3 AA batteries

Most Versatile Standing Toy

VTech Magic Star Learning Table

Can be used on ground

includes sounds and lights

Some said it could slide

Why We Love It

Your little one will eagerly pull himself up to play with one of the six play stations on the VTech Magic Star Learning Table . Each station presents a different opportunity to play and develop fine motor skills: Your baby can toggle between turning the pages of the flip book, driving the steering wheel, spinning knobs and more. Many parents say the variety of toys, as well as the sounds and lights, helped grab and hold their child’s attention to help them practice standing.

. Each station presents a different opportunity to play and develop fine motor skills: Your baby can toggle between

turning the pages of the flip book, driving the steering wheel, spinning knobs and more. Many parents say the variety of toys, as well as the sounds and lights, helped grab and hold their child’s attention to help them practice standing.

And you’ll get plenty of long-term play out of VTech’s table. Babies can start playing with this toy as early as 6 months as a floor toy — just remove the legs and place the top on the floor.

And you’ll get plenty of long-term play out of VTech’s table. Babies can start playing with this toy as early as

— just remove the legs and place the top on the floor.

The wide base of this table makes it sturdy to use for pulling up, although some parents suggest pushing it against a wall so it doesn’t slide.

Dimensions: 20 x 15 x 17 inches

Weight: 4.1 pounds

Power: 2 AA batteries

Community Reviews

MrsB603 “He also really loves this activity table and this ball popper thing. He gets really excited when I pull them out and they entertain him for a long time!”

Best Standing Toy with Balls

Bright Starts Having a Ball Get Rollin' Activity Table

Can be used on ground

includes lights and sounds

has built-in ball drop

Other objects can get stuck in ball drop

Why We Love It

This Bright Starts activity table features a ball drop that helps baby practice fine motor skills and hand-eye coordination and learn cause-and-effect — all while strengthening the muscles needed to stand. Parents said this toy has provided hours of playtime, as baby never seems to tire of placing the ball on the ramp and watching it spiral down. Many parents said their babies were fascinated with the ball drop, which also plays lights and sounds, and stayed standing for a long time, ultimately helping them feel more confident on their feet. When not in use, the six balls can be stored in the legs of the table.

Another bonus: The top comes off to become a tummy time toy, sitting toy or travel toy.

One thing to note: Your baby may learn how to put any object in the center, which could result in toys getting stuck.

Weight: 7 pounds

Dimensions: 19 x 19 x 16.5 inches

Power: 3 AA batteries

Community Reviews

onegirlsmom “This is my daughter's absolute favorite toy (she actually got it several months ago, but plays with it more than anything else- especially now that she's able to pull up to standing). Her dad & I have a blast with it too!! Haha.”

Best Sit-to-Stand Toy

VTech Sit-to-Stand Learning Walker

Can be used on ground

doubles as walking toy

Some said the wheel locks don’t work well

Why We Love It

The VTech Sit-to-Stand Learning Walker comes highly recommended by What to Expect community members, and it’s easy to see why. For starters, it gives baby a lot of support as he learns to stand. The walker’s thick handlebar makes it easy for baby to grab to pull himself up, while the wide base evenly distributes weight to steady baby as he learns to balance. Many parents said that their babies felt comfortable trying to stand in the beginning with this toy. “It's really helping to build his confidence!” one parent noted.

But your baby can use the toy before they start standing, thanks to the removeable activity board. Featuring a shape sorter, several spinners and plenty of buttons, the activity board has a number of objects to hone your child’s fine motor skills. Many attribute the activity board to increasing the toy’s longevity, with numerous parents saying their babies played with it from 6 months through their toddler years.

In addition to how much their babies loved playing with this toy, parents also appreciated that it’s lightweight, easy to store and portable.

Dimensions: 16.5 x 14.2 x 18.1 inches

Weight: 5 pounds

Power: 2 AA batteries

Community Reviews

“We use the VTech sit to stand walker. We had it when our LO just started crawling. He actually liked to sit on his knees and play, which turned into him creeping up it to stand and play. He can walk behind it if we help push it. It has worked well for us to encourage standing.”

“My son just turned 8 months on the 2nd and will not play in anything where he isn't free. He hates walkers and jumpers and has been pulling himself up and cruising for over a month now so we bought him a vtech sit to stand. He walks with it all on his own :) as long as you monitor your baby while they use it, it should be fine. It has definitely helped him improve on standing on his own and balancing!”

“The V-tech sit to stand is the freaking greatest. My 6 year old played with it from like 6 months til she was at least 3 lol it finally died so we’re getting another for this baby.”

Best Wall-Mounted Standing Toy

Learning Advantage Crocodile Activity Wall Panels

Multiple kids can use at once

includes eight activities

takes up no floor space

Expensive

requires drill to install

Why We Love It

Featuring multiple activities, including spinning gears, mazes and a xylophone, Learning Advantage’s crocodile-shaped toy encourages baby to stand without taking up precious floor space, which parents in small homes especially appreciate.

What parents love most, however, is that the toy provides an electronic-free learning experience. At more than 6 feet long, the wooden playing center is free from noise or flashing lights to avoid overstimulation. And, because it’s so long, many parents said that they were able to keep multiple kids occupied at once.

One thing to note is that unlike the other standing toys on this list, baby can’t use it to pull himself up. So, you’ll either want to use it for babies who are already more comfortable on their feet or with something nearby that can support them as they standup.

Weight: 22.5 pounds

Dimensions: 74 x 24 x 5 inches

Power: N/A

Best Wooden Standing Toy

Manhattan Toy Double-Decker Celestial Star Explorer

Stylish

two tiers

multiple compartments for more than one child playing at once

Heavy

expensive

Why We Love It

The multiple levels of this double decker wooden activity table encourage baby to stand and reach for one of the many fun features. From wire bead runs, to gliders to clacking doors, all the components on Manhattan Toy’s table support fine motor development. With four different compartments, parents liked that multiple kids could play at the same time and found that kids from ages 6 months to 3 years old were entertained. And since some of the features are placed on the table’s legs, babies can play with this toy before they start standing while sitting or during tummy time. Parents also liked that all of the edges are smooth and that it’s quite heavy so it’s less likely to tip over.

Dimensions: 20 x 20 x 27.5 inches

Weight: 14.25 pounds

Power: N/A

Our Experts

We consulted with a pediatrician and physical therapist:

Katie Lockwood, M.D., Associate Professor of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania and spokesperson for the AAP.

KC Rickerd, PT, DPT, pediatric doctor of physical therapy and owner of Milestones & Motherhood

We also canvassed the What to Expect’s community boards to see what standing toys received the most positive reviews, and what parents liked most about them.

FAQs

Are standing toys good for babies?

Standing toys are good for babies and a great way to help them practice standing. “Push toys, like a sturdy wagon or push cart, can also help kids cruise around and build confidence,” says Dr. Lockwood. “But [they] should only be used under supervision in a child-safe environment.”

You should also avoid using seated baby walkers , which have been found to pose fall risks and can delay baby’s motor development, per the AAP.

It’s important to note, however, that while standing toys are a great way to motivate baby, Dr. Rickerd says you don’t need one. As long as you’re giving them plenty of floor time, your baby will likely progress from crawling to standing to walking on their own. They may use the couch, the crib or even your body to start pulling to stand and practicing their balance.

What toys help babies stand up?

There are many types of toys to help baby stand up. You’ll want to look for elevated toys that encourage upright exploration, like a stationary activity table or a sit-to-stand walker. They should be sturdy and able to bear the weight of your child pulling without tipping over.

Some toys and objects you could use as baby learns to stand include:

Activity tables and stations: An activity table is just what it sounds like — a child-sized table with an assortment of toys, buttons, levers, switches and more to explore attached to the top. These are designed to entice baby to stand and support him while he plays.

Push walker: These are often wagons, carts with wheels or a sit-to-stand toy that comes with an activity board on the front. They include a bar for baby to grab onto to pull himself up. They’re also a great toy that grows with baby because when he’s able to take steps, he can use it to push it forward.

Wall-mounted toys: If you want to save on floor space, wall-mounted toys are a great way to encourage baby to stand. These are often wooden activity boards that you can hang low on the wall for baby to play with while he practices standing. One thing to note is that they don’t typical offer a bar or surface for baby to use to pull himself up, so this might be a better option once he’s more comfortable on his feet.

Household objects: A sofa, coffee table, laundry basket or diaper box can also work as a standing toy. Early walkers are known to find creative ways to use things in their environment to practice standing and even taking a few steps. So, you’ll also want to keep an extra eye on baby that he isn’t pulling on anything that can tip and fall over.

“With any toys, I recommend aiming for ones that children can get into and out of on their own,” Dr. Rickerd says. Ultimately, you want to avoid placing your child in a standing position, even if you’re using an activity table or the couch. Allowing them to figure it out on their own will go farther than simply placing them in the position.

WhatToExpect.com, When Do Babies Stand Up? , October 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, Baby Walkers: A Dangerous Choice , August 2022.

Your Next Read

26 Toys for 18-Month-Olds, According to Child Play Experts and Parents Alike Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Do Babies Stand Up? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The 9 Best Baby Floor Seats, According to Parents and Experts Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

When Do Babies Start Playing With Toys? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 6-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 9-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 10-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for 15-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for an 11-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Your Baby Will Sit Up — With Your Help and Alone Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

Best Games to Play With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

When Do Babies Start Crawling? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window