6 Stretch Mark Creams Moms-to-Be Can’t Stop Buying (and Derms Approve, Too)

Best Stretch Mark Creams

Quick Summary

The best stretch mark cream, according to dermatologists and moms, is Palmer’s Cocoa Butter Formula Massage Lotion . The affordable cream contains cocoa butter, shea butter and lanolin to moisturize, as well as collagen and elastin to help strengthen the skin as it stretches along with your growing belly.

If you’ve started your hunt for the best stretch mark cream, you’ve likely noticed that the many options on the market can be overwhelming. Combine that with conflicting information about which skincare products are pregnancy-safe and what will actually work to get rid of stretch marks, and you may want to give up the search entirely. But don’t give up just yet. To help make the decision easier for moms-to-be, I did the research on everything you need to know when buying stretch mark cream, which options are the best, and what to look out for to ensure they’re pregnancy-safe.

According to the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) , stretch marks appear when rapid changes in elastin and collagen production, such as a growing belly, cause the skin to rupture, scar, and then heal. Many factors impact whether you get stretch marks, including hormone levels and genetics, but creams and topical remedies can offer some relief.

"While there's no magic bullet cream to definitively prevent stretch marks, some products may help soothe itchy skin during pregnancy and may also improve the appearance of stretch marks," says Annabelle Garcia, M.D., a board-certified dermatologist at Sonterra Dermatology .

How I Chose the Best Stretch Mark Creams

To ensure the safety and efficacy of the stretch mark creams on my list, I consulted several dermatologists, including Garcia and Emily Wood, M.D., a board-certified dermatologist at Westlake Dermatology. They provided guidance on which ingredients are safe to use during pregnancy, and I cross-referenced this with the AAD and Cleveland Clinic' recommendations. Through my research, I ensured that all the stretch mark creams featured were free of the following:

Retinol

Salicylic acid

Alpha hydroxy acids (AHAs)

I also prioritized products that contained at least one of these ingredients, which have been shown to help with skin elasticity:

Shea butter

Cocoa butter or coconut oil

Jojoba oil

Vitamin E

Centella asiatica extract

Hyaluronic acid

Aloe vera gel

I further narrowed down my list based on results from the 2024 Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Awards , where over 700 moms voted on their favorite stretch mark cream. Finally, I spoke to two moms and looked to the What to Expect community to see what moms-to-be were using and what they found effective. Below are my recommendations for the best stretch mark creams on the market today.

Best Overall Stretch Mark Cream

Palmer’s Cocoa Butter Formula Massage Lotion

Contains natural collagen and elastin

48-hour hydration

Hypoallergenic

Some users don’t like the smell

Key ingredients: Cocoa butter, shea butter, vitamin E, lutein, natural oils

Why We Love It

Voted Best Stretch Mark Cream in the 2024 Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Awards, Palmer’s Cocoa Butter Formula Massage Lotion has gained a reputation for gently and effectively treating stretch marks. It’s particularly good for those with sensitive skin. Here’s why.

The formula is both hypoallergenic and made with a variety of natural, gentle ingredients that sensitive skin may tolerate better. These ingredients include pure cocoa butter, shea butter, and a blend of argan, almond, and coconut oils, which offer 48 hours of hydration to help with itchy skin. Palmer’s Cocoa Butter also contains natural antioxidants like lutein to support the skin as it stretches, while vitamin E works to reduce the appearance of stretch marks and scars. Apply it to your belly and beyond with a soothing massage to truly reap the benefits.

Community Reviews

"I have had it successfully get rid of stretch marks! I love the stuff! Use it one to two times a day and each time rub in small circles for at least a couple of minutes :)"

"I LOVE THIS STUFF! Yes! Even not pregnant I used it since my skin stretches so badly and it got rid of the most of the color!! I 1000% recommend to everyone but everyone is different so it may not be for you but I do recommend!"

"That's all I use and I don't have any stretch marks yet. They must formulate it really well because it makes my skin super tacky (in a good plush way? lol) for a couple days."

Best Splurge Stretch Mark Cream

Sol de Janeiro Brazilian Bum Bum Cream

Sustainably sourced

Bright and summery scent

Refillable jar

Expensive

Key ingredients : Guarana extract, Cupuaçu butter, coconut oil

Why We Love It

There’s a reason Sol de Janeiro’s viral Brazilian Bum Bum Cream is a beloved bodycare staple across the board. Its rich formula is incredibly versatile, and it comes with the iconic, summery Cheirosa ‘62 scent that Sol de Janeiro is known for. (That’s also something to take into account if scents aggravate you right now — this product is heavily scented).

"After hearing all the hype about Sol de Janeiro's Bum Bum Cream (and desperately needing a little pick-me-up during my pregnant summer) I decided to give it a try," says Liz Buxton, What to Expect's Director of Commerce Content Strategy and mom of one. "Unlike my usual lotions, this one felt like a true indulgence, with a rich yet lightweight texture and a scent that made it feel more like a treat than just another step in my routine."

fter hearing all the hype about Sol de Janeiro's Bum Bum Cream (and desperately needing a little pick-me-up during my pregnant summer) I decided to give it a try," says Liz Buxton , What to Expect's Director of Commerce Content Strategy and mom of one. "Unlike my usual lotions, this one felt like a true indulgence, with a rich yet lightweight texture and a scent that made it feel more like a treat than just another step in my routine."

The variety of butters and oils within this product make it incredibly hydrating, while potent and unique ingredients like caffeine-rich guarana extract and cupuaçu butter help tighten and hydrate the skin, respectively.

"I know a lot of people swear by it for stretch marks, but I was more drawn to it for the hydration and scent. That said, keeping my skin well-moisturized has always been a priority, especially during pregnancy, and this cream definitely delivered on that front," Liz says, adding the smooth, whipped texture that melts into the skin without feeling greasy or heavy.

You’ll love this formula during pregnancy, but you’ll be using it longer after, too. And the good news is that a ittle goes a long way, so you won't break the bank keeping your skin soft.

Community Reviews

fleur2023 "Sol de Janeiro bum bum cream! Absolutely obsessed and it smells so good too. It is expensive but a little goes a long way mine lasts ages."

Best Affordable Stretch Mark Cream

Burt's Bees Mama Belly Butter

Affordable

Contains vitamin E

99 percent natural origin ingredients

Very thick consistency

Some users don’t like the scent

Key ingredients: Vitamin E, cocoa butter, shea butter, jojoba butter

Why We Love It

If you’re looking for a rich and nourishing formula that’s also lower-cost, look no further than Burt’s Bees Mama Belly Butter . This thick body butter combines the nutrient-rich benefits of vitamin E with cocoa, shea, and jojoba butters to offer intense hydration that not only helps diminish the appearance of stretch marks but also combats itchy pregnancy skin. Many members of the WTE community use Burt’s Bees Mama Belly Butter as their go-to because they love how rich and hydrating it is without feeling too sticky. The formula is also made with 99 percent natural origin ingredients, making it gentler on your skin.

Community Reviews

lll222 "I’ve been using the burts bees & mixing it with the vitamin E oil they make as well!! & I love it. Keeps my skin moisturized all day."

alsacharok "I’ve been using Burt’s Bees Mama Bee and I have to say that I really like it. I’m 23 weeks, no stretch marks yet, and my belly always feels hydrated but not sticky or oily. It absorbs in to my skin without being overly greasy."

Best Clinical-Grade Stretch Mark Cream

Trofolastin

Clinically tested to work

Can help with dry pregnancy skin

Contains centella asiatica

Pricey

Key ingredients: Centella asiatica extract, vitamin E, collagen-elastin hydrolysates

Why We Love It

Trofolastin not only comes highly recommended by dermatologists but is also a favorite among moms in the WTE community — and for good reason. This cream is the only one on the list with solid clinical testing showing that it actually works. According to Dr. Wood, who also recommends this product, the cream’s efficacy lies in its ingredients, specifically the addition of pregnancy-safe centella asiatica. “Centella asiatica is a plant found in the wetlands of Asia, which has been shown to increase collagen production,” she says. Other ingredients, like vitamin E, can help add moisture to the skin, which may in turn improve the appearance of stretch marks, but centella asiatica is the only clinically tested ingredient shown to reduce and potentially prevent the appearance of stretch marks.

Aiding in collagen production is key to diminishing the appearance of stretch marks, and Trofolastin helps regenerate, repair, and heal rapidly stretching skin. It’s been shown to prevent the appearance of stretch marks in 89 percent of its users, while offering gentle hydration to dry pregnancy skin. Though it is a bit on the pricier side compared to other options on this list, the results from Trofolastin speak for themselves. To apply, simply massage the cream onto your skin twice daily.

Community Reviews

slytherinbaddie "I did a lot of research and read research studies about the products that actually work/help. Those products are centella asiatica, sweet almond oil, and hyaluronic acid. Also the cream trofolastin has been proven to help ... I’m 35 weeks + 4 and still no stretch marks so I’m very hopeful this will last."

Best Belly Oil

Bio-Oil Skincare Oil

Non-greasy formula

Contains vitamin E

Also works on scars and uneven skin tone

Not clinically tested on stretch marks

Key ingredients: Vitamin E, vitamin A, chamomile and lavender oil

Why We Love It

If Trofolastin is first on our list, Bio-Oil comes in as a close second (not to mention it was voted Best Belly Oil in the 2024 Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Awards ). Many members of the WTE community recommend Bio-Oil as their holy-grail solution, with some saying even their mothers used it during their pregnancies. Bio-Oil is also approved by dermatologists and OB/GYNs as pregnancy-safe, with Monte Swarup , M.D., F.A.C.O.G., a board-certified OB/GYN in Chandler, Arizona, confirming its safety for use during pregnancy.

So why is Bio-Oil so popular? Many users love how the non-greasy formula absorbs easily into the skin and leaves it feeling hydrated all day.Its combination of vitamin E and A, along with chamomile and lavender oil, works together to fade the appearance of stretch marks while soothing the skin. You can also use it on other areas of your body, including your face, without worrying about clogged pores. The best part? The vegan-friendly, paraben-free formula can be used after pregnancy to help with scars or uneven skin tone. There’s a lot to love here! Just check with your doctor before testing it out, as some healthcare providers warn against using products with vitamin A during pregnancy or while nursing.

You may also want to check your smell sensitivity beforehand. Karla Martin, What to Expect's Senior Photo Editor, found that even though the scent was mild, it was a bit too strong for her to handle during the latter half of her pregnancy. She did, however, go back to using it once her baby was born, citing that the oil "felt so luxurious."

Community Reviews

"Bio Oil! Second pregnancy with zero stretch marks. I use it at night and Palmers in the am. I don’t like to feel oily all day!"

"Bio Oil. I used it my whole pregnancy and didn’t get any stretch marks. They say it’s genetic, but doesn’t hurt to try and avoid."

"Been using bio oil for a couple months now. I have 0 stretch marks on my belly (and I feel like I popped pretty early and fast). Also, absorbs quickly and very light weight, a plus if the weather is HOT like it is where I am. On top of that it was recommended to me by 4 other pregnant women at a maternity clothes shop ??"

Best Organic Stretch Mark Cream

Earth Mama Belly Butter

Tested for sensitive skin

Contains organic ingredients

Lightly scented

Key ingredients: Shea butter, jojoba oil, calendula blossom, borage seed oil

Why We Love It

Compared to Burt’s Bees Belly Butter, Earth Mama Belly Butter is a lighter formula that absorbs quickly into skin and locks in hydration. The formula uses organic ingredients like shea butter, jojoba oil, calendula blossom and borage seed oil to nourish and soothe dry skin, while potentially helping skin regain its natural elasticity. Keep in mind that this cream is also lightly scented, but the brand claims that it’s light enough not to aggravate morning sickness and many WTE moms-to-be say they enjoy the scent. However, if you’ve been more sensitive to smells during pregnancy, that’s something to consider before buying. On top of using it on your belly, Earth Mama Belly Butter is safe and gentle enough to use on breasts and thighs for an added dose of moisture.

Community Reviews

Julieogkelly "I love Earth mama. It smells so good!"

A Note About Stretch Mark Creams

It’s important to remember that there isn’t a singular solution for stretch marks that works for everyone. The AAD , along with the doctors I interviewed, states that whether or not you get stretch marks, and the severity of those stretch marks, depends on many factors beyond our control, such as hormones or genetics. As a result, a bit of trial and error may be necessary to find what truly works for you.

While creams containing centella asiatica are a good place to start due to their proven clinical efficacy for preventing stretch marks, remedies with popular ingredients like vitamin E or cocoa butter can help reduce the appearance of stretch marks if they do appear. The AAD recommends massaging the cream into the skin when you apply it, as massage can enhance the cream's effectiveness.

At the end of the day, though, none of these remedies are likely to cause negative effects, as long as you test a small patch on your skin to ensure you don’t have a reaction. Dr. Garcia notes that many of these remedies can at least alleviate itchy skin that often accompanies pregnancy. For others, these creams offer a healthy dose of hydration, which is important for maintaining your skin barrier, both during pregnancy and beyond

FAQs Best Stretch Mark Creams

What cream is best for pregnancy stretch marks?

According to the Cleveland Clinic, there’s some research suggesting home remedies with aloe vera gel, hyaluronic acid and centella asiatica herb may help moms and moms-to-be treat or prevent stretch marks. That being said, pregnant women should speak with their healthcare providers before trying out a stretch mark cream.

When should you start using stretch mark creams during pregnancy?

“I would recommend starting to use a stretch mark cream as soon as you know you are pregnant,” Dr. Wood says. This way, you can start treating skin as soon as hormones begin to fluctuate and skin begins to stretch.

What if stretch mark cream isn’t working?

If you’re not seeing results from one of these top-rated creams, ask your dermatologist about in-office treatments such as microneedling and laser to help reduce the appearance of stretch marks.

American Academy of Dermatology, Stretch Marks: Why They Appear and How to Get Rid of Them , 2023. Cleveland Clinic, Stretch Marks , May 2022. Annabelle Garcia , M.D., Dermatologist, San Antonio, Texas. Monte Swarup , M.D., F.A.C.O.G., OB/GYN, Chandler, Arizona. Emily Wood , M.D., Dermatologist, Austin, Texas. Jessica Wu , M.D., Dermatologist and Member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board, Los Angeles, California.

Your Next Read

Best Products for Postpartum Stretch Marks Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Are Pregnancy Stretch Marks Making an Appearance? Here's Why and What You Can Do Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is Better Skin Hiding in Your Grocery Cart? What Dermatologists Want Pregnant Moms to Eat (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Best Nipple Creams to Help You Find Relief While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The 10 Best Baby Lotions, Creams, and Ointments for Sensitive Skin Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Dark Patches on Your Face? Here’s What a Dermatologist Says About Pregnancy Melasma Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Your Pregnant Belly Itches (and What Actually Helps) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

How to Relieve Itchy Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

What is Melasma (aka Pregnancy Mask)? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Got Blotches, Patches, or Mottling? The Truth About Pregnancy Skin Darkening Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Should I Use Sunscreen When I'm Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window