Celebrate the outpouring of baby love with an oh-so-sippable baby shower punch.

Baby showers are packed with fun, love and (let's face it) lots of work for the host. You have to pick a cute baby shower theme , decide on a baby shower cake and make sure it all goes smoothly. So, ideas that make the day magical and a little easier can come in handy. One way to do this is with help-your-self drinks, like a colorful baby shower punch.

"Punch is perfect for baby showers with its bright colors and vibrant flavors, and it's so easy to serve to a crowd," says cookbook author Natasha Kravchuk of Natasha's Kitchen .

Get inspired to make a fun drink that guests will love — with a myriad of ways to customize the recipe from the color to the garnish. (And if you're looking to complete your party menu, check out these baby shower food suggestions, too.)

How to make baby shower punch

baby shower punch recipe

Make a fun and festive baby shower sherbet punch with this recipe from Natasha's Kitchen .

Ingredients

The recipe makes approximately 18-20 cups.

For the punch:

2 liter bottle of lemon-lime soda

2 liter bottle of club soda

12-ounce fruit punch can, thawed in the fridge

12-ounce pineapple juice can, thawed in the fridge

6-8 scoops of raspberry sherbet ice cream for pink punch or blue raspberry sherbet for blue punch

For the garnish:

One pint of frozen raspberries (for blue punch, use blueberries)

A few slices of sliced pineapple (fresh or canned), if desired

Instructions

Pre-scoop sherbet, and place scoops on a baking sheet lined with plastic wrap. Put them in the freezer.

In a large punch bowl, combine the pineapple juice and fruit punch cans. Then pour in lemon-lime soda and club soda. Stir gently until combined.

Garnish with pineapple slices (if using) and berries.

Add frozen sherbet scoops on top right before serving.

More ideas for baby shower punch

Use rainbow sherbet

rainbow sherbet baby shower punch

Combine berry rainbow sherbet, soda, orange juice and some raspberries to make this stunning and tasty punch. The pink, yellow and green color palette works well with a variety of baby shower themes , like rainbows or unicorns. (Get the full recipe from The Frugal Girls .)

Make it light and fruity

blue baby shower party punch recipe

Blue Hawaiian Punch gives this drink its gorgeous color (and makes it the ideal shade for blue baby shower punch). Liz of Liz on Call garnished glasses with fruit skewers — loaded toothpicks are a great way to add a little personality and polish to a drink. If you're not feeling fruit, try blue rock candy.

Double the punch for a gender reveal

If you're planning to include a gender reveal at your baby shower , incorporate the surprise into the menu. You can spread the news via cute gender reveal cupcakes with pink or blue frosting inside, but you could also do something that packs a punch … like punch! Make a bowl of blue and a bowl of pink, and have guests make their guesses by pouring themselves one or the other.

Top it with sprinkles

baby shower punch with sprinkles

Pouring 7-Up over raspberry sherbet gives this punch its cloud-like, frothy top layer. All that's left to do is sprinkle some edible gold stars over the top and you've got a magical-looking punch. As in the recipes above, feel free to substitute raspberry sherbet for blueberry, lime or rainbow sherbet to change up the color.

Add a sugar rim

For an extra sweet touch, pour colored sanding sugar in a shallow bowl. Dip the the glasses' rims in water, and let any excess drip off. Then dip the rims in the sanding sugar. Voila!

Garnish with cotton candy

cotton candy baby shower punch

Pour your favorite sparkling beverage in a chilled glass. (Offer prosecco to guests, but keep fruity soda on hand for the mom-to-be and other partygoers.) Then top with cotton candy! It's a whimsical garnish, and it adds a touch of sweetness and color when dunked in the glass.

Pick out funky straws

The only thing that makes a brightly colored punch feel more festive is a cool straw. Pick out bendy ones, striped ones, heart-shaped ones … whatever floats your boat.