7 Best Nipple Shields to Help With Latching and Minimize Pain

best nipple shields

QUICK SUMMARY

The best nipple shield is the Medela Nipple Shield, according to testers from the What to Expect staff and user community. When choosing a nipple shield, experts and moms say the most important factors to consider are sizing, material and shape.

Breastfeeding may be natural, but it sure doesn’t always come so naturally for some new moms. And guess what? That’s okay!

A rough breastfeeding start doesn’t necessarily mean nursing won’t work for you. It may just take a bit of help for you and baby to get into a groove. Many new moms and lactation consultants swear by breastfeeding nipple shields , which can help get you through those tricky first weeks.

Simply put, a breastfeeding nipple shield is a silicone "nipple" you place over your own to help baby latch. They are soft and flexible, so they won’t bother your skin, and should stay in place during feedings thanks to a suction cup-like design. If baby is having trouble feeding, the hole in the tip of each shield will help allow milk to flow through.

“There are many reasons to use a nipple shield,” says Suzanne Chan , D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T., board-certified pediatric nurse practitioner working in the Infant Cardiac NICU at NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital in New York City who is also a certified lactation counselor (CLC). “The biggest reason is how much it can aid in the success of breastfeeding. You may need a nipple shield if you have a flat or inverted nipple, sore or cracked nipple due to a poor latch, or to help a preemie with a more secure suction and latch.”

How We Chose the Best Nipple Shields

We reviewed and selected nipple shields based on the following criteria from leading experts, as well as What to Expect community members:

Size range: You’ll notice that some nipple shields come in different sizes, reflecting the diameter of the nipples on the shields measured in millimeters. (If you aren’t sure what size you should order, it's recommended to be fitted by a lactation consultant.) We’ve prioritized nipple shields that are available in a range of sizes to accommodate different nipples.

Material: Nipple shields are typically made of rubber or silicone, but all of the options on our list are made of silicone. We like silicone because it’s soft and pliable for baby, yet remains quite durable and heat-resistant so it can hold up after many washes. A major pro of silicone is that because it’s clear, it’s easier to see if baby is latching correctly. However, whatever you choose, Dr. Chan recommends looking for one that does not have any texture because that may irritate or confuse your baby.

Shape: As with size, nipple shields come in slightly different shapes that reflect the different shapes of the human nipple. Ask your lactation consultant for guidance on the best shape and style for you.

Ease of cleaning: It’s essential to keep your nipple shield clean to protect bacteria from growing. Though you should always follow the manufacturer’s cleaning instructions, we prioritized nipple shields that are easy to clean. All of the products on this list can be sterilized in boiling water, and some are dishwasher-safe.

Best Overall Nipple Shield

Medela Nipple Shield

Range of sizes

Cutout for skin-to-skin

Easy to hold in place

Not all retailers offer the smallest size

Material: Silicone

Sizes Available: 16 mm, 20 mm, 24 mm

Quantity: 2

Case Included: Yes

To clean: Sanitize nipple shields by thoroughly boiling in water for 20 minutes or wash in hot soapy water

Why We Love It

Though there are many nipple shields on the market, What to Expect moms overwhelmingly recommend the Medela Contact Nipple Shield, saying this brand helped ease them into a better breastfeeding routine by teaching their babies how to latch while also protecting their nipples from pain.

Not only are these shields BPA-free and come in a range of sizes (they’re available in 16, 20 and 24 mm, though it’s sometimes harder to find the smallest option in stores), but they’re also designed to promote skin-to-skin contact. The ultra thin silicone has a cutout at the top that allows your baby’s nose to nuzzle your skin while they feed.

I personally used these nipple shields when each of my newborns were learning how to breastfeed and found that they really helped my babies latch. Like many new moms, I found nursing tricky due to flat nipples, and these shields helped me continue my breastfeeding journey when otherwise I may have stopped due to the pain and frustration. Many moms in our community who also have flat nipples and struggled with latching praise these shields for helping them nurse.

Leah Rocketto, What to Expect’s Associate Commerce Director, was given Medela's shields by a lactation consultant to help keep her flat nipples erect while nursing. She says they were a “complete game-changer” and, without them, she’s not sure if she would have continued breastfeeding.

“What I really liked about the Medela shields is that they’re small and thin, so it helps the process feel more natural,” Leah says. “Sometimes I’d forget they were on and accidentally wear them all day.”

This set of two comes with a handy clamshell-style carrying case, crucial for helping to keep the shields clean and away from germs when not in use. (Make sure to wash the case frequently, too.)

Community Reviews

“I used the Medela ones with my first baby and they helped so much! Also have flat nipples and I cried in the hospital thinking that my body was letting my baby down. These were a lifesaver. I think I only had to use them for the first couple weeks, then he started latching better without them.”

“Medela is what I use and love them.”

“I have been using the Medela nipple shields, and they’ve been working great! I have flat nipples as well. I went to a lactation consultant appointment and they were super helpful.”

Best Nipple Shield for Babies With Tongue Tie

Lansinoh Contact Nipple Shield

Special cutout

Comes with a carrying case

Affordable

Only two available sizes

Material: Silicone

Sizes Available: 20 mm, 24 mm

Quantity: 2

Case Included: Yes

To clean: Hand wash in soapy water or sterilize in boiling water for 5 minutes

Why We Love It

Breastfeeding can be especially tough for babies with tongue ties (also known as ankyloglossia), since their tongue’s range of motion is restricted due to the extra tissue growth beneath it. As a result, getting the hang of latching and proper suction is a little trickier — but not impossible.

(also known as ankyloglossia), since their tongue’s range of motion is restricted due to the extra tissue growth beneath it. As a result, getting the hang of latching and proper suction is a little trickier — but not impossible.

Many moms like the Lansinoh Contact Nipple Shield, as its lower profile accommodates babies with a shallower latch, which is often a side effect of the condition. These shields can be a great asset if you’re looking for something to hold you over before baby’s tongue tie can be fixed, or just to strengthen their latch before you transition back to breastfeeding without a shield.

Regardless of whether your little one has tongue tie, though, this is a great nipple shield. Many What to Expect moms say they look and feel very similar to the Medela shields, and they’re a little more affordable, too. The downside is that they’re only available in two sizes, so wouldn’t be the best option for someone who needs a 16 mm shield.

Community Reviews

“I ended up with the Lansinoh brand and first bought my pump size. Once they got here, I was so happy LO would latch after the hospital. After 2 weeks though, I went down a size and they’re perfect. They were such a reasonable price.”

“I use the Lansinoh 20mm ones, and have done since my LO was born. Once you get ones you are comfortable with I would recommend getting several pairs!”

“I really liked the Lansinoh and the Medela ones.”

Best Nipple Shield for Large Nipples

Dr. Brown's Nipple Shields

Goes up to 25 mm

Comes with a case

Some moms say the shape of these isn’t as conducive to a good latch

Expensive

Material: Silicone

Sizes Available: 25 mm and up

Quantity: 2

Case Included: Yes

To clean: Hand wash in warm soapy water or sterilize in boiling water

Why We Love It

From the makers of the popular baby bottles, Dr. Brown’s Nipple Shields are one of the few on the market to offer extended sizing: Their Size 1 nipple shield goes up to 24 mm, while the Size 2 is appropriate for those 25 mm and above. Most nipple shields max out around 23 or 24 mm, making this one of the best options for moms with larger nipples. (Other good options include the Medela 24 mm and the Haakaa Nipple Shield with its round, wide base.)

From the makers of the popular baby bottles, Dr. Brown’s Nipple Shields are one of the few on the market to offer extended sizing: Their

is appropriate for those 25 mm and above. Most nipple shields max out around 23 or 24 mm, making this one of the best options for moms with larger nipples. (Other good options include the

Though they’re on the pricier side, these silicone shields come two to a pack along with a carrying case. There are also additional holes on the tips of these nipple shields, which helps prevent milk from pooling (something that may happen if you have oversupply).

Some moms do say that the shape of these nipple shields — they’re less elongated than others on the market — make it hard for some babies to latch, however. Many moms also report that the silicone is also especially soft and thin, which some appreciate but others find to feel too flimsy.

Best Affordable Nipple Shields

Purifyou Nipple Shield

Affordable

Wide range of sizes available

Case is included

Some parents say their babies didn’t latch as well on these as Medela

Material: Silicone

Sizes Available: 16 mm, 18 mm, 20 mm and 24 mm

Quantity: 3

Case Included: Yes

To clean: Hand wash in warm soapy water or sterilize in boiling water for at least 2 minutes

Why We Love It

Some moms credit this nipple shield for “saving” their breastfeeding experience. Purifyou Nipple Shields are BPA- and BPS-free and feature a unique wide, curved design that allows you to better hold it in place while feeding baby because it mimics the natural shape of your breast. Many moms say that this design seems to help the shields stay in place a little better. And, of all the products on this list, it’s by far the cheapest option, breaking down to just $4 per set — you’ll always have one on standby, just in case!

They also come with a case that’s big enough to hold a pacifier, so you can continue using it after you’ve eventually weaned your baby off the shields. Best yet, Purifyou’s nipple shields are available in smaller sizes than many other brands (16 mm and 18 mm in addition to the standard 20 mm and 24 mm), making them a good choice for those with smaller nipples.

Best Nipple Shield for Transitioning from Bottle to Breast

Haakaa Nipple Shield

Anti-slip features

Two base options

Expensive

Some texture

Material: Silicone

Sizes Available: 22 mm in a round or triangle base

Quantity: 1

Case Included: No

To clean: Hand wash in warm soapy water, use a steam system or boil in water for 2-3 minutes

Why We Love It

For those looking to transition from bottle to breastfeeding, finding a nipple shield that is similar to a bottle might be helpful.

The Haakaa Nipple Shield — from the same brand as the widely beloved manual pump — has a symmetrical “butterfly” design and anti-slip ridge that make it easier for moms to hold it in place. And if you know and love the brand’s pump, you can be rest assured this has the same powerful suction, thanks to the thick silicone and asymmetrical design.

Although it doesn’t work for everyone, many moms who have been primarily bottle-feeding call the Haakaa Nipple Shield a “game changer.” They find that their babies like the shape of the nipple, which is designed a bit more like a bottle to help ease little ones into breastfeeding with some familiarity. Best of all, it’s made to fit all nipple sizes, so you don’t have to worry about selecting the right size. Those with flat or inverted nipples also found this shield to work well as it creates great suction.

There is some texture on this shield, a feature that Dr. Chan says can sometimes be confusing for babies, but this may not be a problem for little ones who are already used to the texture on a bottle nipple. It’s also one of the more expensive nipple shields on the market and does not come with a case, so you’ll have to find something to store it in when not in use.

Community Reviews

“I use this for every feed! My baby loves it and works so well if you have inverted nipples. It creates a suction once they start sucking and stays on. It was a game changer for me. I was only pumping for a few weeks until I got this.”

“I have this one! My baby is EBF but I had to pump and give him a bottle at a few days old because he destroyed my nipples and it was so painful. Also my nips flattened so it was hard for him to latch. I got this nipple shield because it was a similar shape to the bottle I was using, and my baby took to it no problem. I squeeze it and kind of suction it to my nipple and I can see it fill with milk. I was thrilled I was able to feed him from the breast again, and now I can sometimes pop the shield off midway and he will latch on my actual nipple too.”

“I used the Haakaa nipple shield and it was the only one that worked for me. Its shape is closer to a bottle nipple which helped me transition from bottle to breast.”

Best Nipple Shield for Short Nipples

Haakaa Silicone Nipple Shield

Ideal for shorter or smaller nipples

Dishwasher-safe

May be too small for those with larger nipples

Material: Silicone

Sizes Available: 15 mm

Quantity: 2

Case Included: No

To clean: Hand wash in warm soapy water, sterilize in boiling water or put in dishwasher

Why We Love It

Before you started breastfeeding, it may not have even occurred to you that your nipples might be “short.” But when it comes to nursing, shorter nipples can sometimes make latching a little trickier. If that’s the case for you, many moms recommend the Haakaa Silicone Nipple Shield — the brand’s more “traditional”-looking nipple shield that more closely resembles a real nipple than a bottle.

This nipple shield is well suited for nipples that are on the smaller and shorter side: It’s 15 mm, one of the smallest options on the market, and is less elongated than comparable products. (That said, the smaller size means this isn’t a good option for anyone with larger, longer nipples.) Like many of the other nipple shields on this list, it’s made from ultra thin silicone, and is slightly curved at the top to allow baby’s nose to touch your skin while they feed.

And although the silicone is very thin, it’s one of the few nipple shields on the market that’s dishwasher-safe, making it a breeze to clean.

Community Reviews

fitztart “In terms of brands, I preferred the Haakaa nipple shields.”

Best Nipple Shield for Flat or Inverted Nipples

Haakaa Two-Pack Inverted Nipple Correctors

Comes with a carrying case

Dishwasher safe

Expensive

Material: Silicone

Sizes Available: One (‎1.81 x 1.14 x 3.39 inches)

Quantity: 2

Case Included: Yes

To clean: Sterilize with any steam sterilizing system or boiling water, dishwasher-safe

Why We Love It

Inverted or flat nipples are fairly common, but boy can they sure throw a wrench into your breastfeeding plans. That said, it's still possible to breastfeed; it just might take a little training at first (for both of you).

Haakaa Inverted Nipple Correctors are designed specifically for flat or inverted nipples. Called "nipple aspirators," they use suction and gentle pressure to help draw them out before feedings for easier milk flow. (Pumping right before breastfeeding can have the same effect, too.)

They’re a little different than the other nipple shields on this list because you put them on before you're planning to feed your little one and remove them before you nurse. The results last for two hours, and you must repeat the process with each feeding. They're sold two to a pack and can be tossed in the dishwasher; a case is also included.

Our Research

We referenced information from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) and La Leche League International and spoke to a lactation consultant on how to use nipple shields properly:

Suzanne Chan , D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T., board-certified pediatric nurse practitioner working in the Infant Cardiac NICU at NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital in New York City who is also a certified lactation counselor (CLC)

Additionally, we consulted What to Expect staff members, including:

Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Editor, mom of an 18-month-old

As a mom of two and former parenting editor who has used nipple shields while breastfeeding, I’ve also included my experience from testing some of the products on this list.

Finally, we canvassed the What to Expect community boards to learn which nipple shields moms-to-be felt were comfortable to wear and use, and helpful in relieving frustrating breastfeeding symptoms like cracked nipples and pain.

FAQs

How do I know if I need a nipple shield?

Although nipple shields aren’t used by all breastfeeding moms, they can come in handy for those who are having issues getting their babies to latch.

A poor latch could be happening for a variety of reasons. Your little one might be having trouble because one or both of your nipples are flat or inverted. Tongue-tied and premature babies can also find it tricky to latch on at first, while other babies experience some initial breast refusal for reasons that aren’t always clear.

You may also choose to use a nipple shield if your nipples are cracked or sore from breastfeeding, which is fairly common in the beginning. “Nipple shields are great for immediate issues like sore or cracked nipple pain, or a growing preemie,” says Dr. Chan. While your nipples recover, a shield can help protect symptoms from getting worse.

Keep in mind, Dr. Chan adds, that milk supply is reliant on the infant stimulating milk production and milk supply can dwindle when using nipple shields over time. “Nipple shields can also be frustrating and difficult for babies to adapt to,” she says. “It may require the baby to work harder to extract milk.”

How do I use a nipple shield?

Before you get started, experts suggest speaking with a certified lactation consultant. They may recommend another solution first, such as trying different nursing positions . If they do recommend a nipple shield, your lactation consultant will be able to help guide you closely, because using one improperly could lead to further breastfeeding issues down the line.

For the best way to use a nipple shield, you’ll first want to make sure it stays securely in place. If you’re having trouble getting it to stay put, apply warm water to the underside before sticking it on your nipple, which can help it adhere.

If you notice the nipple shield is cloudy and slipping off when the baby is latching, residue from breastmilk or nipple cream could be the problem. Wash it with a drop of dish soap and water and rinse thoroughly.

How long can I use a nipple shield?

Most lactation experts, including La Leche League International , stress that nipple shields are only intended to be used temporarily and with supervision from a lactation consultant who can give you guidance on sizing and overall usage. Once any problems you’re having are resolved, the goal is to stop using these products.

What size nipple shield should I buy?

Nipple shield sizing corresponds to the diameter of the shields measured in millimeters. You can follow the manufacturer’s sizing chart, but ideally you should also work with a lactation consultant to get the correct fit, because it's not necessarily a one-to-one relationship with the size of your own nipple.

“Proper measurement and use of the nipple shield is key to success,” says Dr. Chan. “A lactation consultant can work with you and ensure that you are using the correct nipple shield for you and using it properly.”

WhatToExpect.com, Breastfeeding Basics , January 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How a Lactation Consultant Can Help You Breastfeed , October 2021. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Breastfeeding Challenges , February 2021. La Leche League International, Inverted or Flat Nipples , February 2022.

Your Next Read

How to Use a Nipple Shield When Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Best Nipple Creams to Help You Find Relief While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Breastfeeding With Flat or Inverted Nipples Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Best Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

How to Get a Proper Breastfeeding Latch Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Treat Sore Nipples and Breastfeeding Pain Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Most Common Breastfeeding Problems and Solutions Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Breastfeeding With Breast Implants Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

How to Treat Milk Blebs or Blisters on Your Nipple When Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Switching Between Breast and Bottle? Here’s How to Avoid Nipple Confusion Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Tips for Breastfeeding a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Benefits of Breastfeeding for Mom and Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Breastfeeding Trick That Saved My Sanity With a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window