7 Best Convertible and All-in-One Car Seats, Tested and Reviewed by Real Parents

Best Convertible Car Seats

Quick Summary

The best convertible car seat is the Graco 4Ever DLX 4-in-1 Convertible Car Seat, according to certified passenger safety technicians and testers from the What to Expect staff and user community. When choosing a convertible car seat, experts and parents say the most important factors to consider are height and weight limits, longevity and ease of installation.

When I was pregnant with my first child, convertible car seats weren’t even on my radar. I was much more focused on buying an infant car seat — and quite honestly, I don’t think I fully understood how short a lifespan that purchase would have. When I was pregnant with my second, I immediately purchased a convertible car seat, knowing I didn’t want to have to replace a very expensive piece of baby gear a year later.

A convertible car seat can change to adapt to your growing baby’s needs. Install it as a rear-facing car seat when they’re a newborn, then turn it around when your toddler outgrows the rear-facing height or weight limits. Brilliant, right? Well, there is a catch: To pack in all that flexibility, a convertible car seat will be heavier and larger than an infant car seat. You also can’t pop a convertible seat out of the base and into a stroller, a feature many parents love (especially when they’re running late.) Rather, you'll need to remove your baby each time. Still, that lack of portability may be worth it to you for the value and convenience you get in return.

How We Chose the Best Convertible Car Seats

First, I ensured all products I evaluated met safety recommendations from leading expert groups: the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Then, I spoke to experts for additional insights about convertible car seat features to look for, including:

Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T., a board-certified pediatric nurse practitioner at New York-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital in New York City, Certified Passenger Safety Technician (CPST) and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review board .

Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P., a board-certified pediatrician at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital in Cincinnati, Ohio, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review board

Next, I interviewed six What to Expect staffers about their experiences testing car seats, and reviewed the results from the 2024 What to Expect Mom Must-have Awards , which polled more than 9,000 parents in the What to Expect community. Whenever you're looking to make a big purchase for your baby, it's wise to consider the feedback of many parents. While some car seat features are universally desired (like ease of use, ease of maintenance and longevity), there are other features that some families may weigh more heavily than others (like size and weight, especially if you have more than one child and need to cram multiple seats into your vehicle).

results from the 2024 What to Expect Mom Must-have Awards , which polled more than 9,000 parents in the What to Expect community. Whenever you're looking to make a big purchase for your baby, it's wise to consider the feedback of many parents. While some car seat features are universally desired (like ease of use, ease of maintenance and longevity), there are other features that some families may weigh more heavily than others (like size and weight, especially if you have more than one child and need to cram multiple seats into your vehicle).

The parents I interviewed were:

Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor, mom of a 2-year-old

Jeanne Beacom, Senior Campaign Reporting Manager, mom of a 2-year-old

Sarah Darby, Sr. SEO Strategist, mom of a 1-year-old

Alexandra Bisono, Sr. Art Director, mom of a 2-year-old

Olivia DeLong, Sr. Editor, mom of a 3.5-year-old

Shelley Gingrich, Executive Director, Brand Solutions, mom of 5-year-old and 2-year-old

As a mom of two and former parenting editor, I’ve also included my experience from testing many of the convertible car seats on the list.

Best Convertible Car Seat Overall

Graco 4Ever DLX 4-in-1 Convertible Car Seat

Easy to install

Plush fabric feels cozy

Some parents find it tricky to put the fabric back together afterwards

Why We Love It

If you’re looking for a convertible car seat that will last you many years, this car seat from Graco — a two-time What to Expect Mom Must-Have Award winner — may be your best bet. As the name implies, this car seat is designed to give you years of use — maybe even up to your child’s 10th birthday!

— may be your best bet. As the name implies, this car seat is designed to give you years of use — maybe even up to your child’s 10th birthday!

That's thanks to the car seat's four-in-one design. The seat can transform from a rear-facing car seat (from 4 to 40 pounds) to a forward-facing car seat (from 22 to 65 pounds), high-back booster seat (from 40 to 100 pounds) and backless booster seat (from 40 to 120 pounds). “I like the ‘grow with me’ aspect,” says Melissa Bykofsky, What to Expect’s Executive Editor and mom of a 2-year-old. “In theory, I won’t need to get another car seat or a booster or anything else for the car.”

And while parents love the Graco 4Ever for its versatility, younger users will adore this convertible car seat for its cup holders (one on each side for snacks and sippies). Many parents also report that the fabric feels plush and their children seem comfortable and content sitting in the seat.

Parents appreciate many of the 4Ever DLX 4-in-1’s features, too: What to Expect parents say that the straps are very easy to adjust. While it’s easy to remove the lining to clean, some parents do find it tricky to put the fabric back on, though others say it’s relatively easy to wipe and spot-clean.

Dimensions: 24 x 21.5 x 20 inches

Weight: 22.75 lbs.

Rear-facing weight and height limit: 4-40 lbs.; 12-49 inches

Forward-facing weight and height limit: 22-120 lbs; 27-57 inchesCup holders: Yes

Anti-rebound bar: No

Extended rear-facing ability: No

Community Reviews

“We have the Graco 4Ever DLX 4-in-1 and love it. The one I have lasts for all stages and you don’t need another seat. We love it. We have one for my 2 year old and 10 month old! Huge benefit is the cushioned Velcro so you don’t have to fully disassemble the car seat to clean — so nice!”

“I love ours! My 3-year-old has used it since she was 1 and I started using it with my 10-month-old since birth!”

“Absolutely love it. We have four between our two cars and my mom's and my MIL’s car. This is very easy to clean, easy to adjust, great price and I'm happy that it will last longer.”

Easiest Convertible Car Seat to Install

Britax One4Life ClickTight All-in-One Car Seat

Clicking ensures you've installed seat correctly

Expensive

Heavier

Why We Love It

If the mere thought of car seat installation fills you with dread, you’ll want a product that’s simple to correctly install in your car. Parents love Britax car seats in part because of the brand’s ClickTight system, which makes installation with your car's seat belts super easy. There are three installation steps with the Britax One4Life ClickTight All-in-One Car Seat, and you’ll hear an audible and very satisfying "click" when the compartment's shut correctly — instant peace of mind!

As with the Graco 4Ever, the Britax One4Life is an excellent long-term investment. You can use it when your child is a 5-pound newborn all the way up until she’s 120 pounds and 63 inches tall in booster-seat mode. In addition to the ease of installation, What to Expect parents say the fabric is plush and comfortable for little riders and all the straps are easy to adjust. There are also 15 different headrest positions and nine recline positions, which can help you find the perfect fit for your baby.

At 30 pounds, this is one of the heavier convertible car seats on our list. It might not be the best choice if you plan on taking your child’s car seat in and out of the car often or will be traveling with it. At $400, the One4Life is also on the expensive end, but many What to Expect parents say they feel like it’s a fair price given the easy installation and other high-end features.

Dimensions: ‎20.5 x 19.5 x 25 inches

Weight: 30 lbs.

Rear-facing weight and height limit: 5-50 lbs.; until the top of child’s head is at least 1 inch (2.5 cm) below the top of the head restraint

Forward-facing weight and height limit: 22-120 lbs.; up to 49 inches

Cup holders: Yes

Anti-rebound bar: No

Extended rear-facing ability: Yes

Community Reviews

“We love our Britax One4Life for our 2 year old! We switched her to it at 1. When she was smaller it was a little harder to tighten the chest straps, but now we don’t have any issues. We’ve washed the covers twice now and it’s held up great! We took it to the beach last summer and with it in the middle seat two adults still had plenty of room in the window seats. Planning on purchasing the same one for our 5 month old!”

“We have the Britax One4Life and we love it! It has the ClickTight feature which makes it easy to get a proper tight install. It's also easy to adjust everything. It’s super plush and my son seems super comfortable. It comes in different fabric options as well. We went with the cool dry to help keep him cool in the hot months since we live in the south. Highly recommend overall! We’ve been using it for about three months now.”

“We love the Britax One4Life! Pricey but so worth it!”

Best Lightweight Convertible Car Seat

Cosco Scenera Next Convertible Car Seat

Affordable

Travel-friendly

Slim enough to fit three in a backseat

Low weight limit of 40 pounds

Why We Love It

The Cosco Scenera Next is ultra lightweight (just 10 pounds), making it one of the best convertible car seats for travel. It has a slimmer profile than many other convertible car seats on this list and is certified for use on an aircraft. This convertible car seat is also a good choice if you’re constantly moving the baby's car seat between cars or in and out of taxis, as it’s so lightweight. Plus, “it's very easy to install,” says Jeanne Beacom, What to Expect’s Senior Campaign Reporting Manager and mom of a 2-year-old. “I would totally be comfortable putting the Scenera in a taxi, Uber or Lyft.”

Another bonus: With its slimmer size, the Scenera Next is narrow enough to fit in a backseat along with two other car seats, making it a solid option for families with three kids.

It’s also inexpensive, most likely because there are few bells and whistles. Although some parents complain that it’s a little tough to get a tight fit while installing in the car, others rave about the advantages the streamlined design provides. With its lower price point, the Cosco Scenera Next is also an ideal back-up car seat for grandparents’ or nanny’s car.

One downside is that you won’t be able to use this car seat for as long as other models on this list: The maximum weight in the forward-facing position is 40 pounds, while other convertible car seats (see: Graco 4Ever, Britax One4Life) can go up to 120 pounds. Jeanne also notes that while it’s easy to adjust the straps, they can sometimes get a little uneven (to fix this, she reaches underneath to manually straighten them, which works well enough — though it can be frustrating to have to do so with a wiggly toddler in the seat).

Dimensions: 17.63 x 15.75 x 30.25 inches

Weight: 10 lbs.

Rear-facing weight and height limit : 5-40 lbs.; 19-40 inches

Forward-facing weight and height limit: 22-40 lbs.; 29-43 inches

Cup holders: Yes

Anti-rebound bar: No

Extended rear-facing ability: No

Community Reviews

“For travel, we have one of these carseats for each kid. They're safe, cheap and only 10 pounds, so easy for travel.”

“Also easy to install. The two drawbacks are: (1) they basically only sell it at Walmart and (2) It is outgrown very quickly by torso height so you need to ok with buying it just for this trip or recent trips. It probably won’t fit a year from now. But it’s sooo light and cheap though. It’s great for travel.”

"I’ve used the Cosco Scenera Next. Super lightweight and easy to install in a cab or when traveling. It’s a no frills seat but worked great for us and we used it on plane rides too."

Best Affordable Convertible Car Seat

Safety 1st Grow and Go All-in-One Convertible Car Seat

Long-lasting

Bulky

More difficult to install

Why We Love It

For a long-lasting convertible car seat that’s a little less expensive, there’s the Safety 1st Grow and Go All-in-One Convertible Car Seat. For under $200, this convertible car seat — another 3-in-1 model — can take your child from the newborn period all the way to official big-kid stage.

“We wanted an inexpensive car seat that would last through the booster stage as well,” says Sarah Darby, What to Expect’s Sr. SEO Strategist and mom of a 1-year-old. “The seat exceeded our expectations — it was affordable, comfortable, easy to install and easy to use on a regular basis.”

The brand’s Quick Harness is known for being easy to adjust, and parents appreciate the harness holders — handy for those moments when a wriggly kid makes it tricky to lay the straps down perfectly. There are two cup holders, both which can be removed to clean. Another nice-to-have — more than a dozen color options to choose from!

The Grow and Go isn’t the narrowest convertible car seat on our list, and some parents find the installation process to be a little tricky and less intuitive than others on this list. If you need to fit three across or are looking for an especially slim, lightweight car seat for travel, this might not be your best bet.

Dimensions: ‎31.75 x 19.25 x 28.75 inches

Weight: 18.66 lbs.

Rear-facing weight and height limit: 5-40 lbs.; 19 inches

Forward-facing weight and height limit: 22-100 lbs.; 27-57 inches

Cup holders: Yes

Anti-rebound bar: No

Extended rear-facing ability: No

Community Reviews

jaskidmore4 “We have the Safety 1st and love it. It's supposed to fit better in compact cars as well.”

Best Convertible Car Seat for Rear-Facing Toddlers

Nuna Rava Convertible Car Seat

Stylish

Comfortable fabric

Made without flame-retardant chemicals

Heavy

More expensive

Why We Love It

You certainly don’t have to spend a lot on great baby gear, but if you're looking to splurge, the Nuna Rava is a great choice. Parents appreciate the clever design: A grand total of 10 recline angle choices (five for rear-facing, five for forward-facing) makes it easier to fit even in smaller back seats. Plus, the True Tension system makes installing the Rava with your car's seat belts practically effortless. Olivia DeLong, Sr. Editor and mom of a 3.5 year old, says she finds the Rava “super easy” to install. “It takes under five minutes,” she says. We often need to load it into our daughter's grandparent's cars and it is a breeze!”

This car seat has a 50-pound limit for rear-facing kids, which is especially high (many other convertible car seats max out at 40 pounds in rear-facing mode). Many reviewers appreciate that the Rava is made without fire-retardant chemicals, which some parents would prefer to avoid. Another perk: The built-in cup holder, which can be flipped up for sippy cup storage or folded down for more space on the side of the car seat. As your little one grows, she'll benefit from adjustable foot rest to provide more leg room, 10 head support positions and a harness that doesn't need to be rethreaded.

Alexandra Bisono, Sr. Art Director and mom of a 2-year-old, “truly loves” the Nuna brand, and especially that her child could ride back-facing for longer. “My daughter is over 2 years old and we plan to keep her back-facing for as long as possible to keep her safe, and she is very comfortable,” she says.

The Rava is the most expensive car seat on our list, and it maxes out at 65 pounds in the forward-facing position — which is perfectly long-lasting, just not so much as a 3-in-1 model that includes a booster seat. If longevity is a priority, one of the 3- or 4-in-one car seats might be a better long-term investment.

Also worth mentioning: “We love that this car seat offers many recline positions and head support which are easy to adjust, but you have to remove the seat belt anytime you make any adjustments and install it,” says Alexandra. “That is a downside for us.”

Dimensions: 25 x 16 x 19 inches

Weight: 27.2 lbs.

Rear-facing weight and height limit: 5-50 lbs.

Forward-facing weight and height limit: 25-65 lbs.; up to 49 inches

Cup holders: Yes (they flip open)

Anti-rebound bar: No

Extended rear-facing ability: Yes

Community Reviews

“Love my Nuna Rava. Has spots to hold the buckles on the sides to make putting a kid in easier (so they don’t sit in the clips). I’m convinced he’s happier and sleeps better in the car because it’s so soft and comfortable.”

“We were between two seats as well and ended up with the Rava. We love it so far! It is so comfy and baby seems to be very comfortable as well.”

“Love our Rava, we plan to rear face as long as possible and it has high weight limits both rear- and forward-facing. My daughter is 8 months tomorrow and is over 95 percent in height and weight. It’s so easy to install and use, love it in this household, I’m buying a second for my car.”

Best Car Seat for Taller Kids

Graco Extend2Fit Convertible Car Seat

Has an extension panel for extra legroom

Bulky

Harness can be tricky to tighten

Why We Love It

Like some others on this list, the Graco Extend2Fit Convertible Car Seat can accommodate kids up to 50 pounds in the rear-facing position, which is ideal if you’d like your toddler to sit rear-facing for longer. It also has a nice feature — an extension panel that adjusts to provide 5 inches of additional legroom. This can make for a more comfortable ride for taller toddlers and also help your little one comfortably sit rear-facing as long as possible.

This convertible car seat has a no-rethread harness, which means that the straps can be adjusted simply by raising or lowering the headrest (handy if you have a bigger or smaller child occasionally borrowing the seat) and two built-in cup holders, perfect for drinks, snacks and toys. “This carseat is super affordable, and we've actually had both sets of grandparents purchase one for their cars so we don't have to transfer and install car seats when we visit,” says Olivia, who also has this car seat in addition to the Nuna Rava.

We switched to this car seat after my older son outgrew his Nuna Pipa infant car seat at age 1 but we wanted him to continue rear-facing for at least another year. He’s consistently been in the upper percentiles for height, and the Graco Extend2Fit’s extension bar was appealing. He’s been riding in it for 2 ½ years now, and the seat has held up very well — and he still has plenty of room.

At 19 pounds, it’s also on the lighter side for a convertible car seat. While it is clunky to hold, my husband was able to carry my son’s Graco Extend2Fit’s through two international airports. And without getting into too much detail, I can confirm that it’s relatively easy to take all of the inserts out, clean them, then replace them (I can’t count how many times we’ve done it now).

Although the Extend2Fit is known for fitting well in most cars, it isn’t the sleekest car seat if you need to fit three across. We’ve had it in our backseat with my younger son’s infant car seat, and it’s definitely a tight squeeze when I find myself having to ride in the middle. Olivia also points out that the straps tend to get twisted more than they do on some other car seats.

Dimensions: ‎21.5 x 19.5 x 23.5 inches

Weight: 19 lbs.

Rear-facing weight and height limit: 4-50 lbs.

Forward-facing weight and height limit: 22-65 lbs.; up to 49 inches

Cup holders: Yes

Anti-rebound bar: No

Extended rear-facing ability: Yes

Video Reviews

Graco Extend2Fit Convertible Car Seat Review

Community Reviews

"We have the Extend2Fit and love it! We have three vehicles, Toyota Matrix, Tahoe and an extended cab truck which has a super small backseat and it fits in all of our vehicles! Plus my baby is comfortable and loves sitting up high so he can see out. I had to watch a couple YouTube videos because the straps were almost impossible to tighten, but once I got that figured out I’ve had no complaints.”

“I have the Extend2Fit and love it. I really don’t have any complaints about it.”

“We have the Extend2Fit and really like it. My mother in law bought a different one and comparably it’s way sturdier and I love how easy it is to adjust and use.”

Best Convertible Car Seat for Small Cars

Graco Slimfit 3-in-1 Car Seat

A slimmer fit for backseats with multiple car seats

Rotating cup holders save space

Some parents say the straps can be tricky to tighten

Why We Love It

The Graco Slimfit 3-in-1 Car Seat might be right for you if space is a priority in your car. What to Expect parents say it’s slightly slimmer than the Extend2Fit and comparable models, and a good choice for families who need to fit three car seats in the backseat. The rotating cup holders are a clever design feature — they turn in to create additional space. “We have a pretty small car, so we wanted to maximize space with two car seats in the back,” says Shelley Gingrich, Executive Director, Brand Solutions, mom of a 4-year-old and a 1-year-old. “The Slimfit is a bit more narrow than other car seats, plus the cup holders fold in to make more space.”

Although it’s not quite as long-lasting as the Graco 4Ever or Britax One4Life ClickTight, the Slimfit does have impressive longevity: It’s a 3-in-1 model including a rear- and forward-facing position, as well as a highback booster mode that fits children up to 100 pounds. Parents also say the Slimfit is easy to install.

“We got the Slimfit because the price was reasonable, the design was slimmer than others for our small car and the 3-in-1 meant it would make it to 100 pounds,” says Sarah Darby, Sr. SEO Strategist and mom to a 1-year-old. (She also has this car seat in addition to the Safety 1st Grow and Go.) “We didn't want to have to buy another car and the Slimfit's height/weight maximums mean we likely won't have to. Definitely lived up to expectations on all three accounts!”

Dimensions: ‎21.5 x 19.9 x 25.5 inches

Weight: 19 lbs.

Rear-facing weight and height limit: 5-40 lbs.

Forward-facing weight and height limit: 22-100 lbs.; up to 57 inches

Cup holders: Yes

Anti-rebound bar: No

Extended rear-facing ability: Yes

Community Reviews

“Just got it for my daughter. It’s a great seat. Very user-friendly, easy to install correctly, very easy to adjust to fit baby. Straps tighten super easy. I like the Graco 4Ever a little better, but this is great of you want more than one child in the backseat.”

“I have the Graco Slimfit for my daughter and I’m so glad! We found out we were pregnant with twins one month after purchasing her car seat. It’s very sleek, we love it.”

“We got the Graco Slimfit because I wanted something not so bulky.”

How to Choose the Best Convertible Car Seat for You

Every car seat sold in the United States must adhere to the safety standards set forth by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), so you can feel confident that the convertible car seat you choose has met their requirements. That means the best convertible car seat for you will depend on your personal situation and preferences. For example, how big your car is, how often you’ll be uninstalling and reinstalling the car seat in different vehicles, and how important certain features are to you.

Per the guidance of leading experts, two members of the What to Expect Medical Review Board, as well as What to Expect staffers and community members, we evaluated and selected the best convertible car seats based on the following criteria:

Weight limits: Confirm the numbers for both rear- and forward-facing positions. Parents who like the idea of keeping their child rear-facing or simply in a car seat (versus a booster seat) for a longer period of time will appreciate higher weight limits. Also note that some convertible car seats may have higher minimum weight limits, such as 12 or 14 pounds, meaning you won't be able to use them right after your baby is born. We’ve listed the weight and height minimums and maximums for both rear- and forward-facing modes to consider when making your decision.

Ease of installation, use and care: The best convertible car seats are those that can be installed and used stress-free. Many car seats use a bubble or dial to show that the seat is in the correct position, while others have ingenious features that make installation with LATCH or seat belts more straightforward. This handy chart from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) rates the ease of use for various car seats. Our picks all have an overall ease of use rating of three stars or higher from the NHTSA (and most have four stars).

Also helpful is a car seat that’s easy to maintain. “Spills and other messes are inevitable,” says Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., a board-certified pediatric nurse practitioner and Certified Passenger Safety Technician (CPST). “Finding a carseat that is easy to clean and put back together is a must.” Some (but not all) car seats have fabric that’s machine-washable, which can make cleaning them infinitely easier.

Size and weight: A narrower car seat can be helpful if you have a small car or will eventually need to fit three children into your backseat. If you're planning to travel with your convertible car seat or will be moving it between cars, you may want to choose one that weighs a bit less.

Price: There’s a wide range in terms of price for convertible car seats. A car seat with extra features (think magnetic chest clip buckles, cup holders and even extendable leg rests) is going to cost more than a simpler, but equally safe, option. We prioritized convertible car seats that were less than $600, and most are in the $200 to $300 range.

Longevity: Along with the basic style, which can be used either rear- or forward-facing from infancy through the toddler or preschool years, you might also see three-in-one car seats (which include the option to transform into a belt-positioning booster seat when your child is ready) and four-in-one car seats (also called all-in-one car seats, these are essentially the same as the three-in-one, but you can use them as a backless booster when your child meets the weight and height requirements).

FAQs

Should I buy an infant car seat or a convertible car seat?

Both infant car seats and convertible car seats have pros and cons to consider.

Infant car seats are rear-facing only. They have a lower weight limit than convertible car seats, and can usually be used until your baby is 22 to 35 pounds and 26 to 35 inches, depending on the model. Infant car seats are smaller than convertible car seats, have carrying handles and can be easily clicked in and out of their base. This makes them more portable. “They typically come with a detachable carrier that can be easily installed and removed from the vehicle, often compatible with travel systems and strollers,” Dr. Chan says.

Convertible car seats can be both rear- and forward-facing. This means you can use them from the day you bring your newborn home from the hospital until she reaches the maximum weight or height requirement for the seat’s forward-facing position, which is usually sometime in the preschool years. As a result, a convertible car seat is a better long-term investment. “Convertible car seats offer longer-term value as it grows with the child,” says Dr. Chan. The downside is that convertible models are much less portable — they can’t be easily taken out of the car and clipped into a travel system stroller, for example.

An infant car seat might be right for you if:

You want to be able to use your child’s car seat as part of a travel system

Your child will be a passenger in a few different cars (yours, your partner’s, a grandparent’s, etc.) and you don’t want to buy a separate car seat for each

A convertible car seat might be right for you if:

You want to invest in one car seat when your baby is a newborn and not replace it for many years

You don’t mind not being able to easily take your child’s car seat in and out of the car or use it as a stroller attachment

When should I switch from an infant car seat to a convertible car seat?

Most convertible car seats can be used from day one of a newborn’s life until she reaches the maximum weight or height requirement in the forward-facing position. If, however, you start with an infant car seat, you will want to move your child to a convertible car seat once they've reached the maximum weight or height for that model.

When should I switch from a convertible car seat to a booster car seat?

Once your child has met the maximum weight or height requirements for the forward-facing position of her convertible car seat, you can transition her to a booster seat. According to the AAP , she should stay in the booster until the vehicle seat belt fits properly, which is when she is at least 4 foot 9 inches tall; most children will not get a good fit from car seat belts until they're 10 to 12 years old.

What is the best age for a convertible car seat?

Most convertible car seats can be used from day one of a newborn’s life until she reaches the maximum weight or height requirement in the forward-facing position. In most convertible car seats, that’s around 65 pounds and 40 to 49 inches tall. This means your child will be able to ride in the same convertible car seat as a newborn, toddler and even preschooler.

Can my child sleep in a car seat?

The safest place for your baby to sleep is on a firm, flat surface such as her crib, bassinet, portable crib or playard. If, however, your little one dozes off in the car, there’s no need to panic. If you installed your car seat at a recline position recommended by the manufacturer and the straps are tightened properly, your baby will not slump down (and it's okay if their head leans to one side). If you're nervous, someone can sit in the back with the baby to check their breathing periodically. The AAP recommends moving your sleeping baby to a safe sleep surface as soon as possible.

Babies should never be put to sleep in a car seat that's not installed in a car, especially not with the harness straps undone.

At home, always put your baby to sleep flat on her back (never on her tummy) in an empty crib free of blankets, pillows, stuffed animals or bumpers. These practices are the best way to reduce the chances for sudden infant death syndrome, or SIDS.

American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), How to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy Explained , July 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Shopping for Car Seats: Tips for Parents , February 2020. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Keep Child Passengers Safe on the Road , October 2022. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), Car Seats and Booster Seats , 2023. U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), Booster Seats Business Guidance and Small Entity Compliance Guide , 2023.

Your Next Read

What Different Car Seat Features Really Mean and Whether They're Worth Your Money Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Is Your Baby's Car Seat Safe and Up-to-Date? Check These Infant Car Seat Safety Tips Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

The Best Stroller Travel Systems That Parents Say Make Life Easier Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Know About Your Toddler's Car Seat: Get the Latest Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The Best Winter Car Seat Safety Gear to Keep Baby Warm By Korin Miller, Contributing Writer

The 9 Best Baby Floor Seats, According to Parents and Experts Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Should Your Child Switch to a Forward-Facing Car Seat? Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Is the Doona Car Seat & Stroller Worth the $550 Price Tag? Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

How to Find the Best Stroller for Your Family: A Comprehensive Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How to Buckle Your Newborn Into a Car Seat Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Why Aftermarket Car Seat Accessories Are So Unsafe Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Should You Bring Your Child’s Car Seat on an Airplane? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window