The Best Infant Life Jackets, According to Sailing Instructors and Boating Parents

Best Infant Life Jackets

Quick Summary

The best infant life jackets keep your child safe around any body of water, whether you’re headed to the lake, beach or pool. Based on advice from sailing instructors and fellow boating parents, the Stearns Kids Life Jacket is a top choice because of its snug yet comfy fit and affordable price point.

Because drowning is the leading cause of death for children between ages 1 and 4, you’ll want to make sure you’re equipped with the right safety gear. And one of the most important items you can have, whether boating or hanging at the pool, is an infant life jacket.

In fact, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) says that babies should wear a life jacket whenever they’re near water , even if you don’t plan on going for a dip. Even an inch or two poses the threat of drowning , especially for infants and young kids who can’t swim. Of course, life jackets “only work when they are worn,” points out Angus Robertson, sailing director at the Lewes Yacht Club in Lewes, Delaware.

And I know all too well that getting a squirmy baby to wear one without screaming is a tall order. As a lifelong sailor, I’ve been taking my four kids on boats as soon as they were able. Nonetheless, some were fussier than others when it came to putting on a vest. Through trial and error, I’ve learned that fit and weight can make a massive difference in how likely your little one will enjoy the experience. My recommendation is to look for comfy padding and adjustable straps, in addition to a U.S. Coast Guard (USCG)-Approved Label.

How I Chose the Best Infant Life Jackets

I spoke with two sailing instructors (Robertson and Ricky Nelson, owner and general manager at Annapolis Sailing School in Annapolis, Maryland), along with Natalie Livingston, CPRC, AFO , a lifeguard instructor trainer and co-founder of Alive Solutions, Inc. , to understand what types of life jackets and safety features to prioritize when compiling my list of the best infant life vests. I also consulted guidance measures outlined by the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG).

As a mom of four who spends most of her free time on or near water, I relied heavily on my firsthand experience when considering different brands and products. But I also spoke with Emily Longmire, a fellow boater and mom, and reviewed recommendations from parents in the What to Expect community to survey as many options as possible. In the end, I narrowed down my list to the seven best infant life jackets using expert advice and parent feedback to ensure each pick is safe and comfortable for baby. All of the below infant life jackets are:

USCG-certified: Believe it or not, there are some life jackets available to purchase that do not officially meet USCG standards.

Type II PFDs: Personal floatation devices (PFDs) are categorized as Type I, Type II, Type III, and Type V. Type II is specifically recommended for infants — or those weighing less than or equal to 33 pounds — as it provides greater buoyancy and features a face-up design. The padded neck collar also best supports baby’s head. Also keep in mind that the USCG doesn't recommend boarding with a little one until they are at least 18 pounds.

Available in vivid colors: Aquatic experts prefer bright hues for improved visibility. Plus, playful patterns and color palettes may also warm a choosy little one up to the idea of wearing a life vest altogether (whatever works, right?).

Best Overall Infant Life Jacket

Coleman Stearns Kids Life Jacket

Affordable

Fits babies comfortably

Durable

very bright color

padded leg strap reduces chance of chafing

Some parents found it bulky

Weight recommendation: Under 30 pounds

Closure type: Buckles and zipper

Material: Nylon, foam

Why We Love It

The Stearns infant life jacket by Coleman is a solid choice for baby and available at a price point that makes it one of the most affordable options on the market. The vest features closed sides to offer a tighter, more secure fit, even when your little one squirms or splashes around. But parents most appreciate the large, padded headrest, which can even be used for back-floating in a pool or calm body of water with touch supervision. (This means you're always within arm's reach of the child).

is a solid choice for baby and available at a price point that makes it one of the most affordable options on the market. The vest features closed sides to offer a tighter, more secure fit, even when your little one squirms or splashes around. But parents most appreciate the large, padded headrest, which can even be used for back-floating in a pool or calm body of water with touch supervision. (This means you're always within arm's reach of the child).

While I’m a fan of the extra padding (it's buoyant enough to keep baby’s head up and dry), some little ones who aren't quite mobile yet may have trouble looking around and get frustrated as a result. Parents also noted that some older children were capable of figuring out how to pull the zipper down part way, so you may want to reserve it for younger children with less dexterity. Still, keep Nelson’s advice top of mind: “Zippered personal floatation devices can have a more secure fit and thus be safer.”

Community Reviews

"The collar only comes up and bobbles around their neck if they are in the water. It keeps their head lifted so they can breathe. Out of the water, it lays totally flat and out of the way"

“I got a coast guard approved life vest with the flap behind the head. Stearns is the most common big name company that makes them I think. I always have the vest on when we are moving. He actually seems to like the vest and rests very well on the boat.”

“If you have to use a life jacket, I suggest this one.”

Most Comfortable Infant Life Vest

Stohlquist Infant Life Jacket

Comfortable head support

Less bulky than other life jackets

Multiple color options

Fits smaller babies well

Some colors are expensive

Front neckline can be high on some babies

Weight recommendation: 8 to 30 pounds

Closure type: Zipper and buckle

Material: Nylon, polyethylene foam

Why We Love It

Many parents in the What to Expect community use the Stohlquist Infant Vestfor their child while boating or at the pool. What sets this one apart from the rest is the comfortable open double-neck collar. The two-part design has a smaller headrest against baby’s neck that cradles their head for comfort. This way, baby has greater mobility than what many of the other bulkier collars provide. Not to mention, the open design of the sides and back allows baby more freedom when moving their arms around. I started using this life vest with my second son and it’s been passed down to his two little sisters since. The open back is a big perk on hot summer days, allowing greater airflow to keep cool when out of the water. You can also choose between multiple shades, and all are relatively bright for visibility.

for their child while boating or at the pool. What sets this one apart from the rest is the comfortable open double-neck collar. The two-part design has a smaller headrest against baby’s neck that cradles their head for comfort. This way, baby has greater mobility than what many of the other bulkier collars provide. Not to mention, the open design of the sides and back allows baby more freedom when moving their arms around. I started using this life vest with my second son and it’s been passed down to his two little sisters since. The open back is a big perk on hot summer days, allowing greater airflow to keep cool when out of the water. You can also choose between multiple shades, and all are relatively bright for visibility.

Jamison Hermann, a former video producer with What to Expect, has used this vest for his toddler, Elena. “We've used it for beach and boat stuff — mostly canoes and rowboats — since she was about 18 months old and it's been great,” he says. “The vest feels very sturdy, and it's easy to make it fit snugly, which is best for safety. I like the bright color, too, as it's easy to spot her when she's on the move.”

Community Reviews

For baby I used something similar but my older daughter didn’t like that one once she was walking. I got her this stohlquist life jacket and she loves it.

“We also have a type II Stohlquist life jacket we use too. You may have to adjust the straps for the clasps/snaps the first time you use it but should be safe if you buy the right size range/age group. Coast guard approved life jackets (within the same type categories) are all created pretty equal though.”

“I used the Stohlquist infant life jacket and loved it. You can find it on sale by just googling it, you don’t have to go through the manufacturer’s site. My guy is 2.5 and 29 lbs so I need to buy the next one for this summer (infant goes up to 30 lbs).”

Best Lightweight Infant Life Jacket

O'Neill Infant Superlite USCG Life Vest

Lightweight

Highly adjustable

Great neck support

Easy to zip and clip in place

Some parents found it bulky

Weight recommendations: Up to 30 pounds

Closure type: Buckles, zipper

Material: Nylon, polyester, foam

Why We Love It

This O’Neill life vest is specially designed to be lightweight, weighing just under one pound. The style, which features wings around the shoulders, minimizes bulk and increases mobility for baby to help them feel more comfortable while wearing it. The polyester outer shell is durable, yet strong enough to stand up to plenty of use. Quick-release buckles make it easy to get baby in and out of this jacket, even if you’re doing it one-handed.

is specially designed to be lightweight, weighing just under one pound. The style, which features wings around the shoulders, minimizes bulk and increases mobility for baby to help them feel more comfortable while wearing it. The polyester outer shell is durable, yet strong enough to stand up to plenty of use. Quick-release buckles make it easy to get baby in and out of this jacket, even if you’re doing it one-handed.

This life jacket is seriously sturdy, too. I have a hand-me-down from my now-teenage niece that still looks great and serves as a backup life jacket in my family or for visitors and extra guests on the boat. Worth noting: Many parents say this tends to run small, making it a good fit (literally) for smaller babies. Just be aware that you’ll likely need to upgrade it as baby grows — Longmire points out that it can cause irritation around the neckline otherwise.

This life jacket is seriously sturdy, too. I have a hand-me-down from my now-teenage niece that still looks great and serves as a backup life jacket in my family or for visitors and extra guests on the boat.

Worth noting: Many parents say this tends to run small, making it a good fit (literally) for smaller babies.

Just be aware that you’ll likely need to upgrade it as baby grows — Longmire points out that it can cause irritation around the neckline otherwise.

Community Reviews

Bearsnacks “We have a type II PFD/life jacket made by O’Neil that we put our daughter in for the pool.”

cinquieme “We really like O’Neill brand life vests. We use those on our boat as well as at the beach.”

Best Brightly-Colored Infant Life Jacket

Airhead Treasure Life Vest

Easy-to-use zipper

Lightweight

Fun design kids love

Durable feel

Some felt that it ran big

Neck may be bulky on bigger babies

Weight recommendations: 15 to 30 pounds

Closure type: Buckles, zipper

Material: Nylon, polyester, polyethylene foam

Why We Love It

The Airhead Treasure Life Vest features the most kid-friendly colors and patterns of the life jackets on this list, with your choice of a bright pink or bright blue headrest. The chest of each jacket has an adorable under the sea scene, with fish, turtles, sharks and even treasure chests. In addition to being colorful, the segmented headrest essentially cradles baby’s head while floating to keep them comfortable and safe.

headrest. The chest of each jacket has an adorable under the sea scene, with fish, turtles, sharks and even treasure chests. In addition to being colorful, the segmented headrest essentially cradles baby’s head while floating to keep them comfortable and safe.

Many parents attest to how well it kept their child’s head out of the water. It comes with a closed-sided design to ensure the vest stays on even when your little one is moving around a lot. It also features a secure buckle across the middle to adjust for tightness and an easy-to-use zipper for speedy changes. And baby will feel even more comfortable with the ample space for moving her arms around.

Community Reviews

“We have this one by Airhead, haven't used it yet but it's good for less than 30lb.”

“[They] have a little panel thing above the neck to keep them from getting stuck face first into the water.”

“We have this one!”

Best Infant Life Jacket for Handsy Babies

Speedo Infant Life Vest

Snug (but not tight) fit

Zipper can be secured

Comfortable fabric

Cute design

Locking mechanism has a slight learning curve

Weight recommendations: Up to 30 pounds

Closure type: Buckles, zipper

Material: Polyester, polyethylene

Why We Love It

Babies and toddlers will inevitably try to pull off their life jacket; fiddling with the zipper and buckles in an attempt to break free. I like that the Speedo Infant Life Vest has a built-in lock to keep the fastener in place once it’s secured. (Just keep in mind that it may take a little practice for adults to get the zipper in and out seamlessly.)

Babies and toddlers will inevitably try to pull off their life jacket; fiddling with the zipper and buckles in an attempt to break free. I like that the

has a built-in lock to keep the fastener in place once it’s secured. (Just keep in mind that it may take a little practice for adults to get the zipper in and out seamlessly.)

This life jacket has an ergonomic padded collar that baby can lean against without getting lost in it. The overall feel is also comfortable, creating a snug fit without being too tight. Longmire also has this life vest and points out that it’s stayed in great condition over time. The fun pineapple print is sure to be a hit with little ones, too.

Community Reviews

“Speedo makes a coast guard approved infant vest.”

“We have not gone yet this year, but are going to be using a Speedo swim vest for both kiddos. Pretty much everyone who had kids before me in our family swears by them, and my sister’s kids were super skinny.”

“He has the speedo life jacket vest from target now and it keeps him afloat.”

Best Quick-Dry Infant Life Jacket

West Marine Deluxe Kids’ Rapid Dry Life Jacket

Easy for parents to get on and off

Dries quickly

Multiple bright colors

Padded crotch strap

Pricey

Weight recommendations: Up to 30 pounds

Closure type: Buckles, zipper

Material: Neoprene, PVC foam

Why We Love It

West Marine is a legacy brand in boating and sailing, and it’s the preferred life jacket company for many sailing associations and marinas. I grew up using West Marine life jackets, so it felt natural to use them for my kids as well. (Longmire has also used West Marine life jackets for her son.) A big perk of the West Marine Deluxe Kids’ Rapid Dry Life Jacket(and the main reason it's worthy of its price tag) is the fact that it dries quickly thanks to special “rapid dry” technology. I’m confident you and your little one will appreciate that fact on cooler days!

West Marine is a legacy brand in boating and sailing, and it’s the preferred life jacket company for many sailing associations and marinas. I grew up using West Marine life jackets, so it felt natural to use them for my kids as well. (Longmire has also used West Marine life jackets for her son.) A big perk of the

(and the main reason it's worthy of its price tag) is the fact that it dries quickly thanks to special “rapid dry” technology. I’m confident you and your little one will appreciate that fact on cooler days!

The vest comes with an adjustable front strap for a secure fit, plus side-release buckles and a zippered front for simple on-and-off access. There’s also a padded crotch strap to lower the risk of chafing. The closed-sided design stays snug on the child no matter how much they move around without feeling bulky. And, she’ll feel more comfortable in this vest with its large armholes for better mobility.

Best Affordable Infant Life Jacket

Overton's Infant Vest

Very low price tag

Extra head support

Stretchy elastic fabric crotch

Unique "swaddle" shape is cozy

Older babies might find it too bulky

Weight recommendations: Up to 30 pounds

Closure type: Buckles

Material: Nylon

Why We Love It

For an under-$30 infant life jacket, try Overton's Infant Vest that’s both super-comfortable and just as safe as any other pick on this list. It looks more like a floatable swaddle blanket than a classic life vest, with several features designed for baby’s comfort. In fact, many parents report that their baby felt so snug, they took a nap while wearing it.

that’s both super-comfortable and just as safe as any other pick on this list.

The elastic material at the crotch helps guarantee a more secure fit that won’t squeeze baby’s legs. And, of course, the oversized collar provides better head support, which might be more comfortable, especially when floating in the water. Given its unique design, however, you may need to upgrade your baby’s life jacket sooner than if you used a more classic style. But the $20 price tag makes the shorter lifespan well worth it.

Features to Keep in Mind When Shopping for Infant Life Jackets

At baseline, it’s important to follow the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) guidance . Based on this, all infant life jackets should be USCG-certified and Type II PFDs. Yet whatever baby life jacket you choose, it’s crucial to always practice good water safety. "Life jackets are not a ‘set it and forget it’ type approach,” says Natalie Livingston, CPRC, AFO , a lifeguard instructor trainer and co-founder of Alive Solutions, Inc. , an educational and consulting firm focused on aquatic safety. “They do not take the place of adult supervision or of learning to swim.” The AAP recommends always being within arm’s reach of your child when in the water with them, even if they’re wearing a life jacket.

At baseline, it’s important to follow the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG)

. Based on this, all infant life jackets should be USCG-certified and Type II PFDs. Yet whatever baby life jacket you choose, it’s crucial to always practice good water safety. "Life jackets are not a ‘set it and forget it’ type approach,” says

, an educational and consulting firm focused on aquatic safety. “They do not take the place of adult supervision or of learning to swim.”

Experts I spoke with also recommend:

Choosing a life jacket with a grab handle, crotch strap and neck collar, as you want to easily be able to lift your little one out of the water.

Sticking to vivid colors, as aquatic experts prefer these to see baby better. “High visibility should be a top priority,” stresses Nelson.

Testing a zipper before buying. Because getting your little one secured quickly is important, it’s best to choose a life jacket with a zipper that goes up and down easily. That, and getting out of a life jacket more quickly when back on land may avoid a meltdown.

Double-checking the weight and size of your little one. Infant life jackets are designed to fit children who weigh 33 pounds or less, per USCG standards. (The next size up is a “child” life jacket, which is made to support kids between 33 pounds and 55 pounds.)

FAQs

What type of life jacket is best for infant?

The USCG recommends that babies wear an infant Type II PFD when they are on a recreational boat. These life jackets are designed to turn the wearer’s head from a face-down position in the water into a face-up position so they can breathe. These life jackets often come in infant- and toddler-specific sizes, which is important because you should always make sure that baby’s life vest fits correctly.

Should a newborn wear a life jacket?

Although infant life jackets are designed for anyone under 30 pounds, the USCG doesn’t recommend taking infants under 18 pounds on a boat as the life vests might not fit properly. Therefore, a newborn shouldn’t wear a life jacket because it won’t be small enough and could even potentially pose a suffocation risk if it slides up and covers their mouth.

Do infants need life jackets on boats?

Yes, the USCG recommends that babies wear a Type II infant life jacket when on a boat. However, note that this may not be until they weigh 18 pounds, or around when they turn 1 years old, because the life vest may not fit them properly yet to work correctly. But once baby is old enough for a life jacket, they should always wear one on a boat.

American Academy of Pediatrics, Drowning Prevention for Curious Toddlers: What Parents Need to Know , June 2023. American Academy of Pediatrics, Infant Water Safety: Protect Your New Baby from Drowning , November 2019. American Academy of Pediatrics, Life Jackets and Life Preservers , April 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics, Pool Dangers and Drowning Prevention?When It’s Not Swimming Time , July 2020. American Academy of Pediatrics, Swim Lessons: When to Start & What Parents Should Know , May 2023. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Drowning Facts , January 2024. Natalie Livingston, Certified Parks and Recreation Operator, Aquatic Facility Operator, Lifeguard, Lifeguard Instructor Trainer and Co-Founder of Alive Solutions, Inc. National Safe Boating Council, Choose the Right Life Jacket . National Safe Boating Council, Life Jackets . Oregon State Marine Board, All About Life Jackets . U.S. Coast Guard Boating Safety Division, How to Choose the Right Life Jacket Brochure . U.S. Coast Guard Boating Safety Division, Life Jacket Wear/Wearing Your Life Jacket .

Your Next Read

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The Best Winter Car Seat Safety Gear to Keep Baby Warm By Korin Miller, Contributing Writer

7 Best Convertible and All-in-One Car Seats, Tested and Reviewed by Real Parents Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Is Your Baby's Car Seat Safe and Up-to-Date? Check These Infant Car Seat Safety Tips Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Swim Lessons for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

What to Know About Your Toddler's Car Seat: Get the Latest Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

My Child Is Afraid of Swimming: What Parents Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Child Drowning Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is It Safe to Buy Used Baby Gear? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Baby Safety Guide All Grandparents Need to Read Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window