The 7 Best Baby Nasal Aspirators for Stuffy Little Noses

Collage of the best nasal aspirators: Frida Baby, Safety 1st, Playhouse, Momcozy, Oogiebear, Grownsy

Quick Summary

According to parent testers on staff and from the What to Expect community, the NoseFrida is highly recommended for manually removing stubborn boogers from small noses.

Mastering the art of sucking my baby’s snot did not come easily to me as a first-time mom. I was terrified to poke the pointy end of a nasal aspirator into my son’s teeny-tiny clogged nostril. Like so many gross parenting tasks, I eventually got the hang of it out of sheer necessity because — spoiler alert! — babies can’t blow their own nose …and most toddlers won’t either.

As any new parent quickly discovers, congestion can derail sleep, feedings, and everyone’s sanity. That’s why finding the best baby nasal aspirator is so important. Alongside your trusty thermometer and humidifier , a nasal aspirator is one of those cold and flu essentials you’ll reach for again and again. But with so many options to choose from (there’s everything from high-tech electric devices and old-school bulbs), it can be confusing to figure out what’s actually worth it.

That’s why, as a mom of two and parenting writer who has researched and tested her fair share of nasal aspirators, I rounded up the most effective, safe, and easy-to-use tools for baby congestion relief below, so you can both breathe a little easier.

How I Chose the Best Baby Nasal Aspirators

When considering the best baby nasal aspirators, I relied on three key factors to influence the final list:

Expert insights: I consulted both the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the following experts, who provided advice on how to use a nasal aspirator and what to look for when buying one, focusing on styles and features that will help suck up the most mucus in an easy, efficient, and safe way:

Parent-tested favorites: I sorted through recommendations from the thousands of parents in the What to Expect Community to learn which nasal aspirators other parents say truly work well to clear their baby’s mucus. Their honest feedback was invaluable in separating the must-haves from the meh.

Selection criteria: Every aspirator on this list is safe for babies of all ages, boasts gentle yet powerful suction, has easy-to-clean parts, is simple to operate, and is designed to be as comfortable as possible for small, sensitive noses.

Stuffy noses are inevitable — but with the right nasal aspirator, helping your baby breathe easier doesn’t have to be intimidating.

A Doctor’s Note on Clearing Congestion

“The most important factor is the ability to provide gentle, superficial suction,” Dr. Wiseman said. “You want to clear congestion effectively without irritating delicate nasal tissue.”

She suggests parents should focus on five basic components: Ease of use, comfort, ease of cleaning, design, and cost. “It is best to use one designed specifically for babies, one that offers a soft, flexible tip, and provides gentle suctioning,” she explained.

Best Overall Nasal Aspirator

NoseFrida Baby Nasal Aspirator

Not very invasive

suction level is easy to control

Some are put off by the concept

Power source: Manual

Cleaning method: Dishwasher safe

Weight: .8 ounces

Dimensions: 7.1 x 3 x 1 inches

Why We Love It

The NoseFrida from FridaBaby is a hit among parents in the What to Expect community, as well as What to Expect staff. This doctor-designed device allows parents to suck out boogies using a mouthpiece and “snot straw.” Don’t worry; there’s a disposable filter that catches the mucus before it reaches your mouth and the tube is long enough to keep mucus away from the mouth, too. In fact, Alexandra Bisonó, What to Expect's former Senior Art Director, has found that the boogers don’t actually reach the filter. As for cleaning, she’s found that it’s quick and simple: “I open the faucet to HOT water and let it run inside the tube and all the stuff comes out super easily.”

is a hit among parents in the What to Expect community, as well as What to Expect staff. This doctor-designed device allows parents to suck out boogies using a mouthpiece and “snot straw.” Don’t worry; there’s a disposable filter that catches the mucus before it reaches your mouth and the tube is long enough to keep mucus away from the mouth, too. In fact, Alexandra Bisonó, What to Expect's former Senior Art Director, has found that the boogers don’t actually reach the filter. As for cleaning, she’s found that it’s quick and simple: “I open the faucet to HOT water and let it run inside the tube and all the stuff comes out super easily.”

Christine Mattheis, What to Expect’s Group VP of Content & Brand Solutions, agrees that the NoseFrida is a breeze to clean. She’s found that it works more efficiently and quickly than a bulb.

Once past the ick factor of sucking your child’s snot from their nose, parents realize just how great this aspirator is. They love that they can control the suction, and many report that it works more effectively than bulb aspirators. Also, parents appreciate that you only need to put the NoseFrida at the opening of baby’s nose instead of inside his nostril, which means less irritation and fuss. Any parent with a sick baby knows that anything to make baby less fussy and upset when they feel unwell is a winner.

Tested by Christine Mattheis , mom of two and What to Expect's Group VP of Content & Brand Solutions:

“With just one suck per side, I was usually done clearing my daughter's nose. It's shaped kind of like a fat crayon, so it's intuitive to hold — so much less awkward than the bulb.”

Community Reviews

“Friendly PSA: Get the NoseFrida before you need it! My darling 4yo brought a head cold home from daycare...She’s so stuffed and miserable, and it was awful feeling so helpless. Saline mist and boogie wipes and a NoseFrida later… we are both so much happier! And the amount of snot that came out of her tiny little nose! My goodness!!!”

"Omg the nose frida seems gross, but it’s the BEST! Works way better than the bulbs."

“Baby girl had a bad cold a couple weeks ago, and we were sucking snot multiple times a day! It took a minute to get the hang of it, and now I find it oddly satisfying to get a good suck”

“This thing is a lifesaver!! I’ve been using it since my son was about a month or so… he will be 6 months tomorrow. I love it so much I have bought for all my mom to be friends! BTW, his pediatrician is who recommended it to us.”

“I used the nose Frida for my son 11 years ago, it was the ONLY thing powerful enough to actually clear him, and he didn’t scream and cry. So it’s been my staple for baby shower gifts, and they always look at me like I’m crazy and they’ll never do it. Then I typically get texts thanking me later. Nose Frida is a must!”

“The Frida one works best honestly. The one that you have to manually suck with your mouth. I have an electric one too and the Frida one works great. Definitely saline first and it loosens it to come right now.”

Best Bulb Nasal Aspirator

Innovo Silicone Twister Bulb Nasal Aspirator

See-through design

Only two parts

May come apart if not squeezed correctly

Power source: Manual

Cleaning method: Hand wash only

Weight: 3.88 ounces

Dimensions: 1.97 x 1.97 x 0.79 inches

Why We Love It

The Innovo Twister Bulb is a hospital-grade nasal aspirator that, unlike other bulb syringes, is entirely translucent, so you can see exactly how much snot you’re suctioning out. Parents love knowing right away whether they were successful in sucking mucus out. This takes the guesswork out of the process so that caregivers can clear their baby’s nose as quickly as possible, rather than having to take the time to look and see if anything came out.

is a hospital-grade nasal aspirator that, unlike other bulb syringes, is entirely translucent, so you can see exactly how much snot you’re suctioning out. Parents love knowing right away whether they were successful in sucking mucus out. This takes the guesswork out of the process so that caregivers can clear their baby’s nose as quickly as possible, rather than having to take the time to look and see if anything came out.

The Innovo’s 100% silicone design is also hypoallergenic, while its soft, narrow tip is perfect for sensitive noses. The bulb also twists in half for easy cleaning and consists of just two parts, so you can quickly sponge and dry between uses.

Community Reviews

“I use this one from Amazon. Works better than the one they gave me at the hospital. I spray my baby’s nose with saline first, and it works really well!”

“I think the manual one works better IMO. Spent $45 on an electric one and hardly use it except as a toy for my toddler. This one is my favorite because you can take it apart to clean it, and it's clear, so you can see what's in it.”

“We got this bulb from Amazon and it’s effective, easy to clean, and extra helpful since it’s clear!”

“Amazon has a clear two-piece nose bulb you can use instead that works great and is easy to clean. Called innovo twister bulb.”

Best Electric Nasal Aspirator

Grownsy Baby Nasal Aspirator

Comes with multiple tip sizes

three suction levels

lights up and plays music

Expensive

Power source: USB-C rechargeable battery

Cleaning method: Sterilize silicone nozzle in boiling water

Weight: 12.31 Ounces

Dimensions: 6.77 x 4.17 x 2.28 inches

Why We Love It

Let’s face it: No baby likes to have their nose suctioned out. But the electric Grownsy Baby Nasal Aspirator plays music and lights up to distract your little one long enough to let you suck out the offending boogers before they have time to bat away the device. This nasal aspirator is versatile with three levels of suction power and three reusable silicone nasal tips. And, because they’re made of silicone, the tips can be boiled for sterilization.

Let’s face it: No baby likes to have their nose suctioned out. But the electric

plays music and lights up to distract your little one long enough to let you suck out the offending boogers before they have time to bat away the device. This nasal aspirator is versatile with three levels of suction power and three reusable silicone nasal tips. And, because they’re made of silicone, the tips can be boiled for sterilization.

Parents report that they love having the different tip options (which are also replaceable) to get the best fit for their child’s nose. After all, a better fit means it’ll be more comfortable for baby and get the most amount of mucus out. Reviewers attested to the power of this sucker, saying that it not only successfully cleared their little ones’ noses, but also did so quietly. Because it’s rechargeable, parents love that they don’t need to worry about replacing batteries.

Parents report that they love having the different tip options (which are also replaceable) to get the best fit for their child’s nose. After all, a better fit means it’ll be more comfortable for baby

get the most amount of mucus out. Reviewers attested to the power of this sucker, saying that it not only successfully cleared their little ones’ noses, but also did so quietly. Because it’s rechargeable, parents love that they don’t need to worry about replacing batteries.

Community Reviews

"This thing is amazing. We used the nose frida for our first kid and omg, the stress of holding it on the tiny nostril long enough and the exhaustion of all that sucking. No more!! Second child upgrade to the electric aspirator and wowee, I feel so much more in control of his boogers and thus my life. It’s a miracle in aspirator form."

“This one from Amazon!! 3 levels of suction and optimal music and lights. I heard the Frida electric one wasn’t strong enough, but this one definitely is. I wish I had bought it sooner.”

“Love my Grownsy one. My 2-year-old likes that it plays music and has lights. Works well and easy to clean too.”

"My baby actually doesn’t mind the Grownsy nasal aspirator from Amazon. I think the motorized sound keeps her attention plus it has a lights and music option too."

“This thing is amazing. We used the Nose Frida for our first kid, and omg, the stress of holding it on the tiny nostril long enough and the exhaustion of all that sucking. No more!! Second child upgraded to the electric aspirator, and wowee, I feel so much more in control of his boogers and thus my life. It’s a miracle in aspirator form.”

Best Nasal Aspirator and Cleaner Set

Oogiebear The Bear Pair

Works for wet and dry snot

short tip to not go too far into nose

Hand wash only

Power source: Manual

Cleaning method: Hand wash only

Weight: 3.53 ounces

Dimensions: 4.8 x 7.56 x 2 inches

Why We Love It

Sometimes sucking and suctioning are great, but other times, picking and scooping are the way to go to clean out your little one’s nose. If you want the best of both, you’ll love this 2-in-1 Oogiebear Bear Pair , which includes a nose sucker and cleaner. On one end of the rubber-coated wand is a “scoop,” for removing dried boogers, and on the other end is a “loop,” for removing sticky, wet boogers. The aspirator features a soft, silicone bulb that comes apart for easy cleaning. Parents also report that the seal and suction are great for sucking out mucus.

Sometimes sucking and suctioning are great, but other times, picking and scooping are the way to go to clean out your little one’s nose. If you want the best of both, you’ll love this

which includes a nose sucker and cleaner. On one end of the rubber-coated wand is a “scoop,” for removing dried boogers, and on the other end is a “loop,” for removing sticky, wet boogers. The aspirator features a soft, silicone bulb that comes apart for easy cleaning. Parents also report that the seal and suction are great for sucking out mucus.

In addition to the NoseFrida, Alexandra uses the Oogiebear when it’s not just wet mucus she’s working with. “It has been great for the harder and stickier boogers,” she says.

The Oogiebear picker is a great alternative to nasal aspirators because it’s quick and soundless, which is great for toddlers who flinch or wake at the slightest sound. Parents report that the cute bear on the bulb aspirator is also a draw for their little ones. As for the Oogiebear bulb, the bear head tip prevents you from inserting the aspirator too far up your child’s nose.

Community Reviews

"I have an Oogiebear and use it on my son when I notice he has boogers because it’s so much easier than suctioning. He hates anything being around his nose."

"Omg you need an oogie bear... it's the silliest little thing literally just a plastic stick with tiny scoops on either end that are a safe length for baby noses to pick their boogers. I registered for it like why am I doing this and it's actually probably my favorite thing and we use it every day."

“Omg you need an Oogie Bear... It's the silliest little thing, literally just a plastic stick with tiny scoops on either end that are a safe length for baby noses to pick their boogers. I registered for it like why am I doing this and it's actually probably my favorite thing, and we use it every day.”

“Love the Oogie Bear! I use it daily. My little one has so many boogers!”

Best Budget Nasal Aspirator

Safety 1st Newborn Nasal Aspirator

Inexpensive

Soft and flexible tip

Can’t see what’s inside

Power source: Manual

Cleaning method: Hand wash only

Weight: 2.4 ounces

Dimensions: ‎7.63 x 3.63 x 1.75 inches

Why We Love It

Sometimes the classic tools are classic for a reason. This affordable, hospital-style bulb syringe from Safety 1st is simple, effective, and does exactly what it’s supposed to: clears out your baby’s nose. The soft, narrow tip fits tiny nostrils comfortably, while the compact design makes it easy to toss in your diaper bag for on-the-go use. This trusted tool is the same model that comes in the Safety 1st Baby Grooming Kit , which earned the top spot as our Best Baby Grooming Kit . It’s a must-have for new parents looking for a dependable (and inexpensive) bulb aspirator.

Best Hospital-Grade Nasal Aspirator

Momcozy Electric Baby Nasal Aspirator

Nine suction levels

Three tips to choose from

Dishwasher-safe parts

Heavier than other options

Power source: USB-C rechargeable 9V battery (included)

Cleaning method: Dishwasher safe

Weight: 1.06 pounds

Dimensions: 7.83 x 6.61 x 2.32 inches

Why We Love It

If you’ve ever wished you had hospital-level nasal suction at home to tackle intense congestion, the Momcozy Electric Baby Nasal Aspirator delivers. With nine adjustable suction settings, it’s designed to clear even the most stubborn congestion quickly and safely. Parents love the quiet motor because it doesn’t startle baby mid-sniffle, and they say the built-in light is the best for middle-of-the-night stuffy nose relief. This one even comes with multiple tip sizes, so you can keep using it as your little one grows. Plus, the dishwasher-safe tubing and tips make cleaning this electric aspirator easier than other models.

Community Reviews

“I just got the Momcozy hospital grade one. We also have nose Frida and Grownsy and 10/10 would recommend the momcozy over the other ones.”

“Momcozy has been working great for us. Similar to the nosebot but less expensive. Highly recommend.”

“We have the Momcozy nasal aspirator and it’s amazing!! Highly recommend. We could not stomach the sucking ones. Momcozy one has 9 different suction levels and multiple tips. Works great!”

Best Bulb Nasal Aspirator With Light

Booger Buddy Nasal Aspirator Bulb

Cute design

Lights up

Detachable see-through bulb is easy to clean

Takes more time to suction than electric options

Power source: Manual

Cleaning method: Hand wash only

Weight: 4.97 ounces

Dimensions: 3.6 x 3.6 x 2.8 inches

Why We Love It

This clever bulb aspirator earns its spot on this list as one of the few manual bulbs on the market that you can easily use in the middle of the night. (Plus, the name is just too good.) The Booger Buddy features a built-in light, helping you see exactly where you’re aiming, which is especially useful during late-night sniffle sessions. Its made of soft, medical-grade silicone that’s comfortable for your baby, and the transparent design separates easily for cleaning.

Doctor's Note:

Its adorable narwhal shape is the cheery on top, according to Dr. Wiseman. “A friendly, familiar shape or playful character can transform nasal care from a struggle into a smoother, more cooperative moment,” she said. “Kids feel safer and involved, and parents feel more confident and in control.”

Other Factors to Consider When Buying Baby Nasal Aspirators

Choosing the best nasal aspirator will depend on personal preference as well as product performance. Here are points to consider when selecting what’s best for you and your baby.

Manual vs. Electric: There are two types of nose suckers on the market: manual and electric. Both work well, with the cost being higher for electric nasal aspirators. There are, however, convenient advantages such as multiple tip sizes that allow use for a wider range of ages, and literal bells and whistles, like music and lights, to distract your child during the process. Manual aspirators, on the other hand, are simple, but can be just as effective. Most models are the bulb-style that’s used to clean baby’s airways after birth. To use this type of nose sucker, caregivers simply squeeze the bulb first, then insert it into baby’s nostril and release pressure on the bulb to suck out the snot. Another type of manual sucker is one that features a tube for parents to literally suck the snot out with their mouth. It’s not for everyone, but parents find that these aspirators are less intimidating and invasive to baby and therefore, easy to use.

Ease of cleaning: Nasal aspirators need to be cleaned well after each use. Those that can easily be pulled apart to clean and dry are ideal and reduce the risk of bacterial build up. You may want to look for one that has the least amount of parts and no small nooks or crannies to avoid buildup. Some nasal aspirators are dishwasher-safe while others are hand-wash only, so look for whichever type works best for your lifestyle.

Age appropriateness: The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) notes that nasal aspirators are most commonly used for babies under 6 months, but not every snot sucker will be suitable for all babies. Check the manufacturer's age recommendations before purchasing a nasal aspirator to ensure it’s the correct range for your child. “It's important to go with an age- and size-appropriate aspirator, otherwise it may cause no improvements or even result in greater harm,” says Kingsley. Having the right size will make the experience more comfortable for baby and avoid damaging their nostrils.

Amber Leventry originally contributed to this article.

Nasal Aspirator FAQs

What age can I use a nasal aspirator?

“The great news is that you can use a nasal aspirator as soon as you come home with your baby,” says Dr. Godsil. Typically, babies under 6 months of age need a snot sucker because they can’t blow their nose. You can use one on older babies and toddlers, but know that they might be more likely to fight the sucker.

Depending on the size of your child’s nostrils, you may need to experiment with different-sized nose tips of the aspirator. Bulb aspirators can vary in size and are recommended based on your child’s age, so be sure to read the product’s description before making a final choice. For electronic nasal aspirators, look for products that offer different nose tips so that you can be sure you get the right size for the age of your child. Some products can be used from infant to toddler ages, but others are designed specifically for toddlers.

How do I use a nasal aspirator?

First, you’ll want to lay baby on his back before using the aspirator. Dr. Quillin suggests adding a couple drops of saline before using a nasal aspirator to thin out mucus, limit nasal irritation and prevent damage to the inside of the nostril. Make sure the air is out of the bulb, or chamber if you are using an electric one, by squeezing the bulb. Next, place the tip inside baby’s nostril, and release the bulb or activate the suction on an electric model. Once you’ve sucked up the mucus, you can discard it and repeat on the other nostril.

Dr. Wiseman advises using a nasal aspirator before your child feeds, as clearing out the mucus may help them drink and eat better. And if you notice their nostrils becoming irritated, you may need to suction their nose less frequently.

Is it safe to use a nasal aspirator on a baby?

It’s safe to use a nasal aspirator on an infant — just be sure to use one designed for your child’s age. If using an electric aspirator, start with the lowest suction and work your way up if necessary to not irritate baby’s nostrils. “The safest way to clear a baby’s nose is to start with a gentle saline spray or drops to help loosen mucus, followed by superficial suctioning if needed,” Dr. Wiseman says, noting this can be with a nasal bulb, mouth-to-nose style aspirator, or electric nasal aspirator.

However, if the nasal congestion doesn’t seem to be bothering your child, leave it alone. You don’t need to suction out their nose just because they “sound” congested. Instead, remove mucus if they aren’t feeding or sleeping well, or if the congestion is affecting their breathing. And always clean the nasal aspirator after each use.

How do I clean a nasal aspirator?

“Choosing a device that is easy to clean and sanitize is crucial as it is important to prevent the spread of germs and infection,” says Kingsley. “Consider a disposable aspirator or one with removable parts over the traditional ones, as they are easier to clean thoroughly after each use.” When cleaning a nasal aspirator, follow the instructions according to the manufacturer's recommendations, as each device is a little different. Some can be cleaned in the dishwasher or can be sterilized. Others are cleaned with soapy water and left to air dry.

Your Next Read

Why the Fridababy NoseFrida Snotsucker Saves My Sanity Every Time My Baby Has a Cold By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

Our 10 Favorite Doctor-Approved Humidifiers to Help Your Baby During Sick Season Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Build A Cold and Flu Survival Kit To Get Your Baby Through Sick Season Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Stuffy Nose in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Products for Pregnancy Congestion, According to an OB/GYN Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

5 Best Formula Dispensers That You Can Safely Stash in Your Diaper Bag Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

7 Pacifiers Small Enough to Soothe a Preemie Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

7 Best Nipple Shields to Help With Latching and Minimize Pain Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Teach Toddlers to Blow Their Noses Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do When Your Toddler Gets Something Stuck in His Nose Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window