7 Best Wearable Breast Pumps That Let You Pump While Doing (Literally) Anything

best wearable breast pumps

QUICK SUMMARY

If you’re looking for a wearable breast pump, you probably want something wireless, powerful, and able to move with you. According to more than 300 moms, the Momcozy S12 Pro checks all those boxes. It delivers the strength of an electric breast pump while giving you the freedom to stay mobile.

That said, the “best” pump is the one that fits your lifestyle and needs. If you plan to pump while traveling or in public, you might prefer a lighter, more discreet option — brands like Elvie or Willow are worth considering. No matter what you choose, finding the right pump can make your feeding journey smoother and less stressful.

When I was pregnant with my first child, I couldn’t wait to get my hands on one of the high-tech wearable breast pumps that were hitting the market. Now, four years after I started testing them, the range of hands-free breast pumps has greatly expanded, offering even more options. Still, one thing hasn’t changed: The best wearable breast pumps are those that allow moms to pump hands-free just about anywhere.

Traditional breast pumps protrude outside your bra and you have to be connected to an outlet to use them. Wireless pumps, however, offer much more comfort and mobility, fitting snugly into your normal bras. I really appreciated this convenience as I was getting the hang of breastfeeding and trying to multitask around the house, as well as pumping in public places like the office and restaurants.

How I Chose and Tested the Best Wearable Breast Pumps

With dozens of wearable breast pumps to choose from, narrowing it down to the seven best for the most common pumping needs wasn’t easy. Here were the steps I took:

1. Researched and Compared Top Models

I started by comparing the 13 most popular wearable pumps, looking at:

Suction strength (in mmHg and real output)

Comfort (flange fit, cushioning, adjustability)

Discretion (noise level, visibility under clothing)

Mobility (how well it stays in place when moving)

Ease of cleaning (number of parts, dishwasher-safe options)

2. Consulted Lactation Experts and Resources

I spoke with three lactation professionals to learn what to consider when buying a wearable breast pump that’ll help — not hurt — your pumping journey:

Suzanne Chan , a board-certified pediatric nurse practitioner and certified lactation counselor (CLC)

Jacqueline Kincer , an international board-certified lactation consultant and founder of Holistic Lactation

Chrisie Rosenthal , an international board-certified lactation consultant and consultant relations manager with The Lactation Network

I also followed breast pump guidance and recommendations from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and La Leche League International (LLLI).

3. Asked Moms Who’ve Been There

Five What to Expect staffers and contributors — who’ve collectively pumped for 10 kids — shared the wearable pumps they loved and why.

4. Read Hundreds of Community Reviews

I combed through hundreds of What to Expect Community posts for pumps moms love for comfort, output, and pumping on the go.

5. Factored in Award Winners

I reviewed results from the 2026 What to Expect Feeding Awards , where more than 350 pumping moms voted for and shared feedback on their favorite wearable pumps.

The result: A list of seven wearable breast pumps that score highest for comfort, mobility, suction power, and ease of cleaning — so you can pump confidently, wherever you are.

Best Wearable Breast Pump

Momcozy S12 Pro Wearable Breast Pump

Most affordable wearable breast pump

Powerful suction

Easy to use

Comfortable design

Not the most discreet

Weight: 37.28 ounces

Dimensions: ‎7.2 x 5.9 x 4.2 inches

Battery life: 240 minutes

Suction: Up to 270 mmHg

Volume: 6 ounces per side, but it’s recommended to pump around 4 ounces

Why We Love It

Voted Best Wearable Breast Pump in the 2026 What to Expect Feeding Awards (and in 2024, too!), the Momcozy S12 Pro Wearable Breast Pump stands out for its efficiency and affordability.

“I’ve been using the Momcozy S12 for a few months now, and I’m truly impressed by how this compact device holds its own against larger pumps,” writes Holly Crocker , an exclusive pumping mom of two and What to Expect contributor. She also finds it more comfortable than other wearable pumps, thanks to the unique double-sealed flange. “It acts as a cushion between your breast and the collection cup, preventing that annoying pinching sensation.”

The S12 Pro features three modes — stimulation, expression, and a combo massage/pumping mode — plus nine suction levels so you can customize the settings to get your milk flowing. What really sets it apart, though, is how effective it is: According to What to Expect moms, the S12 Pro delivers great output, with suction levels of up to 270 mmHg.

Another bonus? Each cup can hold up to 6 ounces of milk — more than most wearable pumps. Holly found this especially helpful since she has an oversupply.

One downside: It's not the most discreet option. With the motor sitting on top of the cup and a somewhat loud volume, the S12 Pro probably isn’t your best bet for pumping on the go. But if you're pumping at home and want to avoid being tethered to the wall, this is a strong choice.

Tested by Holly Crocker , mom of two and What to Expect contributor:

"My output is just as good, if not better, with the Momcozy S12 compared to the electric breast pumps I’ve used in the past — those with bulky motors and hard-to-clean tubes.

Video Reviews

Momcozy S12 Review

Community Reviews

“I’m a huge fan of my Momozy S12! The suction is perfect and empties me all the way!”

“I like the MomCo S12 Pro. It personally empties me very well. Just as well as my Medela Pump in Style.”

“Definitely Momcozy S12 Pro. It’s hospital grade and empties me every pump.”

Another Popular Wearable Breast Pump

Elvie Stride 2

Hospital-grade power

High collection cup capacity

Easy-to-use app

Not the most portable or discreet

Weight: ‎7.9 ounces for everything

Dimensions: ‎9.13 x 6.18 x 5.04 inches

Battery life: 180 minutes

Suction: Up to300 mmHg

Volume: 5 ounces per side

Why We Love It

Another favorite among What to Expect moms, the Elvie Stride earns rave reviews for its ease of use and efficiency. But the real standout element is its power. While most wearable breast pumps have the motor on top of the collection cups, the Elvie Stride's is separate (it’s connected to the cups by tubing), giving the suction some serious power: It goes up to 300 mmHg, delivering on-the-go hospital-grade strength.

earns rave reviews for its ease of use and efficiency. But the real standout element is its power. While most wearable breast pumps have the motor on top of the collection cups, the Elvie Stride's is separate (it’s connected to the cups by tubing), giving the suction some serious power: It goes up to 300 mmHg, delivering on-the-go hospital-grade strength.

This level of power has remained in the brand’s latest iteration, the Elvie Stride 2 . The biggest enhancement is in the fit, namely the six nipple options (including a sizing tool) and material (a soft silicone versus stiffer plastic), which help the cups contour to the breasts for improved comfort. And don’t worry, it still boasts the same noise-reduction technology that improves moms' ability to be on the go.

"Despite its power, the Elvie Stride is blissfully quiet, so you can wear it while working and not draw attention to yourself," Jaclyn King , a mom of two, writes in her review of the Elvie Stride . Jaclyn also notes the Elvie Stride is incredibly portable and compact, despite the tubes. This, however, makes it less discreet, but you can clip the motor to your waistband or tuck it in your pocket, which many moms say makes it possible to wear the pump while doing other things.

. Jaclyn also notes the Elvie Stride is incredibly portable and compact, despite the tubes. This, however, makes it less discreet, but you can clip the motor to your waistband or tuck it in your pocket, which many moms say makes it possible to wear the pump while doing other things.

Like all Elvie pumps, it connects to an app, which allows you to control the pump remotely, adjust the intensity settings (10 choices with stimulation and expression modes for natural suction), and check your pumping history. (You don’t have live milk monitoring with the Stride; however, the silicone cups make it far easier to see the amount manually.)

Tested by Jaclyn King , mom of two and What to Expect contributor:

"The Elvie Stride has several features, like a powerful motor and decent cup capacity, that make it ideal for moms who want the convenience of a wearable pump but the power and price of an electric pump."

Video Reviews

Elvie Stride Review

Community Reviews

“I’ve never had the original Elvie Stride, but I do have the 2, and it’s fairly comfortable even with my elastic nipples.”

“I have the Elvie Stride and it’s such a game changer. Not having to be plugged up to a wall and separated from my toddler has made pumping so much easier this time around for me, also helps if you need to get stuff done around the house. 10/10 definitely recommend.”

“I have the original Elvie, Stride and Spectra 1. My favorite is the Stride. My LO doesn’t let me sit all day pumping, and I would’ve given it up long ago if it wasn’t for the option to be hands-free and mobile.”

“My Stride has been my primary pump since my milk came in two days postpartum. I’m now six months postpartum and it is still going strong! I respond super well to it and it has been a game changer for me.”

Best Wearable Breast Pump for Work

Elvie Pump

Small

Quiet

Easy-to-use app

Long battery life

Two-year warranty

Expensive

Lighter suction

Weight: 7.84 ounces each

Dimensions: 5 x 4.3 x 2.7 inches

Battery life: 2.5 hours

Suction: Up to 220 mmHg

Volume: 5 ounces per side

Why We Love It

When looking for a discreet breast pump, noise level is an important consideration — and this wearable pump seriously delivers in this department, emitting just the faintest sound while it works. I used the Elvie while breastfeeding both of my sons and found that the motor was quiet enough to use during Zoom calls.

When looking for a discreet breast pump, noise level is an important consideration — and this wearable pump seriously delivers in this department, emitting just the faintest sound while it works. I used the

while breastfeeding both of my sons and found that the motor was quiet enough to use during Zoom calls.

In addition to its gentle sound, I found this pump to be generally excellent: It’s intuitive, easy to set up, sleek and incredibly discreet. It was small and lightweight enough for me to wear in my bra for an entirely hands-free experience. At 5 x 4.3 x 2.7 inches, it’s one of the slimmest wearable pumps on the market, making it one of the best wearable breast pumps for moms who are prioritizing portability.

In addition to its gentle sound, I found this pump to be generally excellent: It’s intuitive, easy to set up, sleek and incredibly discreet. It was small and lightweight enough for me to wear in my bra for an entirely hands-free experience. At 5 x 4.3 x 2.7 inches, it’s one of the slimmest wearable pumps on the market, making it one of the

Jaclyn also used the Elvie throughout her breastfeeding journey, and found it to be a much more discreet pump overall. "The slim profile and lack of tubes or separate motors make it easy to wear anywhere," she writes in her review of the Elvie Pump . "It’s not completely invisible, but is very discreet."

READ MORE : I Tried the Elvie Pump and Elvie Stride: Here’s Which One I Prefer

As a bonus, I also found the Elvie app to be impressive (as do many other What to Expect moms). I could watch how much milk I’d pumped in real time, as well as review information about my pumping history.

One downside, however, is that the parts are smaller. I found them somewhat tricky to keep track of and clean compared to other wearable pumps on this list. The cups are also a little difficult to pour milk out of, and they’d occasionally overflow and leak if I wasn’t paying close attention while pumping (though I had oversupply, which may be why I had this issue).

Tested by Sarah Darby , mom of two and What to Expect's Senior SEO Strategist:

"The Elvie definitely fulfills its role as a wearable pump because it is super quiet, fits easily inside a nursing or other stretchy bra and I found it relatively easy to clean."

Video Reviews

Elvie Pump Review

Community Reviews

“I bought an Elvie with my first and it saved my breastfeeding journey! I hated the tethered-down feeling of the traditional pumps and there was no way that I could realistically sustain a regular pumping schedule with work. With my Elvie I just used it for the whole work day and cleaned it each night. I could wear it under a jacket or a sweater and no one had a clue! I justified the expense thinking that if I could get 4-5 months of breast milk from it, that is what formula would cost me in the same time frame.”

“Elvie is great! I used it and know three friends who loved it.”

“I have the Elvie and it worked great for me! It was a lifesaver with my second.”

Best Wearable Breast Pump for Travel

Medela Freestyle Hands-Free Breast Pump

Weighs less than many other wearable pumps

Access to the Medela Family app

Integrates with the brand’s PersonalFitFlex parts

Has tubing

Not as discreet as some other options

Not the strongest suction power

Weight: 5.4 ounces

Dimensions: ‎10.35 x 9.29 x 5.55 inches

Battery life: 2 hours between charges

Suction: Up to 245 mmHg

Volume: 5 ounces per cup

Why We Love It

Medela makes one of the best electric breast pumps , and their Medela Freestyle Hands-Free Breast Pump is a newer-to-the-market model that’s quickly become a top choice among What to Expect moms. Very similar to the popular Medela Freestyle Flex (which has a design that’s similar to the Baby Buddha), this newer version from the same company has wearable collection cups to make it truly hands-free.

, and their Medela Freestyle Hands-Free Breast Pump is a newer-to-the-market model that’s quickly become a top choice among What to Expect moms. Very similar to the popular Medela Freestyle Flex (which has a design that’s similar to the Baby Buddha), this newer version from the same company has wearable collection cups to make it truly hands-free.

One of the Medela Freestyle’s most compelling features is how incredibly lightweight it is. Weighing less than 1 pound, this is the lightest wearable breast pump on our list, and many moms appreciate that this puts less pressure on your back and makes the pump even more wearable and portable. Another plus: There are only three parts to clean, fewer than most competitors, and the pump works with Medela’s PersonalFit Flex parts too, which is helpful if you already have them from using one of the brand’s other products.

Medela has a handy Family app that lets you track your pumping sessions and milk output. And with a suction power of 245 mmHg, it isn’t the strongest wearable breast pump but is above average.

This pump does have tubing, which some moms may dislike because it means the pump is a little less discreet when out and about. But the Freestyle remains an excellent option, especially if you already use Medela’s other pumps or bottles and can keep everything compatible.

Community Reviews

mnrosario “I was able to do EVERYTHING [with this pump], even driving. The battery lasts a lot. More than a day. Some people don't like it because “the tubes can be on your way” but what they don't say is that machine extract more milk than the other ones just because strength and position.”

Best Wearable Breast Pump for Pumping in Public

Willow 360

Sleek design

Bags make for easier pumping while multitasking

Long battery life

Easy to clean

Expensive

Small capacity

Bags need to be continuously replaced

Weight: 12.5 ounces

Dimensions: 5.67 x 4.41 x 3.35 inches

Battery life: Up to five pumping sessions per charge

Suction: Up to 245 mmHg

Volume: 4 ounces per side

Why We Love It

Unlike the other models on this list, the Willow 360 allows you to move in any position — even bend over — while you’re pumping without worrying about leaks. A huge plus if you're out to dinner or a movie and need to express..

in any position — even bend over — while you’re pumping without worrying about leaks. A huge plus if you're out to dinner or a movie and need to express..

How? It collects milk into clever “O”-shaped leak-proof milk bags rather than a built-in storage container, allowing for 360-degree mobility.

"The standout feature of the Willow 360 is the total freedom it offers while pumping. I can keep up with my toddlers, do chores, and even lie down without disrupting the pumping process," Christine Benton, a mom of three, writes in her review of the Willow 360.

Although it's pricier than many other wireless pumps on the market, it has a good battery life (one charge gets you five 15-minute pumping sessions), connects to an app and doesn’t require much work on your end. The Willow has two phases, stimulation and expression, and automatically switches gears when it senses a let-down — which means even less effort on your part. Plus, there are only two parts to clean (far fewer than standard breast pumps), which you can wash by hand or pop in the top rack of your dishwasher.

The major downside to the Willow 360, however, is that each bag has a smaller capacity than most other wearable pumps (just 4 ounces per side). You also need to continuously replace the bags, which are sold separately , so over time will add to the cost of this already-expensive pump.

The major downside to the Willow 360, however, is that each bag has a smaller capacity than most other wearable pumps (just 4 ounces per side). You also need to continuously replace the bags, which are

, so over time will add to the cost of this already-expensive pump.

Tested by Christine Benton , mom of three and What to Expect contributor:

"The convenience and comfort of the Willow 360 have made it easier to stick to my exclusive pumping goals."

Video Reviews

Willow 360 Review

Community Reviews

“I used the Willow 3.0 and with the bags, you literally can do everything. I could sleep while pumping, chase my toddler, bend over and change a diaper.”

“If you want to be able to do stuff around the house I would recommend the Willow [3.0]. The Elvie is very sensitive and you have very limited movement while using it and definitely have to stay upright. When pumping into the bags [with the Willow 3.0] it is spill-proof no matter the position, I haven’t had any leaks yet.”

“I honestly love my Willow 3.0! It’s really easy to use in my opinion and it’s great for when I’m at work. The only thing I don’t like about it is that the containers and bags only let you pump 4 oz. per breast at a time which isn’t enough to empty mine most of the time but I also have a bit of an oversupply.”

Best Wearable Breast Pump for Boosting Milk Supply

BabyBuddha 2.0 Breast Pump

Efficient

Lightweight

Wearable with lanyard and pumping bra

Tons of complimentary accessories

Option to pump into larger bottles or compatible hands-free cups

Shorter battery life

Not as discreet

Some moms say it’s on the louder side

Weight: 6.6 ounces per pump

Dimensions: 2 x 5 x 1.5 inches (pump)

Battery life: 60 minutes

Suction: Up to 315 mmHg

Volume: Varies by what you pump into

Why We Love It

The original BabyBuddha Breast Pump went viral for being a compact powerhouse. And the BabyBuddha 2.0 follows suit. With an impressive suction power of 315 mmHg, it's comparable to electric pumps, which lactation consultants say are preferred for increasing and maintaining milk supply. Some moms say the BabyBuddha 2.0 even cut their pumping times in half compared to other pumps on this list.

The original BabyBuddha Breast Pump went viral for being a compact powerhouse. And the BabyBuddha 2.0 follows suit. With an

However, that power can be a bit much, especially for new moms. So, the brand improved upon its stimulation and expression modes, offering a higher level of customization. There are now 21 comfort settings (nine new choices, including a softer stimulation mode). Plus, the intensity of the “long pull” stimulation, while still effective, was lowered by 20%.

As is, it’s not the most discreet nor is it truly wireless; it requires a lanyard to carry the motor, which is about the size of a cellphone and less than a pound. If, however, you buy the compatible BabyBuddha Hands-Free Collection Cups ($65), then it's far easier to hide this power pump. (Not to mention the cups hold up to 8 oz. each!)

It also comes with multiple flange sizes — 22mm to 24mm — and lactation consultant Paula Norcott stresses finding the right size is crucial to maximizing milk flow.

Community Reviews

“I prefer my BB to the spectra. I like the freedom of being able to move about with it if I want. It’s small so very portable, which is helpful for travel, packing for work, or just running errands. It does have a very strong suction but I hear the 2.0 is more comfortable and easy (I have the original version). Use pumping spray/lube (with any pump, really). Two thumbs up from me.”

“I love the Baby Buddha 2.0. It’s my primary, I choose it over the spectra. But it might be a little too strong for those early days when your nips are all sensitive. Definitely make sure you use flanges that fit or work best for you. I found the Pumpin’ Pals to be the most comfortable for me. They work amazing paired with the Baby Buddha. My fave setup!”

“I have the old model and really love it. To my knowledge the new one has a gentler setting on stimulation mode. I use it with the legendairy collection cups and I get the best output than any other pump with it. It is a VERY strong pump though so it works well but at times if my nipples are sore it can be a little painful for the first few minutes”

“I just purchased the Baby Buddha pump and it is AMAZING! For how small it is, it pulls milk far better than my Spectra. Plus you get the added freedom of being able to move around with it! I just put the pump in my pocket. It is a bit louder than my spectra but I love it.”

“I used the Baby Buddha with my last baby. I hacked it with the Freemie cups. I absolutely loved it. It has a powerful motor and could pump the same amount as my Spectra in 1/2 the time.”

“Love the Baby Buddha! Pumping only takes about 10 to 15 minutes. It’s a powerful pump.”

Best Wearable Breast Pump for Relieving Discomfort

Eufy Wearable Breast Pump S1 Pro

Built-in heating tech

Hospital-grade suction power

Smart app controls to enhance the hands-free experience

Comfy silicone cups

Comes with a portable charging case

Multiple flange inserts (17 to 24mm) to reduce trial-and-error fittings

Not the easiest to wash or assemble

Heavy

Weight: 10 ounces per cup, or 2.26 pounds together in carrying case

Dimensions: 4.5 x 3 x 5 inches

Battery life: Up to 5 days

Suction: Up to 300 mmHg

Volume: 5 ounces per side

Why We Love It

When Liz Buxton, What to Expect’s shopping content director, first started pumping, her breasts were constantly sore, and she battled clogged ducts more often than she’d like to admit. Compared to her Spectra, the Eufy S1 Pro's built-in heating element provided instant relief that she describes “like a warm compress and pump in one." There are seven temperature settings to toggle between, from 95 to 105 degrees Fahrenheit, to help stimulate milk flow. The best part? You can heat them up beforehand, thanks to the brand's handy smart app. Not surprisingly, she’s been using it in every possible scenario since: at home, in the car, at social events (including two weddings!) and during middle-of-the-night feeds.

Compared to her Spectra, the Eufy S1 Pro's built-in heating element provided instant relief that she describes “like a warm compress and pump in one." There are seven temperature settings to toggle between, from 95 to 105 degrees Fahrenheit, to help stimulate milk flow. The best part? You can heat them up beforehand, thanks to the brand's handy smart app.

“Since I both breastfeed and bottle-feed, my baby often only had the stamina to nurse from one side before falling asleep. Instead of sitting up longer to pump the other breast manually, I’d pop the Eufy on the opposite side while she nursed,” Buxton shares. “It saved me time, helped maintain my supply, and made those exhausting night feeds just a little bit easier.”

It’s also incredibly quiet (operating at just 46 dB — about the same level of noise as a desk fan ), has an incredibly long battery life (up to five days of power with the magnetic charging case, based on three 20-minute sessions) and is discreet, providing the flexibility of being able to wear it anywhere.

), has an incredibly long battery life (up to five days of power with the magnetic charging case, based on three 20-minute sessions) and is discreet, providing the flexibility of being able to wear it anywhere.

Her only complaint is all of the “small, tricky parts,” which, if not assembled correctly, reduces the suction power significantly. Cleaning isn’t exactly easy, but not necessarily tedious, either. It also ships with a brush, storage bag and dust covers. And while it doesn't replace a manual pump in terms of power (though it does reach an impressive 300 mmHG), the HeatFlow technology alone makes it a splurge-worthy wearable.

Tested by Liz Buxton , mom of one and What to Expect’s Shopping Content Director:

“I could pump while wearing my normal clothes instead of feeling like I had to suit up just to extract some milk,” she says. “I wore it on car rides with company present, and while it does make some noise, it wasn’t loud enough to be embarrassing or disruptive."

Community Reviews

“Best wearable! Only one I feel empties me”

“I love this pump! Way better than the willow and empties me more than my spectra.”

“I really like this pump so far, I can’t say I have seen an increase in output from my M6 though (I range from 3oz-4.5oz each side). The heating feature is nice, I really can’t even feel the heat when pumping. I have found it extremely easy to clean, they also included a small brush for all those hard to reach places! the app is really easy to use, I like all the options that are available, and that it lets you record the amount pumped. I love the double charger, so easy to charge them both at the same time with only one cord.”

What to Look for in a Wearable Breast Pump

Buying a wearable breast pump is highly personal, and what makes sense for someone else may not be right for you. Keep the following considerations in mind to find the best wearable breast pump for your lifestyle and preferences:

Buying a wearable breast pump is highly personal, and what makes sense for someone else may not be right for you. Keep the following considerations in mind to find the

Comfort: When choosing any type of breast pump, comfort is a top priority. Wearable breast pumps should feel comfortable when worn and fit properly inside your bra. Remember: Finding the right breast pump flange size is crucial to getting a comfortable fit on any breast pump, wearable or otherwise, so make sure to measure yourself using the manufacturer’s size guide.

Suction: Breast pump suction is measured in millimeters of mercury (or mmHG), and higher suction power means the pump is able to express milk more efficiently. Breast pumps usually have a maximum suction of around 220 to 350 (on this list, the range is from 220 to 320 mmHG) with hospital-grade pumps in the higher end of that range. While some moms may choose to invest in hospital-grade suction to express the most milk in the shortest amount of time, others might find stronger suction to be uncomfortable and may prefer a pump that’s a little gentler.

Ease of cleaning: Wearable pumps have a number of parts to clean after use — but those parts do tend to be smaller and a little more fiddly than those of electric pumps. Models with dishwasher-safe parts are generally a little easier to keep clean.

Price: Wearable pumps tend to be more expensive than plug-into-the-wall units, ranging in price from $100 to over $500, says Kincer. “Most of these pumps also have custom milk storage bags that are more expensive than the other ones on the market, so your upfront and long-term costs will also be higher than other pumps," she adds.

FAQs

Are wearable breast pumps covered by insurance?

Since the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) more than a decade ago, health insurers are required to cover breastfeeding support supplies, including wearable breast pumps. However, coverage can vary depending on your health plan (for example, some may only cover hospital-grade pumps while other employers may have “grandfathered” plans that don’t require them to provide coverage for any pump). And if you’ve already used your benefit to cover an electric or hospital-grade breast pump, you may have to purchase an additional wearable pump out of pocket.

“Insurance coverage varies with insurance plans, it's best to contact your insurance provider for more specific details and find out if there is any co-pay or deductibles and if you will require a prescription,” says Chan. “Some insurance companies have specific time frames when you can qualify for a breast pump benefit. Some can be purchased prior to birth and some within a week of birth.”

Also helpful: Some brands, including Willow and Elvie , have information on their website about how to check if your insurance will cover the cost of your pump, which can be useful as you make your decision.

Do wearable breast pumps actually work?

Wearable breast pumps absolutely work, but some moms do find the suction on some models to be a little less strong than that on electric pumps — or that leakage and other issues can crop up if you’re moving around. That’s why many experts recommend having both a standard breast pump and hands-free option available, especially if you’re going to be pumping exclusively.

For this reason, wearable pumps aren’t considered a must-have for everyone who pumps. “[Wearable pumps] are not necessary for every parent,” says Chrisie Rosenthal, an international board-certified lactation consultant and consultant relations manager with The Lactation Network . “Most pumping parents do great with a traditional high-quality double electric breast pump.”

That being said, hands-free pumps are great because they’re portable and allow you to multitask or pump on-the-go. “For the mother who truly needs to be multitasking, a wireless pump will allow her to continue to produce milk for her baby where this otherwise wouldn’t have been possible,” says Kincer.

Considering that a typical pumping session takes about 20 minutes, sitting near a power source for that much time can feel frustrating (plus a little boring and lonely) when you have so many other things to do.

“Parents who find these pumps most helpful are parents who have multiple children, and parents who have jobs that make taking scheduled pump breaks difficult,” adds Rosenthal.

Other benefits of wearable pumps include:

They’re more discreet: Wearable pumps and in-bra collection cups make pumping easier when it’s less obvious. For instance, you can feel less worried about someone walking in on you pumping with these devices or even wear them while you commute.

They may feel more comfortable: You might find yourself hunched over a lot when using a more traditional pump. This can cause back pain, so some parents find that a hands-free pump can actually make pumping much more comfortable.

Is there a hospital-grade wearable breast pump?

Although it’s true that most wearable breast pumps aren’t considered hospital-grade (that’s because they have a lower range of suction power), there are a few hospital-grade models on the market. On this list of the best wearable breast pumps, both the Elvie Stride and the Baby Buddha Single or Double Portable Breast Pump have hospital-grade power.

Can you lay down with a wearable breast pump?

Wearable breast pumps are designed to slip inside a bra so you can wear them and pump completely hands-free. Most of these pumps work very similarly to an electric breast pump: You put the flange in place over your nipple, turn on the pump and wait for your milk to collect.

However, though wearable pumps do let you multitask — making it possible to bend over or move around — some are designed in such a way that it is possible for them to overflow or leak should you lie down completely. Check the specific instructions for each brand, however, as some may be used lying down: For example, you can recline completely while wearing Willow pumps if you’re using the brand’s spill-proof bags .

How do you clean a wearable breast pump?

As you may already know, it’s important to clean your breast pump and pump parts after each use. Washing a wearable breast pump is similar to washing a regular one : Each piece should be washed using dish soap and warm water, then left to air dry on either a paper towel or dish rack (avoid towels because they can harbor bacteria). Or, simply wash it in the dishwasher on the top rack if it’s dishwasher-safe.

But what’s the main difference between cleaning a regular pump versus a wearable one? Wearable pumps actually tend to be easier to clean because they typically include fewer parts.

WhatToExpect.com, How to Get a Breast Pump Through Your Health Insurance , August 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Clogged Milk Ducts , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Best Nursing and Pumping Bras , February 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Pumping Breast Milk , July 2021. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), Breastfeeding , Accessed May 2024. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Breastfeeding: Frequently Asked Questions , September 2021. La Leche League International (LLLI), Pumping Milk , 2023. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Office on Women’s Health, Pumping and Storing Breast Milk , February 2021. Suzanne Chan , I.B.C.L.C., board-certified nurse practitioner, New York-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital, New York. Jacqueline Kincer , I.B.C.L.C. and founder of Holistic Lactation . Chrisie Rosenthal , I.B.C.L.C. and a consultant relations manager with The Lactation Network .

Your Next Read

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Moms Love These Wearable Breast Pumps — And They're Less Than $200 By Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

Best Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

Haakaa Silicone Breast Pump Review By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

How to Clean Your Breast Pump Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Nipple Creams to Help You Find Relief While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

7 Best Nipple Shields to Help With Latching and Minimize Pain Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Your Guide to Pumping at Work Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Moms Who Exclusively Pump Reveal How They Make It Work Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Your Ultimate Guide to Traveling While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Pumping Breast Milk Guide and Tips for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Finding the Right Power Pumping Schedule for You Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window