7 Books to Help Your Toddler Transition to Their Big Kid Bed

toddler bed transition

Transitioning your child from a crib to a toddler bed is a big deal — for everyone. What to Expect mom Mere559 is currently struggling with the transition right now.

"Since baby brother is coming we decided to go ahead and put our daughter in a big girl bed so she can hopefully be used to it before he gets here," says Mere559. "Last night was her first night in the new bed and she got up four or five times and needed us to lay with her each time. I know it’s not going to be perfect right away but I wanted to see if anyone had any advice so we don’t start forming any bad habits that will be harder to break later on."

If you’re having similar questions (and concerns), you’re not alone. “Toddlers often struggle with the crib-to-bed transition because it represents a major developmental shift,” explains Francyne Zeltser, Psy.D ., a psychologist who practices in New York City.

“A crib provides a contained, predictable sleep space that feels safe and familiar. Moving to a bed introduces greater freedom and independence, which many toddlers are not yet developmentally prepared to manage," she says. "This can trigger anxiety about the unfamiliar setup, bedtime resistance, difficulty separating at bedtime, or wandering/calling for parents during the night.”

Parents typically update their little one’s sleep environment any time between 18 months and 3 years , but ideally closer to age 3.

So how can you prepare your toddler for the big change? Many parents have found comfort in books explaining this next step, finding that sharing stories of other kids or beloved characters like Elmo, make this change a little easier. Below, review the books recommended by parents and experts:

Big Enough for a Bed (Sesame Street)

Why We Love It

Elmo has outgrown his crib, and the big question looms: What’s next? While it may take some time, his favorite blanket and teddy bear help bring similar elements from his crib to an otherwise uncharted territory. By the end of the book, he feels comfy and cozy in his new big kid bed.

“This book uses a familiar, comforting character (Elmo) to model the transition in a calm, gradual way,” Dr. Zeltser says. “Toddlers relate easily to Elmo’s feelings and routines, making the story a helpful tool for normalizing initial discomfort and showing that the new bed can become a cozy, safe space.”

Community Reviews

sprinkledust “I had to transition my first at 20 months to a bed, and this book really helped.”

DMCC “I read this book to my daughter every night before bed for two weeks before transitioning her from a crib to a toddler bed. She related to Elmo, and I credit this book with making the switch to a big girl bed much easier than I expected. I was so nervous, but the outcome was best-case scenario for this first-time mom. I have recommended this book specifically to a few friends. Get it!”

My Big Bed by Little Hippo Books

Why We Love It

Little Giraffe has a sibling coming soon, and he’s feeling scared about the prospect of sleeping in a new bed. This imaginative board book comes with touch-and-feel elements for a sensory experience. By the end, Little Giraffe realizes his new bed isn’t so scary, and is happy to give his crib to the newest member of the family.

The sensory parts of the book align well with toddlers’ developmental needs, says Zeltser. “Its tactile pages and simple storyline help reduce anxiety by making the new bed feel fun rather than intimidating, which supports the idea that the transition is a natural part of growing up.”

In My Own Bed by Lovevery

Why We Love It

One of several books in Lovevery’s Tricky Topics collection, In My Own Bed covers the crib-to-bed transition with real images and an easy-to-follow story showing dialogue between the main character Kepa and his parents. Kepa wonders why this is happening, and his dad explains that he needs more room to accommodate his growing body. They go through his typical nighttime routine, with one swap: Kepa’s new bed. To make the process even easier, you can access more resources through the book’s QR code.

covers the crib-to-bed transition with real images and an easy-to-follow story showing dialogue between the main character Kepa and his parents. Kepa wonders why this is happening, and his dad explains that he needs more room to accommodate his growing body. They go through his typical nighttime routine, with one swap: Kepa’s new bed. To make the process even easier, you can access more resources through the book’s QR code.

“Featuring real photographs and a highly relatable narrative, this book mirrors many toddlers’ real-life concerns,” Dr. Zeltser says. “It supports independence by encouraging children to stay in bed until morning. The accompanying lullaby and parent resource guide reinforce consistency and routine, which are key elements of a successful transition.”

Community Reviews

GM621 “I highly recommend this Lovevery book to help with the transition. I really credit that with helping keep my youngest and middle in their beds all night, now that they’re sharing a room.”

Emily "My daughter really enjoys this book. She’s almost ready to sleep in a bed. She really takes well seeing other kids doing activities."

Big Kid Bed by Leslie Patricelli

Why We Love It

Even though Baby is excited about some aspects of the new bed, it’s clear there are new challenges and fears ahead. Baby notes that compared to the crib, the bed is “very, very tall.” “What if I fall?” he wonders. One book in a series, parents and kids alike rave about how it shows the ups and downs of this new sleep space.

Even though Baby is excited about some aspects of the new bed, it’s clear there are new challenges and fears ahead. Baby notes that compared to the crib, the bed is “very, very tall.” “What if I fall?” he wonders. One book in a series, parents and kids alike rave about how it shows the ups

“This story validates the mixed feelings toddlers often experience: excitement, nervousness, and uncertainty,” Dr. Zeltser says. “It helps them work through worries such as ‘What if I fall?’ while emphasizing that their feelings are normal and manageable. The storyline mirrors the gentle, structured approach recommended in the transition guide.”

A Big Kid Bed is Coming by Liz Fletcher

Why We Love It

Louie is a cap-wearing super elephant, with a new adventure ahead: his big kid bed. He’s trepidacious at first, but eventually decides to give it a try. He surprises himself by seeing how brave he can be (and how well he can sleep in his new bed!).

“With its rhyming structure and bravery-building theme, this book helps toddlers understand that nervousness is part of learning something new,” Dr. Zeltser says. “Louie’s journey models courage and perseverance, supporting toddlers who may feel hesitant about the change.”

Community Reviews

Shelby “This book aided in the transition of our daughter going from crib to toddler bed so nicely. We started reading it about a month before the switch, randomly here and there throughout the weeks. Then the week leading up to it, we read it every day, and it was a really great way to communicate this massive change with her.”

Becki Myers We purchased this book in anticipation of our daughter going into her big kid bed. She loves this book and requests it all the time. I love how it doesn’t talk about it being ‘scary’ to move to a big kid bed like several other books. It makes it an adventure instead and has a very positive message.

Big Bed for Giraffe by Michael Dahl

Why We Love It

Another character named Little Giraffe can’t fit into his crib anymore. His toys no longer fit inside, and he even tries to climb out (one part of the book some parents could do without!). It’s not easy at the beginning, but he soon learns how comfortable it is to sleep in a bed. He tries out a few toddler bed options and finally finds his perfect match.

“This story introduces problem-solving around the challenges of moving to a bed, like toys fitting differently or feeling physically uncertain,” Dr. Zeltser says. “It mirrors the trial-and-error toddlers experience during this transition and reassures them that they will eventually find comfort in their new sleep space.”

Community Reviews

Cooper “Adorable book and wonderful author who has created such great social stories that help teach children about what is the right thing to do as well as what to expect! Simple pictures and short phrases make toddlers and pre-kindergarteners the perfect audience for these books!”

Traci These books have helped my daughter with so many different things. They're simple and to the point, which helps her grasp the concept faster! She loves how the giraffe found a bigger bed to sleep in!

Your Own Big Bed by Rita M. Bergstein

Why We Love It

Your toddler isn’t the only one growing. In this book, a little boy sees how a chick, an alligator, and a sea turtle are all getting bigger, too. From taking their first steps to settling into a larger sleeping area, there are a lot of changes for every person and animal throughout childhood.

“By paralleling the child’s development with the growth of animals, this book reinforces that transitioning to a bigger sleep space is a natural part of getting older,” Dr. Zeltser says. “The narrative gently encourages autonomy and pride, which is helpful for toddlers who feel unsure about leaving the familiarity of the crib.”

Community Reviews

Lauren K “This is the best book out of all I bought for our daughter’s transition to a toddler bed. She asks to read it every night.”

melissacg “Helped my toddler transition to a big bed. He was scared of his bed and the dark. This helped so much. We read it for weeks before bed and he referred to his bed as his ‘big bed’ now.”

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

How to Stop Co-Sleeping and Move Your Little One to Her Own Crib or Bed Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Transition Your Baby From a Bassinet to a Crib Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Establish a Bedtime Routine for Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Prepare Your Toddler to Share a Room With Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Safe Sleep Tips for Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Baby Refusing to Sleep in the Crib? Here's What to Do Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Your Toddler from Getting Out of Bed Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

8 Toddler Room Ideas That Turn Any Nursery into a Magical “Big Kid” Room By Kaitlin Stanford, Contributing Writer

How to Sleep Train Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Tired of Bedtime Battles? Try These Toddler Sleep Strategies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Toddler Beds to Safely Transition Little Ones From Their Cribs Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

7 Sweet Stories to Help Your Little One Say Goodbye to the Pacifier (Including the Book That Finally Worked for My Toddler) Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Is Drop-Off a Nightmare? These Toddler TV Shows Can Help Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Reading Books to Your Baby or Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window