7 Foods Linked to Healthier Sperm — and 6 That Could Harm It

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Man eating salmon with fruit and vegetables

Can a change in your man's diet help you get pregnant? It's possible. Learn which foods can boost male fertility and which may actually decrease your odds.

If you and your partner are trying to conceive, diet changes may bring you closer to your goal. Eating a healthy, balanced diet may help increase sperm count, while chowing down on the not-so-healthy stuff could have the opposite effect. There are even specific foods that may be worth stocking up on.

Here are the best foods for boosting male fertility, along with foods that may be worth limiting when trying to conceive.

Key Takeaways

A healthy diet may help improve sperm health and fertility. Nutrient-rich foods like oysters, fruits and vegetables, nuts, seeds, fatty fish, and foods high in zinc, antioxidants, folate, and omega-3s may support sperm count, motility, and overall quality.

Some foods may negatively affect male fertility. Diets high in junk food, processed meats, high-fat dairy, high-mercury fish, excessive caffeine, alcohol, and soy-based foods have been linked to lower sperm count or poorer sperm quality.

Small dietary changes can support conception efforts. By adding fertility-friendly foods and limiting less healthy options, including alcohol, men may improve their reproductive health while also benefiting their overall well-being, potentially increasing a couple's chances of getting pregnant.

Which foods increase sperm count?

Both you and your partner probably already know the many advantages of a healthy diet. But eating certain foods can also be beneficial for sperm count and quality. Healthier sperm means you're less likely to have trouble getting pregnant.

Here are some fertility foods that can help boost fertility:

Oysters

There’s a reason oysters are known as aphrodisiacs. They contain more zinc per serving than any other food, and foods high in zinc may help with male fertility by increasing semen volume and sperm motility.

You can also find zinc in:

Beef

Poultry

Dairy

Nuts

Eggs

Whole grains

Beans

A daily multivitamin

Fruits and vegetables

The antioxidants found in fruits and veggies (like cranberries and collard greens) may help protect sperm from cellular damage and keep them healthy and motile — just what they need to race through the fallopian tubes and fertilize an egg . Meanwhile, vitamins E and C may slightly increase sperm count and movement.

Find vitamin E in:

Mangoes

Avocados

Green vegetables such as spinach and broccoli

Get vitamin C in:

Oranges

Tomatoes

Grapefruit

Folate, a B vitamin with antioxidant properties that may help keep sperm free of chromosomal abnormalities is found in:

Leafy greens

Beans

Many fruits

If you’re looking for one power veggie that does it all, try sweet potato: It’s packed with all of the nutrients above.

Nuts

Some research funded by the nut industry has shown that nuts may help improve the quality and function of sperm. Walnuts, in particular, may help boost sperm quality. That’s because walnuts are packed with antioxidants and omega-3 fatty acids.

Other antioxidant-rich nuts include:

Almonds

Pecans

Pine nuts

Hazelnuts

Peanuts

Stick to a 1-ounce serving (about a small handful) and avoid chocolate-covered nuts and those that have added sugar.

Seeds

Pumpkin seeds contain a hefty dose of zinc and omega-3 fatty acids, both of which may help improve sperm quality.

To stock up on omega-3s as well as vitamin E and other antioxidants, try:

Flaxseed

Chia seeds

Sunflower seeds

Pomegranate juice

Another powerful player in antioxidant circles is the pomegranate. While pomegranate fruit has yet to be proven to boost sperm quality on its own, researchers have found that a combination of pomegranate fruit and galangal successfully increased the number of motile sperm among men with low semen quality.

In the meantime, a little pomegranate juice can't hurt. Drink it instead of the typical morning OJ, or add it to a smoothie.

Fatty fish

Fertile men’s sperm contains more omega-3 fatty acids than the sperm of infertile men. Get omega-3s from fatty fish including:

Salmon

Herring

Sardines

Anchovies

Bonus: Omega-3 fatty acids also improve blood flow to the genitals, which may support sexual health.

Maca root

The powder from this Peruvian root has a long-standing reputation as a natural libido booster. That hasn’t been definitively proven, but some research has shown that maca powder increases sperm concentration and motility.

Sprinkle some in oatmeal and smoothies, or add a bit when making pancakes, waffles, and other goodies.

Trying to conceive? Use the What to Expect app to track your cycle, log symptoms, and get tips you both can use to boost your chances.

Which foods should men avoid for fertility?

While some foods may give fertility a boost, others are worth cutting back on or avoiding when baby-making is on the agenda. These foods may decrease sperm count and negatively impact male fertility:

Junk food

Sure, you already know this stuff isn’t good for the heart or the waistline — but fatty, fried, and sugary foods can impair male fertility, too. Sweetened snacks and beverages like soda can hurt sperm quality, research suggests.

High-mercury fish

Mercury has been linked with infertility in both women and men. Fish with the highest mercury content include:

Swordfish

King mackerel

Tilefish

Marlin

Bigeye tuna

Orange roughy

Shark

Swap these for omega-3-rich salmon or zinc-rich shellfish.

Caffeinated drinks and alcohol

Research shows that drinking too much coffee, tea, energy drinks, and alcohol may decrease sperm count. It's recommended to limit caffeine intake to the equivalent of about two cups of coffee per day, and keep the alcohol consumption in check.

"Dear husband left his very stressful job, cut back on his alcohol intake, and improved his diet, and that had a significant impact on his motility," says What to Expect Community member miraclemama2011.

Soy

It’s unclear whether a diet rich in soy can actually lead to problems getting pregnant, but some research has linked diets high in soy foods with a lower sperm concentration. So it may be wise to ease up on soy-based foods such as:

Soy sauce

Tofu

Soy milk

Tempeh

High-fat dairy

Yes, milk does a body good. But in the case of sperm, men may want to limit high-fat dairy products. Full-fat dairy foods can negatively impact sperm count and motility.

It’s better to reach for low-fat milk, skim milk, or milk alternatives like almond milk or coconut milk. The same goes for other dairy products like cheese and yogurt: Pick the low-fat versions, which have been found to benefit sperm quality.

Processed meat

Diets high in processed red meats are associated with lower sperm count and quality, including:

Bacon

Hot dogs

Sausage

Deli meat

Opt for healthier alternatives like chicken breast, lean beef, bison, and lean pork instead.

Just as it's important for hopeful moms-to-be to pay attention to their diets, the same is true for would-be dads. Adding more fertility-friendly foods and cutting back on less healthy choices may help support sperm health and improve your chances of conceiving. These changes can also benefit overall health — a win for both of you as you work toward growing your family.