8 Gun Safes for Homes With Babies and Kids

gun safe

More than 40 percent of parents with children under the age of 18 have a gun in their household, according to a 2024 poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation . The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) suggests temporarily removing firearms from the home when you have young kids, but if that's not possible, storing your guns as safely as possible is essential.

Firearm injuries are one of the leading causes of death among children under the age of 18 — and about half of these deaths occur at home, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . In many of these cases, the child was playing with a gun that was loaded and in an unlocked area, like a nightstand or cabinet.

Of course, it’s never too early to teach your child about gun safety — namely, if you see a gun, never touch it, leave the area and go tell an adult right away — but the best way to keep your child safe is to store your firearms properly if you have to have them at home, says the AAP.

“Any home with a gun should have the gun stored, locked, unloaded and kept separate from ammunition,” says Annie Andrews, M.D., a pediatrician and senior advisor at Everytown for Gun Safety . “Children who are as young as two are strong enough to pull the trigger of a gun."

If you do need to store your guns at home, here are some of the safest ways to do it.

Types of gun safes

If you have a gun at home, there are a few different types of storage for your firearms, according to Be SMART , an organization that helps parents understand responsible gun ownership.

A full-size gun safe: These can hold long guns and/or handguns, and can prevent children from accessing them. They can only be opened with your fingerprint, a key or with an electronic code. Typical price range: $200 to $2,000+

A lock box or locker: These are smaller and lighter firearm storage containers that can be used if you're traveling somewhere with your gun. They can only be opened with a key or an electronic code. Typical price range: $50-$350.

In general, if you have long guns, you’ll need a larger, heavier safe, which can be pricier than the smaller safes made for handguns. The upside is that these safes can make your guns more difficult to steal or for little hands to explore, especially when they’re secured to the floor or wall. If you have handguns, those safes tend to be smaller than those for long guns, which can be good if you don’t have many guns — or much room.

Traveling with your firearms

If you have to leave your home with a firearm, you’ll want to transport it unloaded. It will also need to be in a portable, locked safe (also known as a lockbox) that’s fixed to some type of immobile structure, such as the hardware underneath a seat if you're traveling in a car, says Lickenbrock. You'll want a safe that is TSA-compliant and comes with their own security cables so you can attach the safe underneath your seat in the car. Always check the TSA website and your own airline's policy before traveling with a firearm, though. Most domestic flights allow you to check your firearm as long as it's locked, unloaded and you declare to the check-in agent you have it.

How to choose a gun safe

Once you’ve narrowed down the type of gun safe you need, there are a few features you should look for (no matter what type of safe or gun you have). While they come at all different price points, and some come with more bells and whistles than others (think: waterproof, fire-resistant, and climate-controlled containers), you don't need to shell out thousands of dollars to keep your firearms out of the hands of children — there are safe storage containers starting at around $50. Just make sure you look for the following features:

A steel exterior: Steel is the strongest gun safe material, so it provides maximum security, says Greg Lickenbrock, the senior firearms analyst of the Everytown for Gun Safety Support Fund. Just one note, though: Some of the travel cases on this list are not made of steel because steel can be quite heavy – but other options can still be a safe storage solution if you're taking your guns on the go.

Pry-resistant features: Things like anti-pry tabs (also known as reinforced brackets) and locking bars make it harder for someone to break into, says Lickenbrock.

Hardware for anchoring the safe: For at-home safes, you'll want to anchor your safe to the floor, wall or other immobile structure, he says, so make sure it comes with bolts or a steel cable to do that.

Locks: Gun safes open in a few different ways, and you always want to be sure yours has some type of secure lock, says Lickenbrock. Here are some of the different lock options:

How we chose the best gun safes

While there is no official federal authority that fully approves or authorizes gun safes, says Lickenbrock, these gun safety devices meet the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives' definition of a secure gun storage or safety device option. They also meet the safety standards of the California Department of Justice, which plays a large role in regulating gun safety standards across the country, he adds.

Best Safe for Rifles and Hunting Gear

Vaultek RS Series

Instant alerts if someone is tampering with the safe

biometric scanner so that only certain people can open it

adjustable shelving so you can configure the inside

On the pricier side

only stores up to seven rifles

Why We Love It

The Vaultek RS Series is one of the techiest safes out there. It connects to Wi-Fi, so you can receive instant alerts about the safe, including if someone is trying to open it. The safe can store five to seven rifles and six to eight handguns and for security, it can only be opened using the biometric scanner, a regular key, or the eight-digit keypad.

Material: Steel Interior: 13.75 inches W x 11.7 inches D x 54 inches H Weight: 93 pounds Price: $1,600

Best Safe for Rifles and Hunting Gear

Cannon Armory

Holds up to 24 long guns

Comes with anti-pry tabs

Has adjustable shelving

Given its weight

this safe may be difficult to move if needed

Why We Love It

There’s no Wi-Fi compatibility in the Cannon Armory, but what it lacks in bells and whistles, it makes up for in construction: The safe is made of solid steel with bolt locks and anti-pry tabs. It’s also fire-resistant for 60 minutes and waterproof for up to 14 days. The safe, which opens with an electronic keypad, holds up to 24 long guns and has pockets on the door to store up to four handguns.

Material: Steel Interior size: 53.3 inches H x 23.8 inches W x 13.3 inches D Weight: 580 pounds Price: $850

Best Safe for Rifles and Hunting Gear

Liberty ProVault

Why We Love It

You’ll feel secure with your firearms in the steel Liberty ProVault, which has an electronic lock and military-style locking bars to protect kids from getting inside. This brand also offers safes that can hold up to 24 long guns, depending on how much storage you need.

Material: Steel Internal dimensions: 56 inches H x 16.25 inches W x 10 inches D Weight: 247 pounds Price: $800

Best Safe for Handguns

SentrySafe Gun Safe

Comes with a biometric lock

Anti-pry door

LED-backlit keypad

Only holds up to two handguns

Why We Love It

This gun safe is biometric for added security, but also has an LED-backlit digital keypad and override key in case the fingerprint function isn't working for some reason. It’s built of solid steel and has a pry-resistant door making it hard for anyone to try and break inside. You can fit two handguns or one larger pistol inside.

Material: Steel Interior : 14 inches W x 6.5 inches D x 2.2 inches H Weight: 16 pounds Price : $170

Best Safe for Handguns

SentrySafe Shelf Safe

Digital lock can set an eight-digit code

two manual override keys

bolt-down hardware so you can attach it to the wall or floor

On the smaller side

Why We Love It

This option may be small, but's super practical: It’s made of solid steel and features two live-locking bolts for security. We also like that it has a digital keypad lock that can set an eight-digit code, making it harder for curious minds to crack.

Material: Steel Interior specs:16.8 in. W x 11.6 in. D x 6.9 in. H Weight: 17 pounds Price: $98

Best Safe for Handguns

Gun Vault MultiVault

Made of steel

comes with a backup key

Only holds one handgun

Why We Love It

This handgun safe might be basic, but it gets the job done: It’s made of 20-gauge steel and comes with a steel security cable so it can be anchored to your floor or wall. Tip: It opens with a three-to-six-digit code, so you may want to set the longest password possible (a three-digit code will be easier to crack than a six-digit code).

Material: Steel Interior specs: 10.75 inches W x 6.5 inches D x 2 inches H Price: $98

Best Safes for Travel

Vaultek LifePod Electronic Lock Box

Easily portable

unlocks with a four-digit LED keypad or a manual key

water resistant

Not made of steel

Why We Love It

This handgun storage case has a four-digit keypad (which is backlit with LED lights) and comes with two manual keys as a backup. The case is made of a lightweight polymer, which makes it easy to carry on the go, and is both airtight and weather-resistant.

Material: Advanced non-metal polymer Fits: Handgun up to 7.75 inches L x 6 inches W x 1.75 inches H Includes: 2 manual keys, 19-inch security cable

Best Safes for Travel

SnapSafe Treklite Gun Safe Lockbox

Made partly of steel

super portable

Not water-resistant

Why We Love It

Though not quite as durable as the Vaultek, the SnapSafe TrekLite delivers in terms of security and storage. The lockbox is made from both steel and impact-resistant polycarbonate and opens with a four-digit combination lock. It also meets TSA firearm guidelines and can fit under your car's seat when using the security cable.

Material: Steel and polycarbonate Interior: Handgun up to 10 inches H x 7 inches W x 2 inches D Includes: Security cable

Be Smart for Kids, Secure Gun Storage: Types of storage , September 2024. AAP, Firearm Deaths Spike Almsot 30% During Pandemic , June 2022. KFF, The Impact of Gun Violence on Children and Adolescents , February 2024. CDC, Unintentional Firearm Injury Deaths Among Children and Adolescents Aged 0–17 Years — National Violent Death Reporting System, United States, 2003–2021 , December 2023. Everytown , September 2024. State of California Department of Justice, Regulatory Gun Safe Standards , September 2024.

Your Next Read

How to Babyproof Every Room in the House Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Safe vs. Unsafe Baby Sleep Environments: The Ultimate Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

8 Walking Safety Tips for Toddlers to Keep Spills and Hazards at Bay Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Is Your Baby's Car Seat Safe and Up-to-Date? Check These Infant Car Seat Safety Tips Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

How to Make Sure Your Baby's Crib Is Safe Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Childproof Furniture to Prevent Tip-Over Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Overwhelmed by Baby Gear? Here's What You Really Need (and What You Don't) Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Is It Safe to Buy Used Baby Gear? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

What to Know About Your Toddler's Car Seat: Get the Latest Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Space-Saving Tips for Baby’s Nursery By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

Are Baby Walkers Safe? Here's What the Experts Say Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window