7 Low-Stimulation Toddler Shows That Won’t Make You Want to Hit Mute

low stim shows for toddlers

Gentle pacing, sweet lessons, and zero earworms — these toddler shows strike the perfect balance for you and your little one.

One night when my son was just shy of 2 years old, we went out to dinner and were seated at a table next to a toddler with an iPad. My son craned his neck to see more and was suddenly transfixed by Netflix’s Trash Truck. We later became all too familiar with the two precious seasons of the low-stimulation show.Tuning in has been laughter-inducing (for all of us!) and even helps keep him calm during less-than-fun activities like nail-clipping sessions.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend waiting until your child is 2 for screen time (and we almost made it!). But even then, some TV shows are considered more calming for this age group than others.

“Compared to fast-paced content with rapidly changing graphics and flashing lights or colors, low stimulation shows, with slower pacing and much simpler animation, can help improve attention span and language development and allow for additional processing time and engagement,” says Brook Choulet, M.D. , a child and adolescent psychiatrist and toddler mom.

But… It's all about moderation. While low-stimulation shows can be beneficial for those 2 years and older, you still don’t want to overdo it. Too much screen time can lead to social and emotional delays as well as some language delays, says Gina Posner, M.D. , a pediatrician at MemorialCare Orange Coast Medical Center in Fountain Valley, California, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

Here are a few low stimulation shows that won't hype you or your toddler up — and dare I say, you might even enjoy them too.

1. Arthur

Arthur

If you’re a ’90s kid like me, you remember Arthur . An extension of the popular book series by Marc Brown, the animated show following the beloved, glasses-wearing aardvark ran for an impressive 25 seasons and 253 episodes. Over the years, it has covered topics including medical diagnoses like cancer and autism, as well as appreciating others with different personalities and belief systems. And lucky for all of us, it's still playing on numerous channels (you just won't see any new episodes come out — at least that we know of!).

What experts say: “I like Arthur’s gentle pacing and relatable scenarios,” says Dr. Choulet.

What parents say: “A lot of the shows we watched as kids are slower paced, like Arthur !” — ivfmama99

Where to watch: PBS Kids , YouTube TV , Hulu or Fandango

2. Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood

Daniel Tiger

Inspired by the classic Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood , which aired from 1968 to 2001, Daniel Tiger is a modern adaptation with just as much heart and feel-good fun. For the past seven seasons, we’ve seen Daniel develop a deeper understanding of emotions and experience big and small milestones — including what it means to become a big brother (a top-rated episode for any family welcoming a new baby soon), and experts agree it's a good one.

What experts say: “Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood is a good example of a low-stimulation show that mimics the pace of a toddler's world. I like that it uses songs and repetition to help kids process big changes, such as welcoming a new sibling,” says Dr. Choulet.

What parents say: “Daniel Tiger is great, gentle, and not fast paced, and taught really useful skills” — CAZ10

Where to watch: PBS Kids , YouTube TV , Apple TV+ , Hulu or Fandango

3. Franklin

Franklin

Millennials and Gen Zers will appreciate that their favorite animated series from childhood is a mainstay for toddlers today, too. Based on the popular books by Brenda Clark and Paulette Bourgeois, this six-season series takes us through the experiences of the titular character, a tortoise named Franklin. Topics discussed and lessons learned range from punctuality to how to accept an apology.

What experts say: "This is an ideal low-stimulation show for kids that has been around for several years, which is another reason parents trust the content" says Michigan-based psychologist Michele Leno, M.D . "It shows kids how to form healthy bonds and support. The colors are bright but earthy, and the music is soft and easy for some kids to learn."

What parents say: “We don't do much screen time (though it has definitely increased now that baby sister is in the picture), but my son's current favorite show is Franklin . I love that the family is wholesome, the parents are kind and loving, there are applicable life lessons for my son's age (about friendship, forgivingness, sharing, playing nicely, etc), and it's very low stim.” — exSPANNding2022

Where to watch: YouTube , Plex , Amazon Prime Video , Apple TV+ or The Roku Channel

4. If You Give a Mouse a Cookie

Mouse a Cookie

The book by Laura Numeroff is likely part of your bedtime already (and if it isn’t, add it to your cart ASAP!), but there’s also a TV series to explore. There are only two seasons, but chances are you’ll watch them over and over again. There are so many adventures for Mouse and Oliver, but they’re not too fast-paced or overwhelming. Similar to the book’s concept, one thing leads to another and these characters find themselves playing detective, getting creative at bathtime and becoming a part-time toymaker.

What experts say: “This series teaches abstract thinking and problem solving,” Dr. Leno says. “Children can learn how one event leads to another. Children start understanding the relationship between cause and effect.”

What parents say: “It was the first show we really let our son watch, and it is very relaxed. We downloaded a few episodes for a 5-hour plane ride, and let him watch around 40 minutes and he loved it.” — ToothFairyMama

Where to watch: Amazon Prime Video

5. Little Bear

Little Bear

Maurice Sendak’s book series was first introduced in the late 1950s and went on to become an animated series in the early 2000s. Little Bear is a 6-year-old smart grizzly bear cub who lives in the forest with his mom and dad, and goes on adventures with his friends Duck, Hen, Cat, Owl and a little girl named Emily. While watching, your toddler can recognize the animals he sees and learn where these animals live while gaining some social skills like cherishing friendships and practicing patience.

What experts say: “Reducing screentime is always the goal, and a series that is intentional about doing so?” Dr. Leno says, noting that each segment is only about 3 to 7 minutes long. “The stories help children identify with their own real-life adventures. It can encourage them to play an active role in their birthday party themes, sparking creativity.”

What parents say: “Little Bear on YouTube is very low stimulation. My daughter loves it! It’s very relaxing and slow paced. You can usually tell what’s low stimulation by when it was made. The older the show the less stimulation. The newer the faster paced. I also put on old Disney movies or shows. I prefer things before mid 90.” — lovemysweetpeas

Where to watch: YouTube , Amazon Prime Video , Apple TV+ , Paramount+ or The Roku Channel

6. The Berenstain Bears

Berenstain Bears

For yet another book-turned-TV series (sensing a theme here?), many parents and tots highly recommend The Berenstain Bears . Head out to Bear Country to visit the treehouse of Mama, Papa, Brother and Sister Bear. The two seasons premiered in the 1980s and promotes family connection with humor you and your little one will love.

What experts say: “This series helps children learn about family relationships and roles,” Dr. Leno says. “They recognize the parents' authority and sibling love and rivalry. They see themselves in a character and identify where they fit into their own family dynamic.”

What parents say: “Screen time isn’t evil, you just pick/choose educational things like Ms. Rachel or low stimulation shows like The Berenstain Bears . My toddler has an incredible vocabulary plus she’s learning to be bilingual!” — diy22

Where to watch: YouTube , Amazon Prime Video , Apple TV+ or Fandango

7. Trash Truck

Trash Truck

Though only two seasons were released from November 2020 to May 2021, there’s no shortage of lessons and adventures for a young boy named Hank and his BFF, Trash Truck. Joined by Donny the raccoon, Walter the bear, and Ms. Mona the mouse, the gang comes together to overcome common fears like visiting the doctor or trying new vegetables. Aside from the talking animals, other fantastical elements involve Trash Truck surfing, flying, and even squeezing his way down school hallways to show up for his pal Hank. It's our favorite for sure!

What experts say: “The music and colorful setting provide just the right amount of stimulation without overdoing it,” Dr. Leno says. “The children learn imaginative play and personification. We must be creative when teaching children, and allow them to have that aha moment as they often resist traditional learning methods.”

What parents say: “Trash Truck! It’s not ever stimulating and it’s also not annoying to listen to as the parent. It’s very cute.” — darbyjolene

Where to watch: Netflix

American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Where We Stand: Screen Time , December 2023. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), HIOPS for Screen Time Limits , February 2024. Brook Choulet, M.D., Concierge Psychiatrist in Scottsdale, Arizona. Gina Posner, M.D., Pediatrician at MemorialCare Orange Coast Medical Center in Fountain Valley, CA, and Member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. Michele Leno, M.D ., psychologist and founder of DML Psychological Services in Michigan.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

Explaining a New Baby to a Toddler Is Hard — These TV Episodes Make It Much Easier Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

When Can Babies and Toddlers Watch TV? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Drop-Off a Nightmare? These Toddler TV Shows Can Help Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Toddler Songs to Sing Together Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The Best Crafts for Toddlers Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The Stages of Play Your Child Will Go Through Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Ways to Discipline Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Can't Toddlers Sit Still? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Avoid Spoiling Your Child Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Toddler Impatience, Explained: Simple Ways to Help Your Child Practice Patience Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Use Time-Outs Effectively With Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Cut Back on Saying "No!" to Your Child Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

I’d Pay Double for This $24 Travel Toy By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window