7 Pregnancy Arm Exercises That Will Have You Feeling Super Strong

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting

arm exercises during pregnancy, woman using resistance band

Pick up your heaviest grocery bags (or a growing kid!) with confidence after working these upper-body moves into your routine.

If you think arm workouts aren’t necessary for new or expecting moms, learning about functional training may change your mind.

Functional training is a fitness methodology designed to help you complete daily tasks with a reduced risk of injury or fatigue. Essentially, it helps you gain more strength and stamina to move through life with ease.

And pregnancy arm workouts are exactly that — functional training. Just think about the upper-body strength you’re going to need every time you lift that infant, then that toddler , then that small child.

Find out what makes arm workouts for pregnancy so valuable both now and as your little one grows. Plus, learn seven great arm exercises that you can add to your prenatal routine for a stronger, healthier upper body. Just remember to check in with your doctor before beginning a new exercise routine during pregnancy.

Key Takeaways:

Arm workouts during pregnancy are functional training for real life. They build the strength and stamina you’ll use to lift a car seat, carry your baby, and push a stroller.

Keep it safe and smart. Choose weights you can control with good form, breathe, engage your core, and check in with your doctor before starting or progressing.

Simple moves go a long way. Mix options like rows, presses, fly exercises, and dips two to three days a week — solo or in a quick circuit — to support better posture now and postpartum.

Benefits of arm workouts during pregnancy

Doing arm workouts during pregnancy prepares your body for life with a newborn — just think about the hefty weight of a car seat! Specifically, your prenatal workout should incorporate lifting, carrying, picking up, pushing, and pulling moves to get ready for life as a new parent.

“These days I need all the strength I can get to carry around my 19-month-old!” says What to Expect Community mom stolichnaya01.

What’s more, arm workouts during pregnancy can help prevent posture problems. That’s helpful, since your growing pregnancy belly can often cause an expecting mom’s shoulders to round forward.

Performing pulling movements in your upper-body workouts, for example, targets important back muscles. Strengthening this area can help realign the spine and shoulders and ward off hunching.

Arm exercises to avoid during pregnancy

Arm exercises are generally safe during pregnancy. But there are a few things to keep in mind — mostly, the amount of weight you’re lifting. While there’s no need to stop lifting weights during pregnancy , you should avoid picking up too much weight too soon (a good practice whether you’re pregnant or not).

If a weight is too heavy for you to do an exercise with proper form, this could impact your breathing pattern and therefore the proper use of your deep abdominal muscles. Play it safe and stick with lighter dumbbells, or use resistance bands.

You’ll also want to watch your form when lifting any amount of weight overhead. Failing to properly brace and engage your core could cause you to arch your back and up your risk for pain or injury.

Build strength for pregnancy and beyond with expert-backed exercise advice tailored to your due date in the What to Expect app .

Best arm exercises during pregnancy

Now that you’ve got the bases covered, it’s time to get to work on getting strong for you and your baby. Check out the arm exercises below that you can work into your existing prenatal fitness routine.

You can also move through each exercise in a circuit, performing two or three total rounds, for a complete arm workout during pregnancy.

Reverse fly

reverse fly

Begin standing. Hinge at the hips and maintain a flat back and neutral spine. Holding one 5- to 8-pound dumbbell in each hand, bring weights in toward the midline at belly-button height with your palms facing each other and elbows out wide.

Exhale and lift your arms out to the side and back, squeezing your shoulder blades together to engage the back.

Inhale and slowly lower the weights back down to the starting position.

Do 10 reps.

Reverse tricep dip

tricep dip

Sitting on a sturdy chair or bench, place your palms on the front edge of the seat with your fingers wrapping around the bottom. With both heels planted on the ground, lift your hips so your butt is forward and hovering off the seat. Your shoulders should be in line with your wrists.

Inhale and bend your elbows toward the back of the chair, keeping your arms tight to the sides of your body, until the arms are roughly at a 90-degree angle.

Press through your palms to straighten the arms and lift your hips back up.

Do 8 to 12 reps.

Deadlift with forward press

deadlift

Begin standing with your feet shoulder-width apart holding a 5- to 8-pound dumbbell in each hand.

Inhale and hinge at the waist to lower dumbbells in front of your shins, keeping your palms faced in and weight close to your body. Reach down to roughly low- to mid-shin height or when your hamstrings catch.

Exhale and engage the pelvic floor and deep abdominal muscles. Press through your heels returning to standing while simultaneously bringing weights to chest height, elbows out wide.

Press both arms out directly in front of you at chest height, then return to starting position.

Do 8 reps.

Wide-grip row with resistance band

wide grip row

Sit upright in a chair with your feet flat on the floor and spine neutral.

Hold a resistance band in both hands with grip slightly wider than your shoulders. Keeping your arms straight, lift them up until you reach chest height.

Inhale, and bend your arms to pull your hands apart and stretch the band, keeping the elbows lifted, drawing them back into a wide row. Squeeze the shoulder blades together and keep the chest wide, but avoid arching your low back.

Exhale and slowly straighten your arms back out to the starting position. Keep your arms lifted, never fully releasing the band’s tension. Repeat.

Do 10 reps.

Forward and lateral arm raise

forward to lateral arm raise

Begin standing with knees slightly bent and feet about shoulder-distance apart.

Holding one 5- to 8-pound dumbbell in each hand, with your arms down in front of your thighs and your palms facing your body, lift straight arms up directly in front of you to shoulder height. Lower your arms back down with control.

Next, with your arms at your sides and palms facing in, lift straight arms up and out to the sides to shoulder height. Lower your arms back down with control.

Do 10 reps.

Quadruped scapular push-up

quadruped scapular push-up

Begin in an all-fours position with your shoulders stacked above the wrists and your hips above the knees. Exhale to engage your deep core muscles and lift your pelvic floor to stabilize the spine and pelvis.

Keeping your arms straight, retract your shoulder blades, pulling them up and together.

Inhale and protract the shoulder blades away from each other.

Do 12 reps.

Crescent lunge with single-arm row to triceps kick back

lunge row kickback

With your left leg forward and the right leg back, bend your left leg to a 90-degree angle, keeping the right leg straight behind you. Hinge forward slightly at the waist, maintaining a neutral spine.

Hold one 5- to 8-pound dumbbell in your right hand (the same side as your straight leg) with your arm stretched straight down toward the floor, and place the other hand on your hip for extra stability.

Bring your right elbow back, keeping the weight close to your body, to row the weight up and back.

From this bent position, extend your forearm to bring the weight back and straighten your right arm. Keep the elbow static.

Reverse the movement by bending your elbow and bringing the weight back down toward the floor.

Do 8 to 10 reps on each side.