7 Products to Help with Constipation During Pregnancy

Products to Help With Constipation

On the laundry list of not-so-lovely pregnancy symptoms, constipation is most certainly up there. Not only is it a hallmark of early pregnancy, but for some women it lingers throughout the entire 9 months and into the postpartum period.

Like most pesky pregnancy side effects, hormones are usually to blame, namely progesterone. In an effort to prevent premature labor, progesterone quiets muscular contraction in the uterus, as well as other organs, including the gut and colon, explains Felice Gersh, M.D., an OB/GYN in Irvine, California. Add to that the fact that your growing baby is taking up more and more space in your uterus, plus any changes in your diet as a result of pregnancy cravings or aversions, and you have a recipe for constipation.

For some unlucky women, constipation can start as soon as they begin taking their prenatal vitamins and continue throughout pregnancy, notes Sherry Ross, M.D., OB/GYN and Women’s Health Expert at Providence Saint John’s Health Center in Santa Monica, California.

How To Help Relieve Pregnancy Constipation

Eat the rainbow. When you’re pregnant, it’s more important than ever to eat a healthy diet with plenty of leafy greens, crunchy peppers, super squash, antioxidant-packed fruits and berries, chia seeds (try soaking them in milk overnight) and whole grains. Not only do these foods benefit your little one's development, they’re packed with fiber to help your digestion humming right along. Another fiber-packed ingredient?

Makeover meal time. Aim to eat five small meals a day rather than three big ones. Not only will this give your system time to catch up, it also keeps you from getting hangry.

Flat or sparkling? Keep pouring and drinking water — 12 to 13 glasses a day will help keep your digestive track lubricated and make your poop softer (which makes it easier to go). Decaffeinated tea (iced or hot), hot water with lemon, and fruit and veggie-infused waters are other hydrating choices .

Keep moving. When you want things to get moving, you gotta get moving. Even a 10-minute daily walk can be enough to boost circulation to keep you regular.

Don’t hold back. To prevent constipation, it’s important to go when you feel the urge.

Talk to your doctor. Many prenatal supplements include iron, which, while beneficial for you and your baby, can cause constipation. If you suspect this might be the case, ask your doctor if she can recommend an alternative supplement.

If you’re experiencing pregnancy constipation, hang in there! Constipation usually eases up after your baby is born. In the meantime, here are some products that might help relieve your symptoms.

Water Bottle

S'well Stainless Steel Bottle

Why We Love It

One of the best things you can do for your body during pregnancy (aside from taking your prenatal vitamin , of course) is to drink enough water . "Drinking fluids helps food move efficiently through the intestines and keeps the muscles of the intestines well oiled,” says Dr. Ross.

During pregnancy, you need even more H2O for you and your growing baby, and having a water bottle by your side all day can help ensure that you get enough (10 8-ounce glasses daily).

This stainless steel water bottle has a triple-layered, vacuum-insulated construction that keeps beverages hot or cold for up to 41 hours. Happy sipping!

Capacity: 25 ounces

Running Shoes

Brooks Women's Launch 9

Why We Love It

Exercise is another important way to combat all sorts of pregnancy symptoms, including constipation. “Exercising regularly aids in our digestion by decreasing the time it takes food to move through the intestines and also increases our heart rate and breathing, which helps contract the intestinal muscles to move stool through the intestines more quickly,” says Dr. Ross. “Plus, exercise makes you feel physically and emotionally stronger and more energetic.”

During pregnancy, it's extra important to wear a good pair of exercise shoes that are supportive on your expanding feet, ideally with a midsole cushion and comfortable heel.

Stool Softener

Colace Regular Strength Stool Softener

Why We Love It

It might not be the sexiest purchase you’ve ever made, but stool softeners can help allow for easier passage of a bowel movement, which is why they can come in handy during pregnancy and into the postpartum period.

Dr. Ross encourages most of her patients to take 50mg to 100mg of Colace if struggling with constipation. Before purchasing any stool softeners, however, check in with your provider.

Size: 30 100 mg capsules

Fiber Supplements

Metamucil Sugar-Free Fiber Supplement

Why We Love It

“Bulk-forming laxatives, such as fiber supplements , are the gentlest on your body and safe to use during pregnancy,” says Dr. Ross. “Fiber supplements work similar to dietary fiber, bringing water into the intestines to soften the stool and allow it to pass more easily.” Like any supplement, it’s best to reach out to your health care provider first to make sure that it is the best solution for you.

Size: 36.8 ounces

Milk of Magnesia

Phillips' Milk of Magnesia Liquid Laxative

Why We Love It

Milk of magnesia, also known as magnesium hydroxide, is generally considered safe to use during pregnancy to ease constipation, but you should always ask your doctor before taking it. In addition to helping relieve symptoms of constipation, milk of magnesia may help with muscle cramps, says Kimberly Langdon, OB/GYN and medical advisor at Medzino Health.

Size: 12 ounces

Sip Tea

Yogi Tea in Lemon Ginger

Why We Love It

Ginger is not only helpful for morning sickness ; it's also incredibly soothing on the stomach and may calm nausea, soothe sore muscles and reduce muscle soreness. If you have an upset tummy associated with constipation, ginger tea might help. This ginger tea by Yogi is certified organic, non-GMO and caffeine-free.

incredibly soothing on the stomach and may calm nausea, soothe sore muscles and reduce muscle soreness. If you have an upset tummy associated with constipation, ginger tea might help. This ginger tea by Yogi is certified organic, non-GMO and caffeine-free.

Size: 16 bags per box; 6 boxes total

Probiotics

Pink Stork Pro Prenatal Probiotic

Why We Love It

The good bacteria found in probiotics may help your digestive track speed things along, which in turn may ease constipation. While you can find probiotics in many foods, including yogurt, kimchi and kefir, taking a probiotic supplement may help, too.

Pink Stork Pro Prenatal Probiotic contains Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium. As always, talk to your doctor before adding a new supplement to your diet.

Size: 60 capsules (30-day supply)

Your Next Read

Constipation is Super Common in Pregnancy. Here's How to Get Things Moving Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Is Constipation a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Best Products for Pregnancy Hemorrhoids Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Diarrhea During Pregnancy? Here’s What's Normal — and How to Ease It Medically Reviewed by Lisa Hickman, M.D.

Constipated While Expecting? Here’s What You Need to Know About Milk of Magnesia Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

How to Manage IBS Flare-Ups While Pregnant (and Which Meds Are Actually Safe) Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

Is Diarrhea a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Relieve Baby and Toddler Constipation Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Home Cleaning Products to Use During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Why You Might Feel Bloated When You're Pregnant — and What You Can Do About It Medically Reviewed by Kameelah Phillips, M.D.

Products to Make Pregnancy Sex More Comfortable Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Experts Say More Than a Third of All Moms-to-Be Struggle With Pregnancy Hemorrhoids — Will You? Medically Reviewed by Lisa Hickman, M.D.

Is Bloating a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

From Coffee to Juice: What’s Safe to Drink When You’re Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window