7 Sweet Stories to Help Your Little One Say Goodbye to the Pacifier (Including the Book That Finally Worked for My Toddler)

pacifier books

When my son was 20 months old, I helped him wean off the pacifier. Even saying those words is still a bit stressful. He first became interested in the pacifier around the 2-month mark, and that later turned into a full-blown obsession after weaning from breastfeeding.

To help our sanity, my husband and I purchased the book "Ben Gives Up His Pacifier" by Jenny Album. While there have been some ups and downs over the two months of weaning — like the full-on meltdowns at naptime — he finally stopped demanding his beloved paci.

If you have a paci devotee in your household, you know that there’s a window where you should really cut the habit, and this stage is daunting. "It's best to drop the pacifier between 12 and 18 months … because it can cause problems with speech and also with teeth and jaw development,” says Gina Posner, M.D. , a pediatrician at MemorialCare Orange Coast Medical Center in Fountain Valley, California, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . “Babies typically get more addicted to using it the longer they have it, so 12 months is even better and actually tends to be easier.”

If you’ve committed to the dreaded transition, you know it’s easier said than done. In fact, "removing it suddenly can lead to resistance, tantrums, and even temporary sleep disruption (for everyone)," says Brook Choulet, M.D. , a child and adolescent psychiatrist and toddler mom.

“Books and even podcasts can help normalize how difficult the transition can be for both parents and their babies,” she says.

But which ones do you choose? Here are seven to add to your toddler’s bookshelf so you can finally bid farewell to the pacifier.

Goodbye, Paci!

Why We Love It

Is there anything Lovevery can’t do? The Montessori-based toy and play kit company sells a pacifier transition book that comes with a special bag for your baby’s pacis. It uses real images of a young girl taking on this difficult phase. She goes on a paci hunt, places them all in a bag, and feels a sense of accomplishment after one night without her soother.

do? The Montessori-based toy and play kit company sells a pacifier transition book that comes with a special bag for your baby’s pacis. It uses real images of a young girl taking on this difficult phase. She goes on a paci hunt, places them all in a bag, and feels a sense of accomplishment after one night without her soother.

“This story is helpful because it follows the girl as she picks up all of her pacifiers but also normalizes the feelings of worry or fear in the process,” says Dr. Choulet. “The fact that Lovevery provides a special bag too that matches the girl’s from the story makes it more real for the toddlers listening to the book.”

You can also scan a QR code to access an interactive song about saying goodbye to your pacifier (genius!).

Community Reviews

WJ1026 "We read some books in the month leading up to it (Lovevery’s 'Goodbye, Paci,' and one about the paci fairy) and then we officially just went for it. The "paci fairy" helped us collect them in a special little bag, and the next morning, I had balloons and a little gift for our daughter. The first week was hard. There were definitely tears!"

kaitlin4mom "So we used the book for just under a week, and my 2-year-old napped and did bedtime without it last night! She bit her other paci and I told her it was time to throw it out, and it didn't really faze her."

No More Pacifier, Duck

Why We Love It

Sometimes, it’s just more fun to follow a story about an animal. In this case, an adorable baby duck is getting too old for his paci, and Mama Duck first suggests only using it for bedtime. The book features plenty of repetition as Mama Duck says, “Only in bed, sleepyhead.” And one day, Mama Duck takes the plunge and says, “No more pacifier, duck. Not even in bed, sleepyhead.”

“This story uses simple, repetitive language, which is very helpful for a toddler to process concepts,” says Dr. Choulet. “It's a nice story that ends with a message of growth and pride, which makes toddlers feel good and positive about themselves.

Community Reviews

JackBurton "We read 'No More Pacifier Duck' for about a week. Multiple times a day. I mimicked the language and only gave the paci at bedtime. About two to three days before I planned to take it away, he lost it, and that was that. I again used the language from the book, and it worked. He fussed a bit and looked for it but still managed to sleep without it."

bearsrus "One thing [our daughter] really loved was a book called 'No More Pacifier Duck.' It was funny for her. We would quote the book to remind her that [she couldn't use her pacifier anymore]."

Pacifiers Are Not Forever

Why We Love It

There are so many milestones your toddler has already overcome, and this book celebrates them all. With a focus on older tots who can’t give up their pacifier, it reminds them that they’re big enough to do things like walk, talk, and feed themselves — and now, it’s time to add tossing their pacifiers to the list. Parents will also appreciate that there are pages with step-by-step tips, like how to develop a strategy, plan the official goodbye, keep your little one busy, and comfort them when they need it most.

Community Reviews

Howgreatthouart "We read the book 'Pacifiers are not Forever' for a few weeks, and then one day he handed it to me in the morning, and I threw them all away!"

AprilShowers20 "I got the book 'Pacifiers Are Not Forever,' and it helped a lot for bedtime. Nap time is just going to be rough for a bit, and then he will be fine."

Ben Gives Up His Pacifier

Why We Love It

There were so many books to choose from, but the little guy on the cover reminded us of our own binky-loving baby. It follows Ben, a toddler who takes his paci everywhere — even in the bath (an all-too-relatable situation). The Pacifier Fairy visits Ben and shares that she needs his pacifiers for all sorts of things in Fairyland, gives some advice on coping without a paci, and promises to exchange them for special gifts. This is where parents need to come in and play Pacifier Fairy, so there is an extra step involved for you — but it's worth it. After two days, some tears, and a 40-pack of washable markers, I’m relieved (and honestly, shocked) to say my son is officially paci-free. For girl parents, author Jenny Album also wrote "Bea Gives Up Her Pacifier."

There were so many books to choose from, but the little guy on the cover reminded us of our own binky-loving baby. It follows Ben, a toddler who takes his paci

— even in the bath (an all-too-relatable situation). The Pacifier Fairy visits Ben and shares that she needs his pacifiers for all sorts of things in Fairyland, gives some advice on coping without a paci, and promises to exchange them for special gifts. This is where parents need to come in and play Pacifier Fairy, so there is an extra step involved for you — but it's worth it. After two days, some tears, and a 40-pack of washable markers, I’m relieved (and honestly, shocked) to say my son is officially paci-free. For girl parents, author Jenny Album also wrote "

Community Reviews

Time4no2 "We got rid of soothers in one swoop with our son, who’s almost 3, by reading a book called 'Ben Gives Up His Pacifier' every night for a week. He really identified with Ben, and then when we suggested we do the same, put all his soothers into an envelope and leave them on the outside of his door for the Dummy Fairy, he was on board. He’s never looked for them since."

Pacita the Pacifier Fairy

Why We Love It

A pacifier fairy, appropriately named Pacita, is here to recognize the grief that comes with losing the pacifier, while also explaining how she’ll love and care for them. There’s a lot of rhyming in this poetic tale to encourage toddlers (and their parents) to approach this transition with confidence. Even more, there are four pages of bonus materials outlining advice for finding alternative soothing methods, staying positive, and penning letters from Pacita to your toddler.

Community Reviews

annab8295 "We bought a book about the pacifier fairy and read it every night. Each night my 3-year-old gave up one binky to give to the fairy! He’d leave his binky out for her to pick up in the night and then in the morning he got a letter and a little gift. The last night was a little tough when he gave up his last binky, but since then he’s doing great without them! The book is called 'Pacita, the Pacifier Fairy' and we got it on Amazon."

Mamakirbs "For our first daughter, we introduced 'Pacita the Pacifier Fairy' a few months before she turned 2. Then a month or so after her birthday, we went cold turkey. It was hard for a couple days and we got very little sleep, but then it was over. We plan to do the same for our 16-month-old pacifier lover, too."

Florrie the Paci Fairy

Why We Love It

Meet Florrie, another Paci Fairy with a superpower: She takes kids’ pacifiers and turns them into stars. There’s a sing-along component for music lovers, and the catchy tunes can even lull your little one into a restful, paci-less slumber (or keep them calm during a chaotic car ride). We love how one WTE parent decorated her daughter’s room with glow-in-the-dark stars, and another simply pointed to a real star in the sky to reinforce the book’s message.

Community Reviews

kmb2022 "After reading 'Florrie the Paci Fairy' at bedtime for two weeks, I asked our daughter if she wanted an octopus stuffy toy and she said yes. Then I said, well let's put your paci in this box and see what the paci fairy brings! She willingly put it in a box! She asked about it the next night, and we went out and looked at the stars and I pointed to her paci...and that was the end of that."

lewissm "About a month ago, we borrowed a book called 'Florrie the Paci Fairy' … We read that for a couple of weeks, talked about it, and then our daughter picked out what present she wanted. On the day we decided, we left her pacifiers on the front steps after nap, and she went and played. I quickly ran downstairs to put glow-in-the-dark stars on her ceiling, put the present out front, then rang the doorbell."

Milo the Pacifier Hero

Why We Love It

There are fairies and then there’s 'Milo the Pacifier Hero.' Your kid’s new favorite superhero eases the transition by telling toddlers that he needs to give them to other babies in need. The rhyming story is fun and whimsical, and the customizable certificate is the ultimate reward your little one can hold onto. It teaches them about lending a hand — er, paci — to others and provides a physical token to celebrate their accomplishment.

Community Reviews

peachykeenn "I bought the book about Milo, a superhero who takes your pacifiers to give to new babies who need them. My son decided to allow Milo to take his pacifiers last night, and in the morning there were presents."

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

When Should You Take Away Your Toddler's Pacifier? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Wean Your Baby Off the Bottle Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When and How to Night Wean Your Baby — Without Losing Too Much Sleep in the Process Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Books to Help Your Toddler Transition to Their Big Kid Bed Medically Reviewed by Kelley Yost Abrams, Ph.D.

How and When to Wean Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Babies and Transitional Objects Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfeeding Toddler Doesn't Want to Wean By Heidi Murkoff

How to Introduce a Sippy Cup Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Stop Toddlers From Thumb Sucking Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Switching Between Breast and Bottle? Here’s How to Avoid Nipple Confusion Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Stop Pumping Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

7 Pacifiers Small Enough to Soothe a Preemie Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is It Time For Your Child to Stop Napping? Here's How to Make the Transition Smoother So No One Loses Their Cool Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Stop Co-Sleeping and Move Your Little One to Her Own Crib or Bed Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Tired of Bedtime Battles? Try These Toddler Sleep Strategies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window