70 Baby Items You Didn't Know You Could Buy With FSA Money

FSA Eligible Baby Items

It’s no secret that having a baby is basically synonymous with spending money. Not only do babies require a lot of stuff, but so do pregnant and recovering postpartum moms. Fortunately, a Flexible Spending Account (FSA) can help you stock up on pregnancy and baby essentials, while saving money in the long run.

According to the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services , an FSA is a type of health plan that allows you to set aside pre-tax money to pay for certain out-of-pocket health care costs. And, with most plans, that includes purchasing health-related essentials as well as covering doctor’s visits. (A Health Savings Account (HSA) is another health plan that works similarly to an FSA and can also be used on many of the items below.)

There is one caveat: Only specific baby, maternity and postpartum items are going to be eligible for purchase with FSA money. That said, there is a surprising amount of FSA-eligible baby items covered and include many that all new moms need to have on hand for a smooth recovery, as well as taking care of your newborn.

Find all of our favorite FSA-eligible pregnancy, postpartum, and baby essentials in our Amazon storefront.

Prenatal Vitamins

Nature Made Prenatal with Folic Acid + DHA

Why We Love It

In addition to taking prenatals while pregnant, many moms start taking them before conception and after giving birth. Because you might be taking them for quite a long time, it’s worth saving however you can. The Nature Made Prenatal with Folic Acid + DHA is a favorite pick among What to Expect moms because it’s packed with important vitamins and minerals to aid in cognitive, brain and spinal cord development. In fact, Nature Made has won the What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards for four years in a row, and it’s our editors’ top pick for the best prenatal because it’s a great value and gives you the nutrients you need.

In addition to taking prenatals while pregnant, many moms start taking them before conception and after giving birth. Because you might be taking them for quite a long time, it’s worth saving however you can. The Nature Made Prenatal with Folic Acid + DHA is a favorite pick among What to Expect moms because it’s packed with important vitamins and minerals to aid in cognitive, brain and spinal cord development. In fact, Nature Made has won the

because it’s a great value and gives you the nutrients you need.

Other FSA-eligible prenatal vitamins include Ritual Prenatal Vitamins , as well as Olly Gummy Vitamins and VitaFusion Prenatals if you’d rather take a gummy.

Anti-Nausea Bands

Frida Mom Nausea Bands

Why We Love It

Morning sickness happens to roughly 3 in 4 pregnant women during their first trimester , and many of those moms-to-be swear by the Frida Mom nausea bands for relief. The secret is an inner button that stimulates a pressure point on the wrist, proven to relieve nausea and vomiting. Bonus: Unlike other bands, you can adjust the size to maximize your comfort and the effectiveness of the band.

Wearable Breast Pumps

Willow Go Breast Pump

Why We Love It

For moms who plan to pump on-the-go, a wearable breast pump is essential. Unfortunately, these types of pumps are also expensive and not usually fully covered by insurance ( although there are other pumps that are covered ), so it makes sense to get it through your FSA account. Compact, easy to use and comfortable, the Willow Go Breast Pump makes it simple to get precious breast milk whether you’re sitting at your office desk, driving home in traffic or cleaning up around the house. This was my first choice when it came to getting a wearable breast pump, and I loved that I could control it with an app on my phone.

is essential. Unfortunately, these types of pumps are also expensive and not usually fully covered by insurance (

), so it makes sense to get it through your FSA account. Compact, easy to use and comfortable, the Willow Go Breast Pump makes it simple to get precious breast milk whether you’re sitting at your office desk, driving home in traffic or cleaning up around the house. This was my first choice when it came to getting a wearable breast pump, and I loved that I could control it with an app on my phone.

Other FSA-eligible wearable breast pumps include: the Willow 360 , the Elvie Stride Breast Pump , the Medela Freestyle Hands-Free Breast Pump , the Momcozy M5 Wearable Pump and the Momcozy M9 Wearable Pump .

Electric Breast Pumps

Spectra S1 Plus Portable & Rechargeable Hospital Strength Pump

Why We Love It

Wearable pumps are great for on-the-go use, but pumps like the Spectra S1 are stronger and ideal for regular use at home. After trying a few different pumps, I found that the Spectra S1 was my favorite with both of my kids. It’s strong and easy to adjust, and I like that it’s rechargeable. I also like that it has a little night light on it for middle-of-the-night pumping sessions. “If you’re only getting one pump, I recommend the Spectra because it’s a hospital grade pump and it will have better suction which will empty you more,” one What to Expect mom says . Keep in mind that many health insurances will cover this type of pump, but if it doesn’t, it’s a great use of FSA money since not all breast pumps are eligible.

Wearable pumps are great for on-the-go use, but pumps like the Spectra S1 are stronger and ideal for regular use at home. After trying a few different pumps, I found that the Spectra S1 was my favorite with both of my kids. It’s strong and easy to adjust, and I like that it’s rechargeable. I also like that it has a little night light on it for middle-of-the-night pumping sessions. “If you’re only getting one pump, I recommend the Spectra because it’s a hospital grade pump and it will have better suction which will empty you more,” one What to Expect mom

. Keep in mind that many health insurances will cover this type of pump, but if it doesn’t, it’s a great use of FSA money since not all breast pumps are eligible.

Other FSA-eligible electric pumps include the Lansinoh Signature Pro Double Electric Breast Pump and the Spectra S2 Plus Hospital Strength Double Electric Breast Pump .

Nursing Bras

Kindred Bravely Women’s Sublime Nursing and Pumping Bra

Why We Love It

A trusted nursing bra is an essential whether you’re nursing or pumping. Kindred Bravely’s Sublime bra is both our editors’ top pick and a community member favorite (it even won as Best Nursing Bra in the What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards ). Moms love that it’s super soft and comfortable, with adjustable straps and removable cups. It folds down from the straps for easy nursing access or to turn into a hands-free pumping bra, which is super convenient. The Kindred Bravely Sublime Nursing and Pumping Bra can get a little pricey, so it’s great to use your FSA money to invest in one. Another good, FSA-eligible option: the Momcozy Hands Free Pumping Bra .

is an essential whether you’re nursing or pumping. Kindred Bravely’s Sublime bra is both our editors’ top pick and a community member favorite (it even won as Best Nursing Bra in the

). Moms love that it’s super soft and comfortable, with adjustable straps and removable cups. It folds down from the straps for easy nursing access or to turn into a hands-free pumping bra, which is super convenient. The Kindred Bravely Sublime Nursing and Pumping Bra can get a little pricey, so it’s great to use your FSA money to invest in one. Another good, FSA-eligible option: the Momcozy Hands Free Pumping Bra .

Baby Monitors

Nanit Pro Smart Baby Monitor & Flex Stand

Why We Love It

The Nanit Pro Smart Baby Monitor is one of the few baby monitors covered by FSA dollars. It also happens to be a favorite among parents in the What to Expect community for its high-quality video you can access on your phone, plus its impressive tracking abilities.

In addition to checking on baby’s breathing and movements, you can also note things like the temperature and humidity levels in their room to keep them comfortable. You can even use two devices simultaneously with a split-screen. The flex stand also makes it easy to move the monitor from room to room as needed.

For other FSA-eligible monitors, check out the Owlet Dream Duo and the CuboAi Plus Smart Baby Monitor .

Disposable Nursing Pads

Lansinoh Stay Dry Disposable Nursing Pads

Why We Love It

If you nurse or pump, you’ll want to stock up on nursing pads . The Lansinoh Disposable Nursing Pads are super thin and absorbent, made with a pad that basically soaks up all the excess liquid to prevent any leaking from happening. I used these with both of my kids and loved the non-slip adhesive tapes that keep them in place so they’re not moving around a lot. I also liked that they’re individually wrapped, which makes them super easy to tote around when out of the house.

. The Lansinoh Disposable Nursing Pads are super thin and absorbent, made with a pad that basically soaks up all the excess liquid to prevent any leaking from happening. I used these with both of my kids and loved the non-slip adhesive tapes that keep them in place so they’re not moving around a lot. I also liked that they’re individually wrapped, which makes them super easy to tote around when out of the house.

Other FSA-eligible disposable nursing pads include Philips AVENT Disposable Breast Pads . And for a little extra relief, throw some of your FSA money towards Lansinoh Soothies Cooling Gel Pad .

Nipple Creams

Lansinoh Organic Nipple Butter

Why We Love It

There are plenty of tools to help moms manage painful breastfeeding symptoms . Nipple cream, like Lansinoh’s organic nipple balm , soothes raw, cracked and bleeding nipples. This particular pick is free from petroleum, parabens or preservatives, so you don’t need to wipe it off before breastfeeding (which, of course, can lead to more irritation.) It’s also free from lanolin, which some moms try to avoid. Rather, it uses a slew of natural oils, shea butter and calendula flower extract to soothe and moisturize.

Frida Mom's No-Mess Nipple Cream and Earth Mama's Organic Nipple Butter are also great FSA-eligible options.

Silver Nursing Cups

Silverette The Original Silver Nursing Cups

Why We Love It

More moms and doctors are enlisting silver nursing cups to help relieve the soreness that often accompanies breastfeeding. As the original silver nursing cup, Silverettes are truly the best of the best. Handmade in Italy, the cups are free of any harmful chemicals and nickel which may irritate moms’ breasts. Unlike others on the market, the Silverettes are available in two sizes to better maximize your comfort.

Lactation Massagers

Momcozy Warming Lactation Massager 2-in-1

Why We Love It

When breastfeeding, you may experience engorgement and clogged ducts , which could turn into mastitis . The Momcozy Warming Lactation Massager helps promote milk production, which will help alleviate and even avoid these symptoms. “I got the Momcozy Lactation Massager and absolutely love it,” one of the WTE community members writes. “It has three heating levels and different vibrating levels along with narrow ends to really dig deep when ducts get blocked.” The Momcozy massager has other helpful features, too, like its curved shape that allows it to mold easily to the breast and the compact size that means it can sit in your bra if necessary.

. The Momcozy Warming Lactation Massager helps promote milk production, which will help alleviate and even avoid these symptoms. “I got the Momcozy Lactation Massager and absolutely love it,” one of the WTE community members writes. “It has three heating levels and different vibrating levels along with narrow ends to really dig deep when ducts get blocked.” The Momcozy massager has other helpful features, too, like its curved shape that allows it to mold easily to the breast and the compact size that means it can sit in your bra if necessary.

Other FSA-eligible lactation massagers include the Frida Mom 2-in-1 Lactation Massager or the LaVie Lactation Massager .

Postpartum Kits

Frida Mom Postpartum Recovery Essentials Kit

Why We Love It

The Frida Mom Postpartum Recovery Essentials Kit is extremely popular among What to Expect moms, including myself. It comes with most of the items you’ll need, especially in those first few weeks: disposable postpartum underwear, instant ice maxi pads, perineal healing foam and perineal cooling pad liners. I found the ice maxi pads to be essential for recovery with both of my daughters, and the underwear is comfortable, stretchy and provides great coverage.

You can also put your FSA dollars towards Frida Mom's C-Section Recovery Kit , as well as Momcozy's Postpartum Recovery Essentials Kit .

Postpartum and Period Underwear

Bambody Absorbent Panty

Why We Love It

During the first two months of the fourth trimester, I found that using period underwear as postpartum underwear was extremely useful. They were great for when I still needed an absorbent layer but didn’t need to wear bulky pads anymore. But even if you are wearing a pad, this absorbent underwear offers an extra layer of protection that made me feel more comfortable during recovery, especially when I had people over or I was leaving the house. Bambody panties are made of a stretchy, comfy bamboo material that doesn’t feel too restrictive and can hold up to four tampons’ worth of flow.

If you prefer disposable postpartum underwear, Always Discreet Underwear and the Frida Mom Postpartum Underwear are also FSA-eligible.

Postpartum Pads

Always Infinity

Why We Love It

They’re not the cutest thing you’ll buy during pregnancy, but stocking up on postpartum pads is essential to managing postpartum bleeding. And our personal favorite, Always Infinity Flexfoam , is FSA-eligible. We love that they’re able to absorb all your discharge, but thin enough that they don’t add extra weight and bulk.

is essential to managing postpartum bleeding. And our personal favorite, Always Infinity Flexfoam , is FSA-eligible. We love that they’re

able to absorb all your discharge, but thin enough that they don’t add extra weight and bulk.

Though these are a great option to buy in bulk, you may also want to use your FSA money to buy a box or two of Frida Mom’s ice maxi pads which provide instant cooling relief.

Peri Bottles

Frida Mom Upside Down Peri Bottle

Why We Love It

Beloved by What to Expect moms, the Frida Mom Upside Down Peri Bottle is a postpartum gamechanger. It was one of my favorite postpartum items, and I used long after both of my daughters’ births. The genius design means that it can be held upside down, with a narrow angled neck that makes it so easy to clean exactly where it needs to without having to contort your body into an awkward position. It holds a lot of water and I loved how comfortable it was to use, especially compared to the peri bottle I got from the hospital.

Cooling Pads

Tucks Hemorrhoidal Pads with Witch Hazel

Why We Love It

Although marketed for hemorrhoids, the Tucks Hemorrhoidal Pads are a favorite among moms to help their vagina heal after giving birth. They’re made with witch hazel, which is naturally healing and offers immediate relief from burning and itching. You can place these in your underwear or on top of a pad and keep them on for as long as necessary to help you feel better. Moms in the What to Expect community call these a “lifesaver,” and say they feel “amazing.”

Eczema Cream

Eucerin Baby Eczema Cream

Why We Love It

Eczema is not uncommon in babies , and although it can look and seem really uncomfortable, it’s thankfully pretty easy to fix. Eucerin Baby Eczema Cream is a favorite among parents in the What to Expect community because of how hydrating and effective it is. Made with soothing ingredients like oatmeal and licorice root, this cream is steroid- and fragrance-free, so it’s ideal for baby’s sensitive skin. If that’s not working, though, Aveeno Baby Eczema Therapy Moisturizing Cream and Cetaphil Baby Eczema Soothing Lotion are also FSA-eligible.

, and although it can look and seem really uncomfortable, it’s thankfully pretty easy to fix. Eucerin Baby Eczema Cream is a favorite among parents in the What to Expect community because of how hydrating and effective it is. Made with soothing ingredients like oatmeal and licorice root, this cream is steroid- and fragrance-free, so it’s ideal for baby’s sensitive skin. If that’s not working, though,

Diaper Rash Cream

Triple Paste Diaper Rash Ointment

Why We Love It

Diaper rash cream is a must-have that you’ll always want to have on hand. A favorite among What to Expect parents — as well as my personal favorite that I used with my daughters — is the Triple Paste Diaper Rash Ointment . I’ve tried several different types of cream and have found that Triple Paste is the most effective at calming and soothing diaper rashes when they pop up. I love that it’s so thick, so a little goes a long way, and it’s made without a scent and ingredients like talc, alcohol and dye, so it won’t aggravate baby’s skin.

is a must-have that you’ll always want to have on hand. A favorite among What to Expect parents — as well as my personal favorite that I used with my daughters — is the Triple Paste Diaper Rash Ointment . I’ve tried several different types of cream and have found that Triple Paste is the most effective at calming and soothing diaper rashes when they pop up. I love that it’s so thick, so a little goes a long way, and it’s made without a scent and ingredients like talc, alcohol and dye, so it won’t aggravate baby’s skin.

Triple Paste is a little pricey, though, so you can also get Desitin , Bordeaux’s Natural Butt Paste and A&D Original Ointment with your FSA money.

Milk Storage Bags

Medela Breast Milk Storage Bags

Why We Love It

Once you start pumping, you’ll need a place to safely store all of your excess breast milk. The Medela Breast Milk Storage Bags are great option: You can fill them with up to six ounces of breastmilk and keep them in the refrigerator or in the freezer. They don’t leak, they’re easy to fill without spilling, and they can lay flat or stand up for easy storage.

Other FSA-eligible breast milk storage bags include Lansinoh Breastmilk Storage Bags and Dr. Brown's Breastmilk Storage Bags . The Willow Breast Pump’s reusable breast milk containers are also FSA-eligible.

Nasal Aspirators

Frida Baby NoseFrida the Snotsucker

Why We Love It

Your baby’s first few colds can be scary for you and uncomfortable for your little one. Luckily, there are many nasal aspirators . One of the most popular ones, especially among What to Expect parents, is the Frida Baby NoseFrida Snotsucker . It seems a little intimidating at first: One end goes in your baby’s nose, and the other goes in your mouth so you can snuck the snot out (don’t worry: a filter prevents any mucus from getting in your mouth). I was hesitant to use mine, but it’s now a staple for both of my kids. It really does clear up congestion that your baby can’t get out themselves, and I love that the travel case makes it easy to stash in the diaper bag.

Your baby’s first few colds can be scary for you and uncomfortable for your little one. Luckily, there are many

. One of the most popular ones, especially among What to Expect parents, is the Frida Baby NoseFrida Snotsucker . It seems a little intimidating at first: One end goes in your baby’s nose, and the other goes in your mouth so you can snuck the snot out (don’t worry: a filter prevents any mucus from getting in your mouth). I was hesitant to use mine, but it’s now a staple for both of my kids. It really does clear up congestion that your baby can’t get out themselves, and I love that the travel case makes it easy to stash in the diaper bag.

If you’re still uncertain about the setup of the Snotsucker, Frida Baby makes another What to Expect parent-loved option, the Electric NoseFrida , that’s FSA-eligible, too.

Baby Medicine

Genexa Infant’s Pain & Fever Oral Suspension

Why We Love It

You’ll want to have a go-to medication on hand for the day your baby has their first fever or requires some kind of pain reliever. Personally, I love the Genexa Infant’s Pain & Fever Oral Suspension because it works just as well as Tylenol, but it’s free from artificial sweeteners, flavors, fillers and preservatives, and is also dye-free.

You can also purchase infant Tylenol using FSA dollars, as well as children’s medicine, such as children’s Motrin and children’s Tylenol (but remember that these are both meant for kids over 2).

Thermometers

Braun No Touch and Forehead Thermometer

Why We Love It

Taking your little one’s temperature is not an easy task, especially as they get older and more wiggly. I’ve always found the Braun No Touch and Forehead Thermometer to work well when they won’t really sit still. It works quickly and it gives an easy read. Keep in mind that in the first year, doctors usually recommend using a rectal baby thermometer for the most accurate temperature. For a rectal option, the Frida Baby Quick-Read Digital Rectal Thermometer is a great FSA-eligible choice.

Bandages

Welly Bravery Badges

Why We Love It

Bandages are one of those things you don’t want to be caught without, so stocking up on them in advance is a great idea. Welly Bravery Badges are my personal favorite, mainly because they’re the only ones my toddler will wear without fuss. The design is always super fun (there are a lot to choose from), but most importantly, they are adhesive without being painful to remove. Yet they’re still sticky and don’t easily fall off. If you want classic Band-Aids , those are also FSA-eligible — as are just about any other brand of bandage.

Bandages are one of those things you don’t want to be caught without, so stocking up on them in advance is a great idea. Welly Bravery Badges are my personal favorite, mainly because they’re the only ones my toddler will wear without fuss. The design is always super fun (there are a lot to choose from), but most importantly, they are adhesive without being painful to remove. Yet they’re still sticky and don’t easily fall off. If you want

, those are also FSA-eligible — as are just about any other brand of bandage.

Baby Sunscreen

Blue Lizard Mineral Sunscreen

Why We Love It

As someone who has tested nearly every baby sunscreen on the market, I can say with 100-percent confidence that Blue Lizard is my favorite (plus, it’s an editor- and What to Expect parent-favorite, too!). It’s never irritated my kids’ skin, and it fully protects their skin without leaving an obvious white cast behind. My kids spend a ton of time outside at the beach, and they’ve never gotten a burn with this on. I also love the stick , because it’s easy to apply to wiggly babies and toddlers who are not interested in sunscreen at all.

on the market, I can say with 100-percent confidence that Blue Lizard is my favorite (plus, it’s an editor- and What to Expect parent-favorite, too!). It’s never irritated my kids’ skin, and it fully protects their skin without leaving an obvious white cast behind. My kids spend a ton of time outside at the beach, and they’ve never gotten a burn with this on. I also love the

, because it’s easy to apply to wiggly babies and toddlers who are not interested in sunscreen at all.

Most sunscreen is FSA-eligible, so you can shop just about any baby sunscreen with your dollars. Some other What to Expect favorites include Thinkbaby SPF 50+ Baby Sunscreen , Mustela Baby Mineral Sunscreen and Baby Bum SPF 50 Sunscreen .

Pregnancy-Safe Sunscreens

La Roche Posay Anthelios Mineral Sunscreen

Why We Love It

Your skin is more sensitive during pregnancy (thank you, hormones!) so it’s even more important to lather on the SPF. And the good news is you can use your FSA money to stock up on some of the best pregnancy-safe sunscreen . One of our personal favorites: La Roche Posay Anthelios Mineral Sunscreen. Containing SPF, hyaluronic acid and glycerin, this luxe beauty find is the perfect moisturizing sunscreen.

Your skin is more sensitive during pregnancy (thank you, hormones!) so it’s even more important to lather on the SPF. And the good news is you can use your FSA money to stock up on some of the best

. One of our personal favorites: La Roche Posay Anthelios Mineral Sunscreen. Containing SPF,

hyaluronic acid and glycerin, this luxe beauty find is the perfect moisturizing sunscreen.

If the price is a little too high, Sun Bum Mineral Sunscreen Spray or Coola Organic Mineral Sunscreen are more affordable, pregnancy-safe sunscreens that can be bought with FSA money.

Pimple Patches

Mighty Patch Invisible+

Why We Love It

If you're plagued with pregnancy acne , we have two pieces of good news. First, there are several pregnancy-safe acne treatments that you can use to help clear your skin and let the pregnancy glow shine. Second, one of the more popular pregnancy-safe pimple patches is FSA-eligible. Unlike most pimple patches that contain salicylic acid (a pregnancy no-no) Mighty Patch Invisible+ uses the equally effective hydrocolloid to absorb fluid from the pimple.

Belly Wraps

Upspring Shrinkx Postpartum Belly Wrap

Why We Love It

A belly wrap, like this Upspring Shrinkx Postpartum Belly Wrap , is meant to offer abdominal support for weakened muscles and to offer lower back support for comfort. It is compressive with an adjustable fit, and it feels pretty comfortable to wear. I loved wearing this for the first few weeks after I gave birth; it alleviated my discomfort because it was so supportive. It’s a great way to use your FSA money because it’s something people likely aren’t going to buy for you at a bridal shower and it’s not covered by insurance. Another FSA-eligible option is the Frida Mom Postpartum Abdominal Support Binder .

FAQs

Are diapers FSA-eligible?

Although diapers are a non-negotiable for babies, they’re unfortunately not FSA-eligible. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) considers baby diapers personal care items and not medical expenses, and FSA reimbursement is only available for medical expenses. Other baby items that are surprisingly excluded from FSA eligibility include infant formula and bottles.

How do I use FSA money on baby items?

You can typically access FSA dollars through insurance plans and company benefits. These accounts are a place to set aside pre-tax money and use it on qualified medical expenses. This includes things like prescription medicines and eye exams, but it can also cover certain baby, maternity and postpartum essentials that are determined medical expenses. The advantage of using pre-tax dollars to buy these items is that you end up saving money that you would otherwise be putting towards your federal and state taxes.

Your insurance policy will dictate whether you need to shop directly from the official FSA stores, or if you can buy items directly from retailers like Amazon, Target or Walmart, or a pharmacy like CVS or Walgreens. Some insurances will give you a debit card to purchase these items, while others will require you to submit receipts. Either way, make sure that the item is explicitly stated as FSA eligible before purchasing.

Your Next Read

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Baby Products You Can Take On a Plane By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

Free Baby Samples? Yes, Please! How to Score Diapers, Formula and More By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

15 Products That Leave Moms Saying 'TikTok Made Me Buy It' Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Is It Safe to Buy Used Baby Gear? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Overwhelmed by Baby Gear? Here's What You Really Need (and What You Don't) Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Baby First-Aid Essentials Every Parent Should Have on Hand Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Planning for a Baby Financially? Add These 11 Tasks to Your Pre-Baby Checklist Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

29 Ways to Make Child Care More Affordable Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Creating a Nursery on a Budget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Your Pre-Pregnancy Check List: How to Get Your Body, Budget, and Life Ready for Baby Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Your No-Nonsense Hospital Bag Checklist: What to Pack and What to Skip Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window