8 Best Toddler Hats Your Little One Will Actually Keep On, According to Parents

best toddler hats

QUICK SUMMARY

The best toddler hats are made from soft materials with insulating or moisture-wicking properties. What to Expect parents prefer adjustable features like a chin strap to ensure a secure fit throughout growth spurts.

Getting a toddler to wear — and keep on — a winter hat can be challenging. But when the temperatures start to drop, it’s essential to cover little noggins and ears. “Our heads are the part of our body where we lose a significant amount of body heat,” explains Dr. Christina Johns , pediatrician and senior medical advisor at PM Pediatric Care . “For babies and toddlers, the size of their heads is much larger relative to their bodies than older children and adults, so they lose even more body heat, which is why wearing a hat is important for this age group.”

As a mom who knows all too well the frustration of properly bundling a little one, only to have them yank off their beanie seconds afterward, I have been on a mission to find the best toddler hats for quite some time. And I think I finally did it! Below, check out the full list of parent-approved styles that combine comfort, warmth and (perhaps most importantly!) staying power.

How I Chose the Best Toddler Hats

Having endured toddler hat drama with my own children, I relied heavily on my personal experience to create an initial list of approximately 20 winter apparel brands and trusted retailers my family and What to Expect parents had success with. I also consulted Dr. Johns and Dr. Joel Warsh , pediatrician and author of Parenting At Your Child’s Pace , to understand which factors are most important when choosing a toddler winter hat and further narrow down my list. I also ensured every hat recommended is sized to fit a toddler securely. Based on the above, I was able to curate the eight best toddler hats for different styles, material preferences and price points.

Best Overall Toddler Hat

Skida Kids Alpine Hat

Not bulky

Brightly patterned

Provides UPF 50 sun protection

Hand wash only

Material: Outer- 92% polyester, 8% spandex; Inner- 100% polyester

Size range: Kids 2-7

Care: Hand wash, line dry

Why We Love It

For family ski trips or days spent playing in the snow, this hat from Skida Kids Alpine has UPF 50 sun protection built right into the fabric without the bulk. The hat’s outer layer, made from a poly-spandex jersey, features MAX-Dri moisture management technology to keep little ones extra dry, while the inner layer of medium-weight fleece lining provides extra warmth, ensuring your toddler’s ears stay toasty even on the chilliest or windy days (especially out on the slopes!).

has UPF 50 sun protection built right into the fabric without the bulk. The hat’s outer layer, made from a poly-spandex jersey, features MAX-Dri moisture management technology to keep little ones extra dry, while the inner layer of medium-weight fleece lining provides extra warmth, ensuring your toddler’s ears stay toasty even on the chilliest or windy days (especially out on the slopes!).

Parents particularly appreciate the hat’s stretchy fit to accommodate growth spurts. Plus, the bright and colorful patterns are fun and much easier to keep track of when little ones are out and about.

Community Reviews

WJ1026 “SKIDA hat, and neck warmer. My LO just loves this brand, but there are tons of neck warmers and hats out there.”

Best Fleece Toddler Hat

Patagonia Furry Friends Fleece Hat

Made with eco-friendly materials

Warm

Runs large

Material: 100% recycled polyester high-pile, double-faced fleece

Size range: 0-3m through 2-5T

Care: Spot clean

Why We Love It

Beyond its fuzzy and soft design, Patagonia’s Furry Friends hat is a favorite among parents thanks to its eco-friendly, double-faced fleece construction. But we also adore the cute addition of the cub-style bear ears on top. It earns major points for its quality, warmth and various sizing. Although some parents note that it runs large, so you’ll want to keep that in mind and consider measuring your child’s head before buying.

Community Reviews

KayttS “Personally I am obsessed with Patagonia. Love their hats, gloves, coats…I buy gender-neutral because I like to pass it down & it actually lasts, plus so cute. And if you don’t pass it down, the resale of it is actually really good lol.”

Best Beanie Toddler Hat

Carhartt Kids Acrylic Knit Beanie Watch Hat

Wide cuff

Snug fit

Many available colors

Affordable

Runs small

Material: 100% Acrylic

Size range: Ages 2-5

Care: Machine washable

Why We Love It

With overwhelmingly positive praise from the WTE community for its warmth, softness and snug fit, this Carhartt hat is my pick for the best beanie. Parents love the wide cuff that can be adjusted to accommodate your toddler’s growth between winters — many have used the same hat for multiple years. Plus, many parents report that their kids actually enjoy wearing this style — some to the point that they don’t want to take it off!

is my pick for the best beanie. Parents love the wide cuff that can be adjusted to accommodate your toddler’s growth between winters — many have used the same hat for multiple years. Plus, many parents report that their kids actually enjoy wearing this style — some to the point that they don’t want to take it off!

With plenty of colors to choose from, it’s also easy to find one that matches your toddler's coat and other winter accessories. Some note that the smaller size (0-24m) was great for younger babies, but for toddlers, the kid's size is perfect.

Community Reviews

“I think my son will be wearing his Carhartt beanie this summer bc he cries if he can’t wear it. We have had some 65-degree days here in Indiana and he still insists.”

“Carhartt beanies are the only ones my little guy will keep on.”

“We love the Carhartt beanie. It’s warm AND cute!”

“Big head baby here also. Carhartt toddler beanies fit and are adorable!”

“I second the Carhartt beanie. Looks so cute on them no matter the head size!"

Best Wool Toddler Hat

Ecoable Kids Merino Wool Hat

Moisture-wicking

Double-layered for softness and warmth

Snug fit with chin straps

Hand wash only

Material: Outer: 100% organic wool; Inner: 100% organic cotton sherpa

Size range: 0-3M through 3-5T

Care: Hand wash

Why We Love It

Many parents in the WTE community swear by Merino wool for its naturally insulating and moisture-wicking abilities. The Ecoable Kids hat features an outer layer of the material, as well as a super soft sherpa interior for extra warmth in extra chilly weather. It’s also thin enough that your toddler could wear it beneath a hooded snowsuit or coat . But the standout feature is its snug fit, as it wraps around the face and ears and has a tieable chin strap to keep the hat in place during strong winds.

Community Reviews

aint-no-sunshine “Merino wool base layers are a must. Got that for my son when we went to Colorado when he was 1 year old. I used a Merino wool balaclava when I went to Afghanistan in the winter years ago (deployed)… it was such a game changer, that’s how I found out how awesome that material was. I kept it over my mouth when I’d go outside and it never got moist and gross smelling. But kept me warm.”

roseymilo “A merino wool hat that also covers the neck is our go-to.”

Best Value Toddler Hat

Cat & Jack Toddler Suede Faux Fur Trapper Hat

Affordable

Soft and cozy lining

Has ear flaps

Features a secure chin strap

Not stretchy

Material: Outer- 100% recycled polyester suede, Inner- 100% recycled polyester faux fur

Size range: 12-24M, 2-5T

Care: Hand wash, line dry

Why We Love It

For a tried and true essential that won’t break the bank, Target’s Cat & Jack trapper hat is an excellent option. Made from heavyweight, recycled polyester fabric and lined with plush faux fur, this style will keep your little one cozy. Although this material doesn’t offer much stretch, parents say that this hat is particularly well-suited for toddlers with larger heads.

is an excellent option. Made from heavyweight, recycled polyester fabric and lined with plush faux fur, this style will keep your little one cozy. Although this material doesn’t offer much stretch, parents say that this hat is particularly well-suited for toddlers with larger heads.

Ear flaps provide extra protection, while the full lining enhances warmth retention. The soft, faux-suede finish gives it a stylish yet functional look, making it both fashionable and practical for winter activities. Meanwhile, the chinstrap’s hook-and-loop fastener helps the hat stay put on your tot’s head and will prevent them from pulling it off.

Community Reviews

mekaE11 “My son has a Cat and Jack hat (from Target) that’s supposed to fit up to age 5. It’s good for kids with bigger heads.”

Best Ear Flap Toddler Hat

Moon Kitty Fleece Winter Hat

Warm and cozy

Soft fleece material

Stretchy design

Ample ear coverage

Some note that the pom pom can be pulled off

Material: 100% acrylic

Size range: 6-12M, 1-3T, 3-5T

Care: Hand wash

Why We Love It

Designed with ear protection in mind, the Moon Kitty Fleece Winter hat extends to cover not just the ears but also part of the face. Crafted from a lightweight, durable knit fabric, it features a super-soft fleece lining that provides extra insulation to keep your little one cozy in cold weather. The double-layer design ensures effective heat retention while still being breathable and quick-drying, so it’s great if you have a toddler prone to sweating when they’re bundled up and playing outside. Plus, it doesn’t have a strap or strings that could be problematic if tied too tightly.

extends to cover not just the ears but also part of the face. Crafted from a lightweight, durable knit fabric, it features a super-soft fleece lining that provides extra insulation to keep your little one cozy in cold weather. The double-layer design ensures effective heat retention while still being breathable and quick-drying, so it’s great if you have a toddler prone to sweating when they’re bundled up and playing outside. Plus, it doesn’t have a strap or strings that could be problematic if tied too tightly.

Parents consistently praise this winter hat’s softness, stretchy fit and value, plus they love the designs and adorable pom pom detail on top. However, there are some reports of toddlers yanking the pom pom from the top of the hat, so that’s something to keep in mind.

Best Waterproof Toddler Hat

JAN & JUL Waterproof Winter Hat

Multiple colors and patterns available

Adjustable sizing

Insulated

Velcro strap

It’s a bit bulky

Material: 100% polyester

Size range: 3-9M through 2-5T

Care: Machine washable

Why We Love It

The JAN & JUL Waterproof hat is a top pick for toddlers who like to play in the snow. The water-repellent and windproof shell ensures your toddler stays dry, while the fully-insulated interior with soft, vegan faux fur on the ear flaps retains warmth, even in freezing temperatures.

is a top pick for toddlers who like to play in the snow. The water-repellent and windproof shell ensures your toddler stays dry, while the fully-insulated interior with soft, vegan faux fur on the ear flaps retains warmth, even in freezing temperatures.

Designed with growing toddlers in mind, this hat has plenty of adjustable features, including a cinch at the back and a hook-and-loop chin closure to ensure a secure fit your toddler is unlikely to remove easily. Parents appreciate this hat’s adjustability and the variety of ways it can be worn and love the "grow-with-me" design, which extends the hat’s life. Plus, it’s machine washable, so if it gets dirty, it can be tossed in the laundry without worry.

Community Reviews

Kpowbaby “I got the Jan & Jul ones and find those work best as they cannot get them off as easily. Everything else is off instantly.”

Best Balaclava Toddler Hat

Reima Merino Wool Balaclava

Soft fleece material

Cute design

Provides neck coverage

Good for layering

Not ideal for toddlers to put on independently

Material: Inner- 100% polyester fleece, Outer- 100% acrylic

Size range: 9-12M, 1-2Y, 3-4Y, 4-5Y, 6-7Y

Care: Hand wash

Why We Love It

Especially great for toddlers who are not thrilled about the idea of wearing a winter hat, a balaclava style is the way to go. And the ultra-soft wool material of Reima's hat ensures it won’t be itchy. Parents are big fans of the ribbed, stretchy opening that’s easy to slip on over little heads but difficult for toddlers to remove on their own. However, if your child enjoys dressing independently, this could be considered a drawback.

What to Look for in Toddler Hats

If you want a toddler hat to stay on — and keep your child warm — throughout the duration of outdoor activities, here’s what you should consider:

Material: Soft, moisture-wicking fabrics will keep your toddler’s head warm and dry. Dr. Johns is a big fan of fleece, but Dr. Wash (plus many parents in the WTE community!) recommends wool for especially cold or wet climates. “Known for its natural insulating properties, wool keeps the head warm and dry even when damp,” Dr. Walsh adds.

Styles: Toddler hats come in a variety of styles, including beanies and balaclavas. Dr. Warsh says that beanies “provide substantial coverage while being easy to wear and adaptable to varying head sizes,” while balaclavas have a one-piece design that provides full coverage of your toddler’s head and neck, leaving a small opening for their face that fits snuggly and is difficult for tots to yank off. Another good option, according to Dr. Warsh, is ear flap hats that “not only cover the ears but also supply additional warmth and are often equipped with ties or chin straps, so they maintain a secure fit, preventing removal by active toddlers.”

Fit: “Hats that are too big either fall off or fall down over the eyes; neither of which will accomplish the goal of keeping kids warm in the cold weather,” says Dr. Johns. Look for hats with stretchy elastic bands around the base or adjustable straps that use hook and loop attachments. Dr. Johns advises that hats with strings be used with caution, as they can sometimes be tied too tight, and suggests a hat with a wider chin strap instead.

Maintenance: Since tots are prone to making messes, many parents prefer the ease of machine-washable toddler hat options. However, since winter hats are seasonal items, spot-clean or hand-wash hats aren’t typically too cumbersome.

FAQs

Where can I find the best toddler hats for outdoor winter activities?

Several noteworthy outerwear retailers make toddler hats specifically designed for spending prolonged periods outside in the cold, particularly in snowy conditions. Highly recommended and parent-trusted brands include L.L. Bean , Columbia , The North Face , and Patagonia . You can find many of these brands at outdoor stores like REI and Dick’s Sporting Goods .

How long can I expect my toddler’s winter hat to last?

A well-made, properly-sized toddler winter hat can last several seasons. Though toddlers grow fast, hats with stretchy fabrics or an elastic edge can accommodate growing heads for longer.

Look for hats that have plenty of give so they won’t get too tight as they grow. Adjustability factors like a velcro strap, tie or rollable cuff can help their hat last multiple seasons. A hat that fits well and has these secure features also helps prevent them from falling off and getting lost.

Investing in a hat that’s durable and machine-washable can also help extend its life. Toddlers are messy, so having a hat that can be easily cleaned without ruining it means you’re less likely to need a replacement.

Your Next Read

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How to Dress a Toddler for the Weather Fact Checked by Jill Malter

The 10 Best Stroller Footmuffs To Keep Your Baby Warm on the Coldest Winter Walks Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The Best Winter Car Seat Safety Gear to Keep Baby Warm By Korin Miller, Contributing Writer

How to Protect Babies and Toddlers in the Cold Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Dressing Toddlers By Maressa Brown, Contributing Writer/Editor

Winter Skin Care for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

12 Best Maternity Coats When You Can No Longer Zip Your Jacket, According to a Mom of 2 Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The Best Infant Life Jackets, According to Sailing Instructors and Boating Parents Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

8 Walking Safety Tips for Toddlers to Keep Spills and Hazards at Bay Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Dress a Newborn Baby for the Weather Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Brushing Your Toddler's Hair Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window