The 8 Best Postpartum Pads Are Comfortable and Leak-Proof

Best Postpartum Pads

Quick Summary

The best postpartum pads are Always Infinity pads because of their absorbency and comfortable, lightweight feel, according to What to Expect staff and moms in the What to Expect Community.

Although they aren’t nearly as cute as your baby’s going-home outfit , postpartum pads are just as essential to pack in your hospital bag . Most maternity wards will supply mesh underwear and heavy-duty hospital pads, but bringing your tried-and-true favorites along can help you feel a little more like yourself post-delivery. And since bleeding after birth (called lochia ) can last up to 6 weeks, you’ll want to stock up on plenty for home, too.

Because tampons and menstrual cups can introduce bacteria to your healing vagina and uterus, they’re typically off-limits until your doctor gives the green light. That means pads and other absorbent products like disposable underwear will be your best friends in those early weeks postpartum.

However, each person’s postpartum recovery journey might look a little different: Some new moms prefer thick, super-absorbent pads in the first couple of days, while others might be fine with thinner and lightweight options. You might even find that period underwear feels more comfortable than pads altogether. Whatever the case, I’ve rounded up our top picks — whether you’re looking for the best postpartum pads for heavy bleeding or the best organic postpartum pads.

How I Chose the Best Postpartum Pads

In order to recommend the best pads for postpartum recovery that work well for a wide variety of women, I combined hands-on testing with feedback and reviews from numerous sources:

First, I considered the postpartum pads I tested and used after giving birth to my two children, taking note of absorbency and comfort throughout the day (as new mom life doesn’t offer many opportunities to sit still!).

I also spoke with three moms on the What to Expect staff who have given birth at least once each and tested several different types of pads while recovering from both vaginal deliveries and C-sections.

I then reviewed thousands of reviews from moms in the What to Expect community to increase my initial list and learn what other brands earned high praise for leak protection, softness, and overall value.

Lastly, I sought expert insights from Shannon Smith , M.D., a board-certified OBGYN and partner at Brigham Faulkner Associates (in affiliation with Brigham and Women's Hospital) in Boston, Massachusetts. She shared her clinical perspective on what new moms need most out of postpartum pads in the first few weeks after delivery. She also explained the typical experience you might have with postpartum bleeding. Based on her guidance, I also ensured that none of the recommended products feature added fragrance, as Dr. Smith notes that "your tissue is very sensitive postpartum."

A Doctor's Note on Postpartum Bleeding

"After delivery, the uterus has to shed the thickened lining that supported the pregnancy. The shedding is helped along by the sudden drop in estrogen and progesterone after delivery that signals to shedding of this remaining endometrium," explains Dr. Smith. "Additionally, when the placenta separates from the uterus, it leaves a raw surface with open blood vessels. These contribute to the heavier bleeding in the first few days after delivery."

While everyone is different, Dr. Smith notes that after the first week, you can generally expect your bleeding to lighten up.

Best Postpartum Pads Overall

Always Infinity with Wings

Great for heavy flow

Thin silhouette

Pricey

Count: Available in packs of 30, 66 and 132

Why We Love It

These Always Infinity pads are frequently recommended by moms in the What to Expect Community, who rave about their thin silhouette and ability to keep moisture contained even on heavy flow days. “It doesn’t feel like you’re sitting on something wet,” one What to Expect mom writes. As a size 5, they’re designed for heavy-duty overnight wear, so you can use them all day and while you sleep.

are frequently recommended by moms in the What to Expect Community, who rave about their thin silhouette and ability to keep moisture contained even on heavy flow days. “It doesn’t feel like you’re sitting on something wet,” one What to Expect mom writes. As a size 5, they’re designed for heavy-duty overnight wear, so you can use them all day and while you sleep.

I used these pads after having my second daughter and loved them. After using thick maxi pads for a few weeks, I felt like I needed something less bulky that still offered plenty of protection, and these fit the bill; I loved how thin and lightweight they felt compared to others.

And for any moms-to-be who want to make their own postpartum healing pads (AKA padsicles) Leah says the Always Infinity pads are a great option. She made hers a month before her due date; they soaked up the aloe and witch hazel to provide plenty of comfort, while still absorbing all her discharge.

Tested by Leah Rocketto , mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Commerce Director:

"I practically lived in the Always Infinity pads postpartum, because they managed to absorb the discharge without adding extra weight and bulk. I also appreciated that the wings provided extra security, especially at night.”

Community Reviews

"I got Infinity Flex Foam, the most heavy duty ones they have. This is the only pad type I use, besides the huge diaper ones during the hospital stay, because otherwise I get irritated down there from bleeding for so long & the Infinity Flex Foam are the only ones that don’t get my skin irritated or rashy."

"I love the Always Infinity Flex Foam pads- they are thin, didn’t seem to snag on the sutures and wick away the blood and discharge."

“the flex foam pads were the best during post partum. I need to restock. I have a few of the super need to get ultra. they were so comfortable and held all of the nastiness in.”

“I use these ones and love them they stay in place and you won’t have to worry about bleeding all over the bed at night or during the day with them when you get back from the hospital and have no more giant surfboard pads haha”

“Always infinity pads! It's a thin foam on the inside instead of the bulky fluff. Just as absorbent if not more but doesn't feel like a diaper lol”

Best Postpartum Pads for Stitches

Stayfree Ultra Thin Overnight Pads with Wings

High absorbency

Soft feel

Some say pads can tear

Count: Available in packs of 14, 16, 28, 32 and 40

Why We Love It

New moms love that Stayfree pads have a super soft cotton surface that won’t aggravate stitches or tender still-healing areas. The extra wide shape is designed to protect you from leaks from the sides and back when you’re lying down, so they’re great for nighttime use, too. And many turn to these Stayfree pads because they’re fragrance-free (so you’ll avoid any added irritation) but still designed to neutralize odor, which is great if you’re wearing them for extended periods of time. Also good: Moms find them to be absorbent (the company claims they can hold moisture for eight hours) but not overly bulky.

have a super soft cotton surface that won’t aggravate stitches or tender still-healing areas. The extra wide shape is designed to protect you from leaks from the sides and back when you’re lying down, so they’re great for nighttime use, too. And many turn to these Stayfree pads because they’re fragrance-free (so you’ll avoid any added irritation) but still designed to neutralize odor, which is great if you’re wearing them for extended periods of time. Also good: Moms find them to be absorbent (the company claims they can hold moisture for eight hours) but not overly bulky.

Community Reviews

"Stayfree overnights are awesome! I hate pads and those are still big enough but not super bulky. And if you get stitches they don’t pull on them like some of the more “woven” type materials on some pads."

“Stay free overnights are awesome! I hate pads and those are still big enough but not super bulky. And if you get stitches they don’t pull on them like some of the more “woven” type materials on some pads.”

“I've always preferred stayfree pads.”

Best Overnight Postpartum Pads

Always Maxi Overnight Pads

Plenty of back coverage

Stays dry

Feels a little bulky

Count: Available in packs of 26, 33, 48 and 144

Why We Love It

Overnight pads, like these Always Maxi pads , are meant to be worn for long periods of time without fear of leaks. They have a wider and longer back to give you extra coverage you’ll need when you’re lying down to sleep, as well as wings for a little extra security if you’re the type to toss and turn at night. Multiple layers of protection keep them dry since they’re meant to withstand a heavy flow. They are on the bulkier side, but that may help provide reassurance while sleeping that they’ll catch and absorb even a heavy flow.

, are meant to be worn for long periods of time without fear of leaks. They have a wider and longer back to give you extra coverage you’ll need when you’re lying down to sleep, as well as wings for a little extra security if you’re the type to toss and turn at night. Multiple layers of protection keep them dry since they’re meant to withstand a heavy flow. They are on the bulkier side, but that may help provide reassurance while sleeping that they’ll catch and absorb even a heavy flow.

Tested by Sarah Darby , mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Director of SEO Content Strategy:

“For postpartum pads, these overnight Always ones were an affordable option that I could easily restock as needed. By the time I got home from the hospital, they were plenty absorbent, and I never had any issues with them.”

Community Reviews

“I used Always overnight maxi and they were great!”

“These were what worked best for me the first few weeks of heavy bleeding. They didn't feel bulky and uncomfortable but they were very absorbent.”

“I second the Always Overnight pads. I used the ones with wings. Worked great for me.”

Best Organic Postpartum Pads

Rael Organic Cotton Cover Overnight Pads

Certified organic cotton

Good for sensitive skin

Pricey

Count: 40

Why We Love It

Founded and launched by three women in 2017, Rael’s pads are incredibly popular among postpartum moms who want organic postpartum pads. These feel soft and gentle on the body thanks to a top layer that is made from certified organic cotton. These are also manufactured without pesticides, GMOs, chlorine, and other harsh chemicals, which is why women with sensitive skin love them. Despite the soft feels, these are proven to protect against leaks, while the extra-long version is often one of the usual overnight postpartum pad recommendations. The organic cotton material makes them very breathable to discourage a buildup of moisture, and they don’t feel too heavy. The company also works with a Los Angeles non-profit to donate menstrual supplies to women living in poverty.

Founded and launched by three women in 2017, Rael’s pads are incredibly popular among postpartum moms who want organic postpartum pads. These feel soft and gentle on the body thanks to a top layer that is made from certified organic cotton. These are also manufactured without pesticides, GMOs, chlorine, and other harsh chemicals, which is why women with sensitive skin love them. Despite the soft feels, these are proven to protect against leaks, while

is often one of the usual overnight postpartum pad recommendations. The organic cotton material makes them very breathable to discourage a buildup of moisture, and they don’t feel too heavy. The company also works with a Los Angeles non-profit to donate menstrual supplies to women living in poverty.

Community Reviews

bkbo0518 “They’re organic, unscented, super soft, and way better than the postpartum Depends ones I got for my first.”

dacolby “Rael overnights. They have an organic cotton cover that is easy on your skin, plus they're super long and flare out towards your butt to really prevent leaking.”

Best Postpartum Ice Pads

Frida Mom 2-in-1 Postpartum Absorbent Perineal Ice Maxi Pads

Soothes sore perineum

Easy to use

Can feel bulky

Doesn’t have wings

Count: 8 count

Why We Love It

After giving birth, you’re going to feel sore pretty much everywhere, and an ice pack in your underwear can offer some much-needed relief. You could make your own, but busy new moms love the convenience of the Frida Mom perineal ice maxi pads . They’re basically a half pad, half ice pack hybrid, and don’t require a freezer to keep cool: You simply snap them in half and shake them to activate the cold, making them portable and easy to store in a convenient spot in your bathroom.

I used these after having both of my daughters, and I had to limit myself to one or two a day because I liked them so much, but didn’t want to run out. They offer a lot of pain relief without ever feeling too cold, and are also very absorbent.

"The Frida Mom ice pads were a game changer ! I had made my "ow padsicles" before labor and delivery, but they were super bulky to the point where I felt like I was wearing a diaper. The Frida Mom pads were a bit thinner but packed just as much — if not more — soothing relief. They're expensive, so you'll want to limit how often you're using them to save money."

Community Reviews

kdecks17 "They don’t need to be kept frozen, break and shake and they’re cold! I liked these so much better than the homemade ones (and you don’t get as wet bc they don’t melt!)"

Best Postpartum Panty Liner

Rael Organic Cotton Cover Panty Liners

Organic

Great for sensitive skin

Not ideal for a heavy flow

Count: Available packs of 44, 60 and 81

Why We Love It

As your postpartum bleeding starts to get lighter, you’ll definitely want to ditch wearing large, bulky pads. Unfortunately, because some bleeding can linger, you’ll still want to have some form of protection. If you’re not ready for tampons yet, try these Rael Organic panty liners . Thin and lightweight, they come in the perfect shape to conform to your body for the kind of comfort where you barely feel them. They are made of super soft 100% organic cotton and are free of chlorine and fragrances, so they’re ideal for sensitive skin, too. And because they’re designed to be flexible, they’ll stay in place even once you start being out and about again. They also come in a longer size for added protection.

As your postpartum bleeding starts to get lighter, you’ll definitely want to ditch wearing large, bulky pads. Unfortunately, because some bleeding can linger, you’ll still want to have some form of protection. If you’re not ready for tampons yet, try these Rael Organic panty liners . Thin and lightweight, they come in the perfect shape to conform to your body for the kind of comfort where you barely feel them. They are made of super soft 100% organic cotton and are free of chlorine and fragrances, so they’re ideal for sensitive skin, too. And because they’re designed to be flexible, they’ll stay in place even once you start being out and about again. They also come in

Community Reviews

ladebrouillarde “Second cotton cover pads. I wore the Rael pantiliners all through the second and third trimesters.”

kmmcvey “I use Rael organic pantiliners everyday. There are disposable and fabric washable ones for the more eco-conscious folks. I have used them just for sanity before pregnancy to save my underwear from getting gross and they are great!”

Best Postpartum Disposable Underwear

Always Discreet Adult Incontinence & Postpartum Underwear

All-over protection

Discreet and less bulky feel

Have a scent that may be overpowering for some

Count: Available in packs of 17, 28, 56 and 76

Sizes: S/M, L, XL, XXL

Why We Love It

Let’s be real: Pads can get uncomfortable, especially if you’re dealing with soreness or pain down there. If you need another option, even for just a few days or weeks right after giving birth, try Always disposable underwear . Meant to offer all-over protection, these are essentially adult diapers – but they don’t feel that way. They’re form-fitting and discreet, and moms swear you can’t see them under clothes

During her first few weeks postpartum, Leah opted for the Always Discreet underwear at night. "They absorbed my discharge wonderfully, and I didn’t have to worry about anything getting on my clothes or the bedsheets,” she says. “They were form-fitting but still roomy enough that I could add a disposable ice pack or witch hazel pads for extra relief.”

One thing Leah and other moms note, however, is that the underwear has a mild scent, even though the packaging doesn’t mention them being scented.

"I needed a little extra comfort those first few days, and I like that this underwear gave me excellent leak protection without the bulk of an extra-absorbent pad. It was especially great during nighttime: I toss and turn a lot, and pads don't always... follow your movement. With the underwear, I knew leaks would be contained no matter how much I moved, saving my clothes and bedding."

Tested by Liz Buxton , mom of one and What to Expect's Commerce Director:

"I honestly still wear them sometimes when I get my period because they are just so much comfier than a pad and easier on the body postpartum than a tampon! Love me a cute adult diaper."

Community Reviews

“I used the always discreet with my first and plan to again. They are comfortable and disposable.”

“I used always discreet with my first. I purchased 2 bags so I had plenty and changed it everytime I went pee. These are sooooo much better than a pad and mesh undies in my opinion. You just wear the underwear by themselves. They are very stretchy so I purchased size small/medium and they fit great. They aren’t too bulky or anything like that.”

“Honestly they're so much more comfortable than a pad and I don't have to worry about ruining my underwear (or washing the mesh ones from the hospital). I've never leaked with them but have leaked plenty with the pads. And they're designed to not look like a diaper, so I feel better about myself when wearing them. Easy peasy.”

Best Reusable Postpartum Pads

Lansinoh Postpartum Hot and Cold Pads

Hot and cold relief

Can also use beyond fourth trimester as relief from menstrual camping

Reusable

Sold as two for easy rotation

Have to wait until bleeding stops

Count: 2 (pads), 24 (disposable sleeves)

Why We Love It

As Dr. Smith stresses, you should avoid using reusable pads in the first two weeks due to a higher risk of infection. She does, however, recommend layering disposable pads with cooling pads for improved perineal pain relief, like these therapy packs from Lansinoh .

Many moms note that these fit discretely in underwear, thanks to the slim size. For an extra hygenic layer, pair them with the brand's disposable sleeves, which are sold in 24 packs for $10. Slip the therapy pad in and enjoy the warmth or cold (simply pop them in the microwave or freezer, and they remain at an ideal temperature for about 20 to 30 minutes) to help with recovery. Even after bleeding has stopped, you'll likely still feel sore.

Pro tip: Gently massage the pad to ensure the icey or warm feel has been evenly distributed throughout before using.

"Once the postpartum bleeding passes, I'd recommend using Lansinoh's hot/cold reusable pads for similar pain relief to that of Frida Mom's ice packs."

What To Look For in Postpartum Pads

Based on research and feedback from moms, these are the factors you should consider when buying postpartum pads:

Absorbency: You'll want highly absorbent pads that can withstand some wear before they need to be changed, as you might find changing your pad to be uncomfortable right after giving birth. For this reason, you may want to consider overnight pads (typically size 4 or 5), because they’re the most absorbent.

Comfort: You’ll likely already be experiencing some pain after giving birth, so the last thing you want is to add an uncomfortable pad to the mix. You'll want something soft but not bulky, and will want to consider features like wings to hold the pad in place and long, wide backs to help avoid leaking.

Value: If you’re going to need enough pads for six weeks or longer, you probably don’t want anything too expensive.

FAQs

What pads should I use after giving birth?

There’s no rule on which specific postpartum pads to use, although you’ll likely want something soft, comfortable and absorbent enough to handle a heavy flow and wear constantly. We like Always Infinity Pads best because they’re absorbent enough for overnight wear but still have a thin and flexible feel. If you’d prefer to use something organic, Rael Organic Cotton Pads are ideal for sensitive skin and have a comfortable fit. Using ice packs in your underwear is also a great way to relieve pain and inflammation, and Frida Mom has 2-in-1 ice packs and pads that absorb liquid and keep you cool. If you hate pads, try disposable underwear, like Always Discreet.

"Whatever pads you choose to use, ensure they are fragrance-free," notes Dr. Smith. She also advises to layer with witch hazel or cooling packs. "Peri bottle with warm water while using the bathroom is key — and then always pat, don't wipe."

How often do you change your postpartum pads?

You should change your postpartum pad as often as you feel is necessary, depending on how full your pad is or how long you’ve been wearing it. In the first few days or week, that might be every hour or more. As time goes on, you may be able to go several hours or even through the night without changing your pad.

When should I switch from heavy-duty to thin pads?

"Everyone is different, but generally after the first week, you can change from extra heavy, hospital maternity pads to more 'normal' period-appropriate pads," shares Dr. Smith. "Then, around 2 to 4 weeks postpartum, most women will be able to change to a light pad or panty liner."

Are reusable postpartum pads safe?

"I would not recommend use of reusable pads in the first one to two weeks due to the higher infection risk in this period," stresses Dr. Smith. "After that time, if you choose to use them, I would ensure they are cleaned thoroughly with hot water and with fragrance-free detergent to prevent vulvar irritation."

WhatToExpect.com, Postpartum Bleeding (Lochia) , May 2021. Cleveland Clinic, Pregnancy: Physical Changes After Delivery , January 2018. NHS, How soon can I use tampons after giving birth? , October 2023. University of Michigan Health Library, Postpartum: First 6 Weeks After Childbirth , July 2023.

Your Next Read

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Products for Postpartum Stretch Marks Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Products to Make Postpartum Sex More Comfortable Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Postpartum Symptoms You Might Experience After Giving Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Postpartum Bleeding (Lochia): What's Normal and What's Not? Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Postpartum Recovery Timeline Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Postpartum Pelvic Floor Exercises Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

What I Wish Someone Told Me About Pelvic Floor Recovery Before I Gave Birth Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Leaking Breast Milk Postpartum Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

What to Expect After a C-Section: Real-Mom Tips for Healing and Newborn Care By Heidi Murkoff

Postpartum Infections: How to Spot the Signs Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

Postpartum Pelvic Pain Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window