8 Best High Chairs That Make Mealtime Safer, Easier, and Way Less Messy

Collage of the best high chairs featuring Lalo, Stokke, IKEA, Inglesina, and Mockingbird

QUICK SUMMARY

The Graco Table2Table 7-in-1 Convertible High Chair earns the top spot, according to the results of the What to Expect Feeding Awards and feedback from our What to Expect community members. Parents love that it’s durable, easy to clean, and highly customizable — plus, it grows with your child from infancy through toddlerhood.

High chairs probably aren’t top of mind when your baby is still nursing or bottle-feeding. But once you start introducing purees and bite-sized foods — something the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends around 6 months of age — you’ll need one. And fast! A high chair quickly becomes one of the most-used baby gear items in your home, especially throughout the first year and well into toddlerhood. So yes, it’s absolutely worth putting some thought into choosing the right one.

How I Tested and Chose the Best High Chairs

I referenced information from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and spoke to Brittany Ferri, an occupational therapist based in Rochester, New York, for more information about high chair features and safety. I also relied on parent feedback to understand what families prioritize when shopping for a high chair. I spoke to several What to Expect staff members, along with contributing writers ranging from moms of three to first-time moms, drew from my own experience as a mom of two, and read through multiple What to Expect community forums.

Based on expert recommendations and parent feedback, I narrowed down a list of 30 high chairs to the eight best using the following criteria:

Safety Features : Every high chair should include a secure three-, four-, or five-point harness to keep your little one safely in place. A five-point harness is the most secure option. All the chairs on this list meet these safety standards and include additional stability features, like wide legs that help prevent tipping.

Longevity : Convertible high chairs — ones that adjust as your child grows — are increasingly popular for their value and versatility. All the options on this list support at least 30 pounds, which means they’ll last most children until age 3 or 4.

Ease of Cleaning : Mealtime = mess time. Spills, crumbs, and smears are inevitable. Every high chair here features either removable parts (like trays, inserts, or machine-washable padding and straps) or surfaces you can easily wipe down. Keep in mind: high chairs with fabric or padded seats are trickier to clean, even if the materials are washable. And foldable chairs? Super convenient, but they often have more crevices where food gets stuck. If easy cleaning is your top priority, consider a minimalist chair with smooth surfaces and less padding.

Best Overall High Chair

Graco Table2Table 7-in-1 Convertible High Chair

Durable material

Grows with child

Compact fold

Easy to clean

Under $200

Not as aesthetically appealing as others

Weight Limit: Up to 40 lbs. in highchair mode; up to 60 lbs. in booster mode

Product Weight: 25.04 lbs.

Product Dimensions: ‎27 x 44 x 24 inches

Foldable: Yes

Tray Included: Yes

Why We Love It

Graco was voted as the Best High Chair Brand in the 2025 What to Expect Feeding Awards , and after reviewing the Graco Table2Table 7-in-1 Convertible High Chair , it's easy to see why . The foldable high chair design has seven (!) different stages, going from an infant high chair to a dining booster seat to a big-kid table and chair. You can even use it to seat two children, further stretching that $200 price tag.

. The foldable high chair design has seven (!) different stages, going from an infant high chair to a dining booster seat to a big-kid table and chair. You can even use it to seat two children, further stretching that $200 price tag.

It also boasts a slew of features that you normally find on more expensive high chairs. To start, there are five different heights, a three-position removable footrest, and a three-position recline to ensure your child is in the ideal seated position for their age. Parents also note the material is super durable, allowing the chair to last for many years and different kids (and through many messy meals.)

Speaking of messy meals, parents say the Graco 7-in-1 high chair is almost too easy to clean. The minimal nooks and crannies make it nightly wipe downs a breeze. Bonus: When it's time for a deeper clean, you can toss the seat pad in the washing machine and the tray in the dishwasher.

you can toss the seat pad in the washing machine and the tray in the dishwasher.

Community Reviews

princessshay2001 “I have the graco and I LOVE it!! The fabric was easily thrown in the washing machine but Aldo wiped down well for messes that didn't seem bad enough to go through the machine. I also loved how easy the double layered tray was ! It also turns into 2 chairs at once in case you have multiple children which I thought was nice, and the straps are easily adjusted. My daughter used this for about 2 years before we switched her to a normal chair and I had absolutely no down sides for it. I'm currently pregnant with baby 2 and planning on using it again since I saved it

Atay122022 “I have this one [Graco 7-in-1 high chair], it's not the smallest footprint when it's open, but I really like that it can turn into a little table and chair when she's older."

Best Affordable High Chair

Ikea Antilop

Affordable

Lightweight

Easy to clean

Minimalist design

Small footprint

No footrest included

Three-point harness

Doesn’t fold

Weight Limit: Up to 33 lbs.

Product Weight : Not listed

Product Dimensions : 22 x 35 3/8 x 24 3/8 inches

Foldable : No

Tray Included : Yes

Why We Love It

Sometimes basic is best. In fact, few high chairs have garnered as much praise in our What to Expect community as the Ikea Antilop chair. This simple high chair is made of lightweight polypropylene with steel legs and is shockingly durable, blissfully easy to clean and not an eyesore. All that, and it’s only $30. (Or $22, if you buy without the tray .)

Sometimes basic is best. In fact, few high chairs have garnered as much praise in our What to Expect community as the Ikea Antilop chair. This simple high chair is made of lightweight polypropylene with steel legs and is shockingly durable, blissfully easy to clean and not an eyesore. All that, and it’s only $30. (Or $22, if you

A no-frills option, for sure, but one that many parents rave about. Why? This plastic and steel high chair doesn’t have any fabric or crevices to contend with, so cleaning is a breeze. It’s also plenty comfortable for baby; there’s ample room to enjoy a meal or even do an arts and crafts project once your child gets a bit older. Although it may not fold flat for daily storage, it’s easy enough to take apart, should you want to stash it out of the way occasionally.

Countless experienced parents — myself included — will tell you they originally purchased a pricier high chair only to have buyer’s regret and wish they’d simply gotten this Ikea chair. With my first child, I made the mistake of purchasing a high chair that was on sale without really researching it or reading reviews. Turns out, the footprint was far too wide for my small apartment and it was painfully annoying to clean. When I found out I was pregnant with my second child, one of the few things I purchased was this high chair.

I’ve often told people that it’s the best $30 I’ve ever spent: Cleaning a high chair is never fun, but the Antilop’s smooth surfaces are manageable to wipe down, even after a very messy meal. While not quite as stylish as a Stokke chair, for example, it has a minimalist design and blends into a room. It also has a relatively small footprint, something I appreciated while living in an apartment.

Tested by Olivia DeLong , mom of a 3-year-old and What to Expect's Senior Health Editor:

"The Ikea high chair is by far the best deal price-wise. It’s super easy to clean because you just wipe it down with soap and water. It’s also not super large, so it doesn’t take up much room."

Tested by Ann-Marie Zafirovski, first-time mom and What to Expect contributor:

"We set it up before our baby was even born, and we’re still loving it months later. It’s so easy to clean, especially during messy puree meals, and feels surprisingly sturdy for something so affordable. I love that it tucks neatly under our breakfast bar in our condo — it doesn’t fold, but it doesn’t need to."

Video Reviews

IKEA Antilop High Chair Review

Community Reviews

Yes! The IKEA one is life. So easy to clean. We even bought extras to leave at grandparents’ houses.

“I bought one at Ikea and I've used it for three kids. Finally time to get a new one for this baby, and next time we go to Ikea I'll pick one up. Seriously got my money’s worth. You can wipe down the entire thing so nothing gets stuck in the cracks forever. I've even taken it on trips since it breaks down into pieces.”

“Third time mom here. IKEA high chair is everything. It’s so easy to keep clean, easy to transport, etc. Way better than anything we tried with our first!”

Best Transitional High Chair

Mockingbird High Chair

Stylish

Easy to clean

Lightweight

Easy to change modes

Long use

Wide base

Pricey compared to basic options

Weight Limit: Up to 35 lbs. in high chair mode; up to 150 lbs. in child chair mode.

Product Weight: 16.5 lbs.

Product Dimensions: 16.5 x 35.5 x 24 inches

Foldable: No

Tray Included: Yes

Why We Love It

Grow-with-baby high chairs are a great investment — but they often come with a higher-than-average price tag. Enter the Mockingbird High Chair . Known for offering luxury gear at a more affordable cost, its thoughtfully designed high chair is no exception.

You can start using this convertible chair as soon as your baby is ready to begin solids, and continue well into toddlerhood. While it doesn’t offer as many modes as some other convertible high chairs on our list, its four footrest positions and three tray depths make it easy to adjust as your child grows. These features also help ensure your baby’s feet are supported and that they can comfortably reach their food — two important factors for safe and effective mealtimes.

“There are very few corners or crevices, and the curved seat is made from a non-toxic, BPA-free plastic that’s super easy to wipe down after meals,” writes Robin Hilmantel in her Mockingbird High Chair review. She also highlights the removable tray with a detachable surface that’s dishwasher-safe. “Even the straps — which have an easy-to-use magnetic closure — are coated in silicone, so they can be easily wiped clean.”

Hilmantel adds how easy it is to convert the Mockingbird from a high chair into a toddler seat, but says that’s just the beginning of what makes this chair a standout.

Another parent-loved feature: a strap-holding clip on the back of the seat that keeps the harness out of the way. It might sound minor, but when you’re trying to settle a squirmy baby or give the chair a quick wipe-down, you’ll be grateful it’s there.

The chair does have a wide base, which some parents say they bump into frequently—so it might not be the best fit for smaller spaces. But beyond that, there are very few downsides.

Tested by Robin Hilmantel , mom of three and What to Expect's Editorial Director:

"Between all the high chairs I've owned and tried while traveling or visiting friends, I’ve used at least 10 different models in five years — and the Mockingbird really impressed me. It looks beautiful, has almost no crevices to clean, and even has clever touches like strap holders on the back so they don’t get in the way during cleanup or buckling. It’s not just a pretty face — it’s incredibly functional, too."

See our full Mockingbird High Chair review .

Video Reviews

Mockingbird High Chair Review

Community Reviews

"I have the mockingbird and I love it! It's easy to clean and doesn't stain. Foot rest is super easy to adjust. Love how the belt can be hooked to the back so it's easy to put on baby etc."

"we have the Mockingbird! It’s much more affordable, I think, and so easy to clean. It sits up high enough so that our son is eating at our table with us. He loves it! He’s a 99% big-baby so I did worry about him fitting in it, but it’s been great so far!"

"we were between the stokke vs mockingbird and am so glad we registered for (and we're gifted, months before baby is due) the mockingbird. we had friends with kids over and they tested it out... they loved it! it's so easy to clean with rubbery straps, plus very easy to adjust by just sliding vs the stokke you have to shimmy pieces of wood. it's also less expensive and comes with lots of accessories that are sold separately with the stokke."

Easiest to Clean High Chair

Lalo The Chair

Stylish

Easy to clean

Comfortable infant support

Smaller footprint

Grows with baby

Two-handed tray removal

Doesn’t fold

Higher price point

Weight Limit: Up to 33 lbs.

Product Weight: 10 lbs.

Product Dimensions: 24.5 x 24.5 x 33 inches

Foldable: No

Tray Included: Yes

Why We Love It

When it comes to baby gear, it’s rare to find something that’s functional, comfortable and design-forward. That’s exactly what makes Lalo The Chair stand out. It’s thoughtfully made with nontoxic materials, easy to clean and — bonus — comes in colors that actually match your home.

The Chair includes everything you need to get started, including a cushion, tray, infant insert and five-point harness. When your baby outgrows the infant setup, it transforms into a toddler chair, so you’ll get lots of use over time. Another bonus: You can also purchase an add-on to turn it into a play chair for arts and crafts down the line.

Although it doesn’t fold for storage, parents love that The Chair has a smaller footprint than many other high chairs. It’s lightweight enough to move around easily, and reviewers rave about how simple it is to clean. The cushion is machine washable, the tray wipes clean with ease and the harness straps are made from cleanable plastic.

Psst : Lalo also just came out with a Hook-On Chair . Although we haven't had a chance yet to test it ourselves, it's already gaining buzz as a space-saving, travel-friendly solution.

Tested by Madelyn Casey, mom of three and What to Expect contributor:

"We’ve been using The Chair with our 6-month-old and I love how sleek it looks and how easily it fits into our space. I was able to put it together myself in 15 minutes. The cushion snaps off easily for cleaning, and the seat helps my baby sit comfortably and safely upright. It’s not the most portable option, but it’s so beautiful I don’t mind keeping it out."

Video Reviews

Lalo The Chair High Chair Review

Community Reviews

“I absolutely LOVE my lalo high chair, I honestly couldn’t do without it because I now use it for his toddler chair but unfortunately will be putting it away soon to be ready for when baby needs it. Couldn’t recommend more!”

“We also loved the Lalo high chair for our first. You can take the straps off and I would put them in the top rack of the dishwasher to get clean.”

"We’ve been using the Lalo highchair and absolutely love it! Haven’t had any issues with our little one slumping, but I know some parents have had success using Lalo's infant support insert or even rolling up a small towel behind baby for extra support. It’s been super easy to clean for us, and we love how it looks in our space."

Most Iconic High Chair

Stokke Tripp Trapp High Chair

Beautiful wooden design

Can be used for many years

Available in many colors

Very high weight limit

Expensive

Tray sold separately

Weight Limit: Up to 300 lbs.

Product Weight: 15.6 lbs.

Product Dimensions: 18.1 x 32.5 x 22.4 inches

Foldable: No

Tray Included: No

Why We Love It

Wooden high chairs are a classic option, as the understated finishes and clean lines fit right into most homes. And no wooden high chair is as iconic as the Stokke Tripp Trapp .

“My daughter has been using this high chair for more than a year, and it’s been a worthwhile investment,” says Leah Rocketto , What to Expect’s associate commerce editor. “It checks all the boxes: It’s safe, easy to clean, nice to look at, and can be used for years, which really stretches the dollar.”

Though it’s undoubtedly pricey, as Leah notes, the Tripp Trapp can be used starting at 6 months old (even earlier if you buy the newborn set ), and becomes an actual chair for your tot once she joins you at your dining table. Even adults can sit on it, as it has an impressive 300-pound weight limit. Many What to Expect parents say their children were able to sit in this seat through the toddler years and beyond, and because it’s so well-made, many families use it for subsequent children, too.

It looks simple, but it’s also very easy to adjust: The footplate and seat can both be adjusted to ensure your little one has enough foot and back support. Leah felt this was particularly helpful in getting her daughter to willingly sit in the Tripp Trapp.

Robin Hilmantel, What to Expect's Editorial Director, also appreciates the ergonomic design. "All three of my kids have been able to sit in the 90-90-90 position that experts recommend while using it," she says.

ll three of my kids have been able to sit in the 90-90-90 position that experts recommend while using it," she says.

The Tripp Trapp doesn’t come with a tray (although you can buy a tray separately), but the sleek silhouette (which was designed by Peter Opsvik in 1972) will look great with your furniture. If aesthetic is top of mind for you, this is one of the most sophisticated high chairs on the market. Choose from several colors, like natural, aqua blue, black, and red.

Tested by Leah Rocketto , mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Shopping Director:

“My daughter always had plenty of leg room and sat positioned in a way that’s comfortable, so she fussed much less than when we put her in other seats."

Tested by Kristin Koch Kennedy , mom of three and What to Expect contributor:

“When I was pregnant with my first son seven years ago, my husband and I hemmed and hawed over which stroller and car seat to get. But pretty quickly, we knew which high chair that we both wanted... In my opinion, the Stokke Tripp Trapp is definitely worth the money. It’s lasted us for more than seven years and three active children, and it still works perfectly. It’s gone through multiple moves, and it's never broken. Since it’s a prominent part of our kitchen, I also love that it sits compactly under the table or against the wall when not in use, and it isn’t an eyesore. It blends seamlessly into our kitchen and can easily be set up at meal times."

See our full review of the Tripp Trapp .

Video Reviews

Stokke Tripp Trapp High Chair Review

Community Reviews

“This chair is sleek, chic and comes in a variety of colors. When our daughter was just about to turn 1 we removed the tray and now she just sits in her Stokke at the table with us. It’s wonderful for socializing with family around mealtimes that way.”

“Stokke Tripp Trapp, hands down! You can use it for so many years. It looks beautiful and is of superb quality! My 3-year-old still uses his.”

“Stokke Tripp Trapp! We love it for our first and planning to get another for this peanut! All wood, so very easy to wipe down!”

Best High Chair for Kitchen Islands

Inglesina Fast Table Chair

Portable

Lightweight

Comfortable padded seat

Built-in storage and carry bag

Easy to clean

Three-point harness

Hand-wash seat cover

Doesn’t fold flat

Weight Limit: Up to 37 lbs.

Product Weight: 4.2 lbs.

Product Dimensions: 11 x 14 x 17 inches

Foldable: Yes

Tray Included: Yes

Why We Love It

While the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) advises that a clip-on high chair shouldn’t replace a freestanding one for everyday use, this style can still be a safe and convenient choice for occasional meals, dining out, travel, or dinner at Grandma’s house. Just be sure to use a model that locks securely onto the table, and double-check that the table can safely support your child’s weight.

Portable, compact, and surprisingly sturdy, the Inglesina Fast Table Chair is the perfect pick for small spaces, families on the go, or anyone who wants their little one pulled right up to the table. Unlike traditional high chairs that take up precious floor space, this one clips directly onto most tables using twist-tight couplings — just check compatibility if you have a glass or unusually thick surface. The seat folds down compactly when not in use and includes a built-in carry bag for easy transport.

Parents also love the thoughtful extras: a high backrest and padded seat for comfort, a dishwasher-safe dining tray, and a rear pocket for storing small essentials. While the fabric seat is hand-wash only, cleanup is generally easy, and the chair’s minimalist footprint makes it ideal for travel or dining out.

Tested by Lakia Holmes, first-time mom and What to Expect contributor:

“This chair is a total game-changer — it’s portable, sturdy, and lets Isla feel like part of the table. I honestly wish I could use it full-time!”

Video Reviews

Inglesina Portable High Chair Review

Community Reviews

“I have the Phil & Teds Lobster one and love it. We brought it on holidays with us and it's gone great. It weighs about 3 pounds I think and it just hooks onto the table. We throw it into the bottom of the pram.”

“The Phil & Teds Lobster chair is great, if it works with the table you'll be at. It was recommended to us by friends who used one for years and two kids. We've used it a couple of times and LO loves it.”

“We also have a Phil & Teds Lobster and I absolutely love it. We use it when we go out to eat at restaurants but have found it doesn't fit on most dining room tables because of the way it clamps.”

Best Booster High Chair

Ingenuity Baby Base 2-in-1 Booster Seat

Lightweight

Attaches to any dining chair

Easy to use

Shorter use than other high chairs

Weight Limit: Up to 50 lbs.

Product Weight: 5.7 lbs.

Product Dimensions: 7.25 x 11.75 x 15.25 inches

Foldable: No

Tray Included: Yes

Why We Love It

If you’re dreading the idea of a bulky high chair permanently set up in your kitchen, a booster feeding chair may be the perfect solution. (Confusingly, this product is called a “booster seat” — a term often associated with toddler car or dining seats — but this version is appropriate as soon as your baby can hold their head up independently.) The Ingenuity Baby Booster offers all the key features of a standard high chair but takes up only a fraction of the space.

The three-point harness and thick seat straps help keep your child secure during meals. It’s also incredibly easy to clean: you can wipe it down or pop the BPA-free tray into the dishwasher. And if you’re especially tight on space, the tray conveniently stores underneath the seat!

You can use the tray when your little one is still learning to self-feed, and once she's ready, remove the tray and pull her right up to the family table. Outside of mealtime, the booster also works as a floor seat, offering a secure place that supports your baby’s posture and helps strengthen neck muscles.

Community Reviews

erinleigh8 “This baby seat is awesome! We haven’t even pulled the high chair out yet because we can just plop this down anywhere. The tray is also self-storing.”

kennedyalexis “i have the ingenuity highchair. my baby is well supported and it can be used as like a booster highchair on your dining chairs and it grows with baby and can be used as a toddler chair as well.”

Best Travel High Chair

hiccapop OmniBoost Travel Booster Seat

Compact

Stable on all surfaces

Comes with carrying bag

Storage for dinner accessories

Wipes clean

Tray is smaller than other high chair trays

Weight Limit: 50 lbs.

Product Weight: 4 lbs.

Product Dimensions: 15.59 x 6.89 x 7.01 inches

Foldable: Yes

Tray Included: Yes

Why We Love It

Compact and easy to fold, the hiccapop OmniBoost Booster Seat is perfect whether you're traveling abroad or just heading out to dinner. Designed for kids ages 6 months to 3 years, the OmniBoost includes a variety of features that help keep your child safe — whether they’re seated on the lawn or in a dining room chair.

In addition to thick, sturdy seat straps, the OmniBoost features a wide base and removable “duck feet” that help distribute weight and increase stability, especially on soft or uneven surfaces. Plus, the three-point harness keeps your wiggly little one securely in place without being uncomfortably restrictive.

There are also several parent-friendly features that make dining away from home easier. For starters, there's a pocket on the back for storing bibs, utensils, or small toys to keep toddlers occupied. The chair also comes with a detachable, dishwasher-safe swivel tray — yes, swivel ! A rare and helpful feature, even among full-sized high chairs.

Some parents note that the tray is a bit small, but this typically isn’t an issue if your child is sitting at the table.

Community Reviews

"I love this [hiccapop OmniBoost] !!! you can attach it to any chair basically or have it standalone. I love it."

!!! you can attach it to any chair basically or have it standalone. I love it."

"I second the Hiccapop chair! You can strap it to a chair or even put it on the ground. Plus it folds up nicely for easy travel. You would not have any regrets with this chair!"

second the Hiccapop chair! You can strap it to a chair or even put it on the ground. Plus it folds up nicely for easy travel. You would not have any regrets with this chair!"

"We bought this [hiccapop OmniBoost] one for a trip but my son loved it so much it became his regular eating chair. We ended up with two because of an amazon shipping mistake and were able to keep one in the car (it folds up and comes with a travel bag). We also had one sent to my dad’s house for when me or my sister visit with little kids."

Why Picking the Right High Chair Matters

As a mom of two, I can tell you: choosing a high chair is a very personal decision. You’ll want to think about what fits your family’s needs and lifestyle. Ask yourself:

How much space do you have in your kitchen or dining area?

Do you want something foldable to tuck away when it’s not in use?

Is easy cleaning a must?

And let’s not forget style — this chair will basically become part of your home’s furniture. You’ll see it every day, so you shouldn’t hate how it looks!

FAQs

When can a baby start using a high chair?

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), most babies are ready for solid foods (and therefore ready to sit in a high chair to eat) sometime between 4 and 6 months. Your baby should be able to sit up alone or with support and have adequate head and neck control. Other signs your little one is ready: She’s able to open her mouth when food is offered, she can swallow it (rather than push it out), she can transfer food from the front to the back of the tongue and she can bring objects to her mouth.

When should a toddler stop using a high chair?

Children should stop using a high chair once they meet the maximum weight or height limit, whichever comes first. (Most high chairs only list a weight limit, which is usually somewhere around 30 to 45 pounds.) That said, some children will be ready to graduate from a high chair to a booster seat, or simply start sitting in a regular chair, before they reach the maximum weight limit on your high chair.

What do babies use after a high chair?

This depends in part on what kind of high chair you get. Some high chairs are convertible, meaning they can see you all the way through the toddler years. They function much like a plastic or metal frame high chair, then fold up into a booster seat when your child gets a bit older. Some even turn into regular dining chairs after that.

If your high chair isn’t convertible, you might choose to switch to a booster seat once your baby reaches the maximum weight limit on your current chair. Booster seats are designed for toddlers and strap onto one of your existing dining chairs. These chairs typically come with removable lap trays so that when your child is ready, she can pull right up to the family table.

How do you clean a high chair?

Generally, most high chair manufacturers recommend using a wet sponge and dish soap to wipe down the surfaces of the seat and tray. Harness straps, cushions and fabric inserts can usually be removed for further cleaning, and these are often machine-washable (though check to be sure). When you remove the cushions or straps, make sure to clean any food that’s accumulated in cracks and crevices.

Many high chair trays are also removable and dishwasher-safe, which can make it easier to thoroughly clean them at the end of the day.

How do I know if a high chair is safe?

Your baby's high chair should be a safe place for her to explore food in all its textured, tasty glory. So you can focus on the food and not any scary incidents, experts, as well as the AAP, give the following advice:

Never leave your baby unattended in the chair. This should be a given, but baby might topple the chair or choke if eating while not supervised.

Always make sure baby is buckled up. Just attaching the lap table is not enough to make sure your little one is secure. Your high chair should have, at the minimum, a T-style strap that goes across baby’s lap, through her legs and connects in the middle for a snug, secure fit.

Make sure your chair is a safe distance from the table or other edges. Babies love to stretch their legs and push, and that could mean an unexpected fall.

Look for a chair that doesn’t tip over easily. You want to ensure that, even as baby gets bigger and more boisterous, she won’t be able to topple the chair.

Always follow height and weight guidelines. They’re set for a reason, and following them will ensure your baby is sitting safely.

Make sure any casters or wheels lock. You want to make sure your baby doesn’t go for any strolls without you.

Be super careful when folding and unfolding your chair. “Safety features such as locks will ensure they stay in place when assembled,” says Brittany Ferri, an occupational therapist based in Rochester, NY. And make sure baby is at a safe distance while you’re folding it back up. You don’t want little fingers or toes to get caught in hinges or locks.

If you’re using a portable chair, make sure your table can support it. Check to verify that any table you’re clipping a portable chair to can support the weight of the seat — and baby — before securely attaching the chair.

WhatToExpect.com, Introducing Solid Foods to Your Baby , December 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), 6 Quick High Chair Safety Tips , March 2017. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Starting Solid Foods , August 2022. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), When, What, and How to Introduce Solid Foods , June 2023.

Your Next Read

Is the Stokke Tripp Trapp Worth It? One Mom's Honest Review Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

7 Best Convertible and All-in-One Car Seats, Tested and Reviewed by Real Parents Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

The 9 Best Baby Floor Seats, According to Parents and Experts Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

The Best Toddler Beds to Safely Transition Little Ones From Their Cribs Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

What to Know About Your Toddler's Car Seat: Get the Latest Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

How to Find the Best Stroller for Your Family: A Comprehensive Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Baby's Car Seat Safe and Up-to-Date? Check These Infant Car Seat Safety Tips Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

What Different Car Seat Features Really Mean and Whether They're Worth Your Money Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

6 Best Standing Toys to Help Your Baby Meet a Milestone Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

The Best Stroller Travel Systems That Parents Say Make Life Easier Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window