8 Common Pregnancy Sleep Problems & Solutions

Updated with Ask Heidi video.

sleep problems during pregnancy

Everyone keeps telling you to “get your sleep now” — but that's a whole lot harder with pregnancy sleep-stealers like heartburn and leg cramps. Here are some tips for overcoming the most common pregnancy sleep problems.

You expected sleep deprivation to come with having a baby — but you may not have expected it to really start until you'd had the baby. Now you know that it can be almost as hard to get enough quality shut-eye when you’re expecting as it is when you're a new parent.

If it’s any consolation, know that you’re not alone. More than half of pregnant women reported poor sleep and sleep disturbances while they were expecting, according to recent research.

As difficult as it might be, getting a good night’s sleep is essential for a healthy pregnancy. Sleep helps your brain to reset, your over-taxed blood vessels to replenish, your blood sugar levels to stabilize and your immune system to stay strong. That’s why doctors say you should aim to get at least seven hours of quality sleep a night.

But between finding a comfortable sleeping position to accommodate your growing baby bump and pregnancy symptoms like the frequent need to pee, heartburn, leg cramps, nasal congestion and overall discomfort, it’s no wonder that a full night’s rest can be so elusive. To add insult to injury, sleep disorders like insomnia and obstructive sleep apnea tend to be more common when you’re expecting.

Despite all that’s going on in your body and brain, a good night's sleep during pregnancy is possible. Here are a few of the most common pregnancy sleep problems, along with tips to help you overcome them so you can get the rest you need.

Frequent need to pee

When it happens

Usually in the first and third trimesters.

Why it happens

Higher levels of the pregnancy hormone hCG can mean having to run to the bathroom frequently , day and night. Your kidneys also have to filter up to 50 percent more blood than usual — which also means more urine (in other words, you’re peeing for two). In the third trimester, your growing uterus presses down on your bladder, increasing your urge to go.

What you can do about it

Drink plenty of liquids throughout the day. Then cut back when it's closer to bedtime (in another words, it's probably best not to guzzle a 16-ounce bottle of water right before you go to sleep).

When you do need to get up to go, leave a night light on in the bathroom (or install a simple dimmer switch). Flipping on the overhead can be too much of a wake-up call and may make it harder to fall back to sleep.

General discomfort

When it happens

Throughout pregnancy, but especially in the second and third trimesters.

Why it happens

Many pregnancy sleep struggles come from just not being able to find a comfortable position to sleep in . In fact, according to one study , almost 80 percent of pregnant women couldn’t find a comfortable sleeping position.

Inveterate stomach-sleepers eventually can’t sleep in this position. Meanwhile, back sleepers also have to search for a new path to slumber, since it can interfere with circulation later in pregnancy.

What to do about it

Sleeping on your side — your left side, if possible — makes things easier on your circulatory system. It also results in less swelling in your feet, ankles and hands, since it enhances kidney function.

If you're not used to the position, it can make falling asleep harder. In that case, pregnancy pillows can help you get comfortable. Pile them up between your knees, under your stomach and behind your back (whatever works!).

Pregnancy Pillows to Help You Get Comfortable at Night