8 Labor and Delivery Gowns Moms Say You’ll Be Glad You Packed

Best Labor and Delivery Gowns

Quick Summary

The best labor and delivery gown is Ekouaer's short-sleeve style , according to testers in the What to Expect community. It’s soft, budget-friendly, and features snap buttons all over for easy access.

A labor and delivery gown isn't essential, but it’s something you’ll be thrilled to have in your hospital bag — trust me. When you arrive at the hospital, the nurses will give you a paper thin, scratchy delivery gown that certainly does the job, though leaves you feeling completely exposed and not very cozy. But you don’t have to wear it if you bring another labor and delivery gown from home.

After several friends shared how much better they felt wearing their own maternity gown during birth, I knew I’d want one, too. How could I pass up even the tiniest bit of coziness and comfort in a cold, unfamiliar setting? Like many moms-to-be, my skin was also feeling extra sensitive in the weeks leading up to my due date, and I worried that the hospital-provided gown would be made of materials that might make me feel itchy or give me hives, which is the last thing I wanted to deal with while giving birth. To make sure I picked the right one, I tried out several gowns myself.

How I Chose the Best Labor and Delivery Gowns

To find the best labor and delivery gowns — ones that keep you comfortable and covered, yet are still functional and birth-team approved — I followed this process:

Community research: I scoured the community message boards to make a list of maternity gowns with the most positive reviews.

Personal testing: As a mom of two and experienced parenting editor, I incorporated my own experience testing a number of labor and delivery gowns.

Design evaluation: I started with a general list of 20 or so options, then narrowed things down by looking closely at their designs. A labor and delivery gown is only useful if it’s practical for both you and your birth team, so I focused on evaluating each based on comfort, material quality, accessibility features, and value.

Material selection: I looked for gowns made from warm yet breathable fabrics (think: cotton, cotton-polyester blends, or rayon), as well as those with a little stretch to accommodate a bump.

Accessibility features: I prioritized gowns with snap or Velcro closures on the back (important if you require an epidural) and on the shoulders to make breastfeeding or skin-to-skin contact easier.

Price and value: Some moms may wear a gown just once and never look at it again, so I selected affordable options for one-time use. For pricier gowns, I focused on features that justify the higher price, such as shoulder closures, pockets, or a matching robe for postpartum use.

Based on the above and feedback from fellow moms, I narrowed the list down to the eight best labor and delivery gowns made from comfortable materials, provide a multitude of accessibility features, and are overall a great value.

Best Labor and Delivery Gown

Ekouaer 3-in-1 Maternity Nightgown Nightgown

Stretchy

Variety of colors and sizes

May run big

Material: 95% rayon, 5% spandex

Size Range: S - XXL

Plus Size Options: No

Nursing / Skin-to-Skin Access: Yes

Why We Love It

This short-sleeve maternity gown from Ekouaer is affordable but so practical. In addition to the fuller arm coverage, the gown is a rayon-spandex blend, so it’ll keep you warm while remaining breathable, and has a nice amount of stretch.

is affordable but so practical. In addition to the fuller arm coverage, the gown is a rayon-spandex blend, so it’ll keep you warm while remaining breathable, and has a nice amount of stretch.

Unlike other gowns that snap at the shoulders, the Ekoauer gown snaps along the armpit area, so you can still maintain some coverage (and warmth) while you nurse, though some moms note that the snaps themselves can feel cold against the skin. There are buttons down the front, plus deep pockets you can put lip balm or your phone in.

The gown is available in 12 colors, so you’re sure to find one that suits your style — and matches your baby’s “welcome to the world” outfit. It also comes in a range of sizes, though many moms say it runs big so you may want to consider sizing down.

Community Reviews

“[My doula] recommended this Amazon one because of the snaps (as opposed to Velcro which can be itchy/irritating).”

“I’m going with this one. People recommended I get the one with back buttons for ease when getting an epidural. I love this brand, the material is super soft and I went with black since I will likely bleed on it.”

“I got this one! Super comfy. Would recommend darker colors!”

Best Luxe Labor and Delivery Gown

Lila Labor & Postpartum Gown

Lightweight material

Easy access to back and stomach

Variety of sizes

On the expensive side

Moms flag the return policy is strict

Material: 8% spandex, 92% rayon

Size Range: One-size with option for petite, standard, full figure or curve fit

Plus Size Options: Yes

Nursing / Skin-to-Skin Access: Yes

Why We Love It

If pregnancy pains have you up and scrolling through TikTok at night, then chances are you’ve seen the Lila Labor and Postpartum gown — and the thousands of positive reviews it's garnered. Created by Caitlyn Schollmeier, a mom of two and doula, the Lila maternity gown’s accessibility is truly one-of-a-kind.

— and the thousands of positive reviews it's garnered. Created by Caitlyn Schollmeier, a mom of two and doula, the Lila maternity gown’s accessibility is truly one-of-a-kind.

The Lila labor and delivery gown has a low-cut back rather than closures, making it easy for your doctor to insert an epidural initially, and also to administer medication when needed throughout labor. And unlike most maternity gowns, the Lila gown has an opening at the belly so doctors can easily attach any fetal monitoring devices you might need. Plus, you can string the cords through the opening rather than have them dangling beneath your gown. Finally, the gown’s V-neck design makes it easy to pull material to the side should you decide to breastfeed.

But accessibility isn’t the only thing moms-to-be love about the Lila gown. TikTok reviewers rave about the soft, butter-like fabric (a stretchy rayon/spandex blend) and the two interior ties that ensure the gown stays closed. It’s also extremely size-inclusive, with petite, standard, full figure and curve sizing available.

Bonus: Lila also has children and baby clothes, so you can opt to add a matching swaddle for your newborn to your order, making for some pretty great photo opportunities.

Tested by Karla Martin , mom of one and What to Expect's Senior Photo Manager:

"I had PUPPS and dreaded those scratchy hospital gowns, so I treated myself to a Lila delivery gown. It was incredibly soft and helped keep my itchiness at bay. The nurses kept oohing and aahing over all its features, and it made everything (epidural, monitors, skin-to-skin, nursing) feel easy and seamless. Worth every penny."

Community Reviews

“I bought a labor gown from Lila labor wear! I love it so much, super soft and actually really flattering. Only downside is I really wanted black, but waited too long and it’s out of stock rn, so went with the plum.”

“I have sensitive skin and the ones they have always make me itch so I got a lila gown for this baby.”

“I bought two Lila gowns (one for delivery and one for recovery) and am super impressed by the quality. They’re so soft and comfortable! Definitely worth the price in my opinion.”

“My Lila gown just arrived and it feels so soft! I’m excited to bring it to the hospital with me.”

“I got a Lila gown for baby #3. I really want to prioritize my comfort this labor.”

Best Plus-Size Labor and Delivery Gown

Latched Mama Labor Dress 2.0

Light and stretchy material

Easy access to back and stomach

Comes with matching headband

Limited (but pretty) patterns

Material : Rayon and spandex

Size Range : XS - 4X

Plus Size Options: Yes

Nursing / Skin-to-Skin Access : Yes

Why We Love It

Although many maternity gowns are available in plus sizes, most don’t go beyond 1X. So we love that Latch Mama's labor dresses are available in a wide range of sizes, from XS to 4X. This stylish dress also has the traditional shoulder snaps but with an added feature: A small strap that keeps the shoulder straps “connected” so they are easier to snap back together when you’re done breastfeeding or snuggling your little one skin-to-skin. There’s also a petal front opening to better accommodate monitors and the cords that come with them.

Although many maternity gowns are available in plus sizes, most don’t go beyond 1X. So we love that Latch Mama's labor dresses are available in a wide

range of sizes, from XS to 4X. This stylish dress also has the traditional shoulder snaps but with an added feature: A small strap that keeps the shoulder straps “connected” so they are easier to snap back together when you’re done breastfeeding or snuggling your little one skin-to-skin. There’s also a petal front opening to better accommodate monitors and the cords that come with them.

Moms in the What to Expect community rave about how comfortable this dress is, with several saying they wore it for the first few weeks postpartum. Given the slightly higher price tag, it’s helpful to know you can wear this gown for more than just one day.

Community Reviews

“I had a cheap Amazon gown for my first and it was incredibly scratchy and uncomfortable and every time I look at it, I despise it more, so I haven’t worn it since. For my second and third, I wore Latched Mama labor/postpartum gowns and they are so incredibly comfy! Super soft, very easy to wear, move, and deliver in, and perfect for postpartum.”

“My husband got me a cute labor/delivery gown from Latched Mama before we knew we were having a section. but we still kept it and I changed into that after I had my first shower and it was so nice to not be wearing the hospital gown. made me feel better and was comfy and had snap down straps for easy nursing.”

“I wore Latched Mama labor/postpartum gowns and they are so incredibly comfy! Super soft, very easy to wear, move and deliver in, and perfect for postpartum.”

“This will be my third delivery wearing my Latched Mama labor and delivery gown. It's the BEST! Everyone from the nurses to the anesthesiologist complimented it, and it was so comfortable for me.”

Best Labor and Delivery Gown for C-Section

Kindred Bravely Universal Labor and Delivery Gown

Full-length front enclosures

Comfortable

Pockets

Some may find the Velcro enclosures annoying

Material : Cotton and polyester

Size Range : S/M/L - 1X/2X

Plus Size Options: Yes

Nursing / Skin-to-Skin Access : Yes

Why We Love It

Kindred Bravely clothes are adored for their comfort and functionality, and this gown is no exception. Unlike most maternity gowns, Kindred Bravely’s Universal Labor and Delivery Gown has full-length Velcro eclosures on the back and front, a helpful feature if you’re recovering from a C-section.

Kindred Bravely clothes are adored for their comfort and functionality, and this gown is no exception. Unlike most maternity gowns,

has full-length Velcro eclosures on the back and front, a helpful feature if you’re recovering from a C-section.

There are snaps on both shoulders for easy nursing access once a baby's born, plus super convenient front pockets that hold necessities like lip balm and your phone.

Available in standard and plus-size options, Kindred Bravely’s labor and delivery gown is super soft and hangs just so for a comfortable fit and feel.

Community Reviews

“I think it was worth it for me. I had a false alarm and was in hospital for overnight and it was much more comfortable than the gowns they have. It opens in front and back so they can easily hook you up to monitors.”

I used this gown from Amazon for my first and I’m so glad I did. I had a medically needed induction that lasted 24 hours before going in for a c section. Being comfortable (as comfortable as you can be in labor for 24 hours) in that time frame was really nice.

“I LOVED my labor gown from Kindred Bravely. The hospital gowns feel like you're wearing a paper bag. I felt so much better and more comfortable wearing my own gown.”

Best Sleeveless Labor and Delivery Gown

Kindred Bravely Ruffle Strap Labor and Delivery Gown

Light material

Convenient snaps

Attractive ruffle design

No plus-size options

Material: 95% viscose, 5% spandex

Size Range: XS - XL

Plus Size Options: No

Nursing / Skin-to-Skin Access: Yes

Why We Love It

If you’ve been running particularly hot during your pregnancy, this labor and delivery gown from Kindred Bravely may be the perfect choice. Made of a stretchy viscose-spandex blend, the fabric is super comfortable but not overly thick, so you won’t feel like the dress is suffocating you.

may be the perfect choice. Made of a stretchy viscose-spandex blend, the fabric is super comfortable but not overly thick, so you won’t feel like the dress is suffocating you.

Meanwhile, this gown has a number of helpful accessibility features, including snaps in the front (helpful for fetal monitoring or C-sections), Velcro closure on the back (for epidural access) and shoulder snaps on the ruffle straps to enable nursing or skin-to-skin. Best of all, this hospital gown looks more like a midi-length cotton dress than a medical necessity, thanks to the sweet ruffles and buttons in the front.

Community Reviews

CN84 “This is the one I got! It has the pull-away straps, openings that are necessary if an epidural is needed, etc! I love it.”

szmama “I have one from Kindred Bravely that I love. I wore it a lot postpartum at home. And it saved me when I was admitted for monitoring last week for four days.”

Best Labor and Delivery Gown for Skin-to-Skin Contact

FridaMom Delivery and Nursing Gown

Fold-down front snap panels allow for layering and easy skin-to-skin access

Fabric absorbs moisture

Material may feel heavy for some

Material : Viscose

Size Range : One-size

Plus Size Options: No

Nursing / Skin-to-Skin Access : Yes

Why We Love It

I was given the FridaMom’s Labor + Delivery and Postpartum Kit , which includes this delivery and nursing gown . At first glance, it seemed quite basic; I wasn’t sure it would be as useful as some of the more elaborate maternity gowns I’d seen. But after trying it on — and then wearing it through a full day of labor and delivery — I can say this simple gown has a lot of helpful features that make it a great labor and delivery gown.

. At first glance, it seemed quite basic; I wasn’t sure it would be as useful as some of the more elaborate maternity gowns I’d seen. But after trying it on — and then wearing it through a full day of labor and delivery — I can say this simple gown has a lot of helpful features that make it a great labor and delivery gown.

Even during pregnancy, I ran cold. Add that to the fact that I gave birth in February, and I was wearing a cardigan for the majority of my labor. The side panels made it so the doctors could easily access my chest area without me having to take off that extra layer. When my daughter finally made her way to the world, as exhausted as I was, I easily unhooked the snaps so we could have that first skin-to-skin moment. The side enclosures came in handy for nursing too: I only had to unhook a few of them, so the gown stayed connected and I didn’t have to worry about trying to find and secure two pieces of fabric. (Not a huge issue, but definitely an annoyance.)

Aside from the accessibility features, the FridaMom gown is made of viscose, a soft fabric that absorbs sweat so you feel slightly fresher than you would in other materials. I sweat a lot during labor despite being cold, so this feature was greatly appreciated. That said, some moms thought that the gown felt hot.

My only complaint was that the gown is a “one size fits all,” so I felt like I was drowning in fabric at times.

Community Reviews

“I got the Frida mom one. Didn’t end up wearing it during labor, but it was nice to have after that first shower! Super soft and cozy for that freezing ass hospital room!”

“I really like my frida mom labor and delivery gown. It’s soft and breezy and I like as little clothes on as possible but I don’t like being naked. This does the trick.”

“I will say I actually had the Frida mom labor gown and didn’t wear during labor but on the postpartum side and it was super awesome! So soft and comfy but had all the snaps and buttons for iv stuff and easy breastfeeding.”

“I had the frida gown and had purchased one other (with buttons down the front and shoulders) on amazon. I found the Frida one comfy but hot!”

“I got the Frida mom one with my first and I was much more comfy than I would have been in the itchy hospital gown, I’m sensitive.”

“I had the Frida mom one and it was amazing. Super cozy jersey material, and had snaps in all the places you need easy access to!”

“Loved my Frida gown! I might get another one to wear for labor and one to wear after!”

“I got a Frida gown off Amazon and it’s so comfy. Not at all flattering but oh well. I thought it was really nice to have in the hospital for my first. It opens in the back for an epidural and it’s just a long gown so cervical checks were easy. And the top unbuttons for breastfeeding. And it has pockets.”

Best Adjustable Labor and Delivery Gown

Baby Be Mine 3-in-1 Hospital Gown

Easy to adjust for comfort

Elastic neckline for easier skin-to-skin access

May run big and feel heavy

Material : Cotton

Size Range : S/M - L/XL

Plus Size Options: No

Nursing / Skin-to-Skin Access : Yes

Why We Love It

A lot of maternity gowns wear like oversized T-shirts, especially once you’ve delivered your baby and your belly has deflated to some degree. Though you’ll still want a roomy dress, you may also want to wear something a little more fitted after your baby is born. That’s why many What to Expect community members love the Baby Be Mine 3-in-1 hospital gown . This comfortable dress has an empire waistline that can be tightened or loosened with the pull of a thread, making it feel more like a real dress.

A lot of maternity gowns wear like oversized T-shirts, especially once you’ve delivered your baby and your belly has deflated to some degree. Though you’ll still want a roomy dress, you may also want to wear something a little more fitted after your baby is born. That’s why many What to Expect community members love the

. This comfortable dress has an empire waistline that can be tightened or loosened with the pull of a thread, making it feel more like a real dress.

The gown also has a discreet front flap to accommodate various monitors and provide easier access for any post-C-section care. When you’re ready for skin-to-skin time, you can simply pull down the elastic neckline for immediate contact. This could also work for breastfeeding, though you can just as easily unsnap the shoulders.

A few downsides worth noting: The dress tends to run big, so some moms felt like they were swimming in fabric. And although it’s made of cotton, some found the material to be on the heavy side.

Community Reviews

“I got the Baby Be Mine gown from Amazon for $30 and matching robe and swaddle and honestly it was worth it to me! I felt so cute and we took a cute pic once she was there.”

“With my first, I purchased a fluffy robe and also a labor and delivery gown (from Amazon, brand is Baby be Mine). I tried using the robe one time and immediately took it off. I LOVED the L&D gown! I was able to wear it the entire time (until I wanted to push and got too hot so just pulled it off… the snaps up the back made it super accessible… plus it snapped so no ties or breeze back there). The nurses (I had a long delivery so saw 2-3 shifts of nurses) all commented on the gown and how awesome and convenient it was and asked where I got it. It also opened in the front for monitors and also snapped above the breasts. I’m planning on using it again this time around and getting a second one so I won’t have to wear the hospital gown at all.”

“I got myself a Baby Be Mine labor/delivery/nursing nightgown with a matching robe. It’s 100% cotton and so soft and comfortable. I’m on baby #3 also, and wanted to treat myself this time around.”

Best Labor and Delivery Robe

Baby Be Mine Maternity Robe

Attractive print options

Super soft material

Can work pre-delivery and postpartum

May run big and feel heavy

Material: 95% cotton, 5% spandex

Size Range: Small/Medium - 2XL/3X

Plus Size Options: Yes

Nursing / Skin-to-Skin Access: Yes

Why We Love It

A robe is a great addition to your hospital bag: It can serve as another layer in a cold room, elevate your look for newborn photos or just make you feel a little more at home. This maternity robe from Baby Be Mine has bell sleeves, an easy-open front with a tie and comes in a number of uplifting patterns that are sure to brighten up even the dreariest of hospital rooms. Dress up your comfy evenings at home pre-baby or wear it at the hospital after you deliver your little one. As an added bonus, because of the cotton and spandex construction, it’s entirely wrinkle-resistant — perfect when you’re shoving it in a small hospital bag at the last minute.

A robe is a great addition to your hospital bag: It can serve as another layer in a cold room, elevate your look for newborn photos or just make you feel a little more at home. This

has bell sleeves, an easy-open front with a tie and comes in a number of uplifting patterns that are sure to brighten up even the dreariest of hospital rooms. Dress up your comfy evenings at home pre-baby or wear it at the hospital after you deliver your little one. As an added bonus, because of the cotton and spandex construction, it’s entirely wrinkle-resistant — perfect when you’re shoving it in a small hospital bag at the last minute.

Community Reviews

haveyoumetbaby “[My maternity robe] is from Baby Be Mine and I lived in it at the hospital and the first few weeks at home.”

FAQs Best Labor and Delivery Gowns

Do I need a labor and delivery gown?

Although the hospital will provide you with a gown to wear during labor, some women prefer to bring their own from home.

Many moms in the What to Expect community say bringing their own labor and delivery gown made them feel more comfortable and relaxed during the birthing process. Even those who wore hospital-provided gowns during labor and delivery said they were happy to have their own maternity gown to change into afterwards. Ultimately, though, this comes down to your personal preference, and you should wear whatever you feel most comfortable in.

Should you bring your own labor and delivery gown?

It’s totally up to you! When you arrive at the hospital, the nurses will give you a labor and delivery gown to put on, so it’s not necessary to bring your own unless you want to. Many moms use the hospital gown, but others say they were happy to have the option to wear their own gown instead. Hospital-provided gowns aren’t always the most comfortable (they tend to be thin and scratchy), so you might feel better wearing something you’ve selected yourself.

Does a labor gown have to open in the back?

Yes, a labor and delivery gown should open in the back so your birthing team has easier access for medical care. In the case of an epidural, for example, your doctor will need to insert the epidural initially into your back and administer medication when needed.

What is the best outfit to give birth in?

A gown is the standard labor outfit because it’s easy to put on and gives your medical team access to your cervix (to check how dilated you are and eventually help guide your baby into the world) and back (if you’re getting an epidural, for example). Some moms also like to have a cardigan, shawl or button-up to wear over their maternity gown during labor — hospitals can get cold!

Do you wear a bra under labor and delivery gown?

This, too, is personal preference. You don’t have to wear a bra under your labor and delivery gown, but some moms like the feeling of being supported and may opt to keep theirs on. (A nursing sleep bra can be a good option for labor, since it’s soft and doesn’t have hard pieces of metal or underwire that might dig into your skin.) Your medical team might ask you to remove the bra during certain tests or procedures, such as if you’re getting an epidural.

What can I wear instead of a hospital gown for labor?

If you don’t want to wear the hospital-provided gown for labor, you can wear your own labor and delivery gown. Available through big box retailers and small businesses, a labor and delivery gown will have openings in strategically-placed areas — i.e. down the back and along the shoulders — so that your birth team can monitor you and perform tests without exposing too much of your skin at once. Because of that, a nightgown is not suitable for labor and delivery, though you can pack one to wear after you give birth.

Your Next Read

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

12 Best Maternity Coats When You Can No Longer Zip Your Jacket, According to a Mom of 2 Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

8 Things Your Labor and Delivery Nurses Want You to Know About Childbirth Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

When to Buy and Start Wearing Maternity Clothes Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

A Mom's Guide to a Hospital Birth Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

7 Best Wearable Breast Pumps That Let You Pump While Doing (Literally) Anything Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Your No-Nonsense Hospital Bag Checklist: What to Pack and What to Skip Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

Labor Positions That May Make Childbirth Easier Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Butt, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

14 Gorgeous Plus-Size Maternity Photos That'll Inspire You to Document This Beautiful Stage Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Nearly Half of Moms Say They Buy Gifts for Their Labor and Delivery Team Fact Checked by Lauren LaCross, Senior Research Analyst

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window