8 Pregnancy Sex Challenges — and How to Fix Them

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnant woman and husband

From morning sickness to your growing baby bump, here are some of the most common sex problems you might encounter, along with solutions that can help make your sex life more comfortable and enjoyable.

Having sex when you're pregnant can feel like you're navigating uncharted waters (and, particularly if this is your first baby, you are!). Just know that it's par for the course for sex to change when you're expecting, and for pregnancy symptoms and that growing baby bump to throw a bit of a wrench into things.

That said, try not to let common pregnancy sex problems get you down. Here are 10 of the most common sex problems when you’re expecting and what you can do to keep intimacy feel-good and fun.

Key Takeaways

Pregnancy can shake up your sex life — and that’s normal. Nausea, fatigue, a growing bump, and body image shifts can dial desire up or down.

Comfort is key. Try new timing, switch to side-lying or rear-entry positions, focus on non-breast foreplay or alternatives like oral or masturbation, and communicate about what feels good now.

Know when to call your doctor. Light spotting after sex can be normal, but seek care for heavy bleeding, severe pain, and burning urination, or if you’ve been told you’re high-risk or need specific restrictions.

Common pregnancy sex problems and how to fix them

Morning sickness leaves you not feeling up to sex

Pregnant or not, tummy troubles make most women feel unsexy and not physically up for sex. So when morning sickness strikes, it’s no wonder sex becomes the last thing on your mind. Unlike a headache, though (which can actually improve after a quick sex session!), knocking boots often just makes nausea worse.

The solution: Wait until you feel less woozy, or schedule sexy time for a different time of day (like the evening if your nausea strikes in the morning). And take comfort in the fact that morning sickness typically tapers off by the beginning of the second trimester of pregnancy.

Pregnancy fatigue is making you too sleepy for sex

Growing a baby is exhausting — especially in the first and third trimesters. But conking out as soon as your head hits the pillow can put a damper on the romance for couples who typically have sex at night. “1st trimester was definitely hard for me to get in the mood. Morning sickness, exhaustion, etc. 2nd trimester has gotten slightly better but still hard,” says What to Expect Community mom MegLuk.

The solution: If you're not feeling too nauseous, try getting busy first thing in the morning (it’ll make for a much better day!). Or, draw the shades on a weekend afternoon, and get it on before the sun goes down. Bonus: Once your partner is in bed, you’ll have a human pillow for a post-sex nap.

Your growing baby bump is getting in the way

If you feel like your bump is preventing you from enjoying (or getting into) certain sex positions, including some favorites from before you got pregnant, you're not alone by any stretch! It's totally normal for your growing tummy to get in the way of some sex moves.

The solution: Luckily, there are plenty of pregnancy-friendly sex positions to choose from to replace your old stand-bys for the time being. Side-lying positions (front-to-front or front-to-back, otherwise known as spooning) may be the most comfortable, as they’ll keep you off your back. With penetrative sex, pregnant partner on top allows you more control over penetration, and rear entry can work well too, either with you on your knees or sitting on your partner's lap.

A negative body image makes you feel less than sexy

As your body changes throughout pregnancy, you may feel less comfortable in your own skin, which can make it tough to feel desirable or get in the mood for sex.

The solution: Chances are, your partner will find your new pregnant figure super sexy. But taking care of yourself and the power of positive thinking are key to tackling this problem. First, try to focus on how your body is changing in incredible ways to support your growing baby. Adding more pregnancy-safe exercises to your routine, like prenatal yoga , can also bolster a healthy mind-body connection. So can doing things to pamper yourself. All that can help you tune out (or at least turn down the volume on) any self-doubt you may be experiencing so that you can have more fun between the sheets.

Swelling changes how sex feels

The hormonal changes of pregnancy can increase the blood flow to your pelvic area — which can feel incredible or a bit annoying, depending on how it affects you. For some moms-to-be, engorged genitals and other labia changes increase sensitivity and lead to stronger and easier orgasms. “I find my orgasms are more intense while pregnant! My libido hasn’t been super high, but when we do have sex I ask myself why I am not doing it more,” says What to Expect Community mom Kandiceee. But they make others feel less satisfied after an orgasm, like a sneeze that got away.

The solution: If genital engorgement happens to be throwing you off your game, see it as an opportunity to switch things up. You may find it more pleasurable to replace your usual with oral sex, masturbation or a sex toy , or a different position. That said, if swelling is accompanied by pain during intercourse , that could be a sign of varicose veins in your pelvic region (they can happen in the vulva, the vagina, and the surrounding area), which you should bring up with your doctor.

Leaky or tender breasts during foreplay is uncomfortable

Some women begin to produce pre-milk called colostrum in response to stimulation, especially during the third trimester. So when second base gets slippery, it’s nothing to worry about — unless it makes you uncomfortable. Similarly, larger, engorged early-pregnancy breasts may feel tender or painful when they're touched.

The solution: If you’re concerned about colostrum getting in the way or if tenderness is creating foreplay trouble, ask your partner to focus on other parts of your body. As for the latter issue, take heart that the sensitivity tends to subside by month 4. Until then, suggest your partner enjoy looking without touching — and build anticipation for a more hands-on approach later. “Communication is key at this stage when nothing is normal. Talk to him and let him know what you’re feeling,” recommends What to Expect Community mom ARJones84.

You're worried about light bleeding after sex

A bit of spotting following intercourse might make you hesitant to get busy the next time you’re between the sheets.

The solution: When you’re pregnant, your uterus is engorged with additional blood vessels, your whole pelvic region is experiencing increased blood flow, and your cervix is more ripe (read: sensitive, even more so toward the end of your pregnancy) — all of which can make a little bleeding par for the course. As long as the spotting is light, it’s usually nothing to worry about — though it’s still worth mentioning to your practitioner.

Your fluctuating sex drive is throwing you for a loop

You could be feeling like you just can’t get enough one minute, and the next, you want nothing to do with having sex. Many women experience sex drive changes during pregnancy , but you may wonder if what you’re experiencing at any given moment is okay — or if it's an indication that something's wrong.

The solution: Rest assured that these ups and downs in your sex drive are completely normal. Just as no two pregnancies are exactly the same, there isn’t a boilerplate way that pregnancy will affect your libido either. Some women experience a higher sex drive thanks to hormonal shifts. Interest can either pick up or wane during the second trimester. Sometimes, a boost is attributed to the fact that early pregnancy symptoms — like morning sickness! — have subsided, and there’s more energy to put into your sex life. Extra blood flow to the labia, clitoris, and vagina can make it easier to climax than ever before — and have orgasms that are stronger and longer-lasting, too. But the same hormones that can make for a heightened sex drive can also put the kibosh on it and leave you feeling less in the mood than usual.

And as delivery nears, it’s common for libido to wane again, sometimes even more than in the first trimester, given challenges that are both physical (your growing bump, aches, and general discomfort) and mental (anticipation of the big event).

From nausea to new aches, the What to Expect app has the scoop on what’s normal and what to do next, week-by-week.

When to talk to your doctor about pregnancy sex problems

It’s normal to experience any or all of the above roadblocks. At every turn, it’s quite possible to encounter an unexpected symptom — and if you're concerned or have questions, run it by your practitioner.

For the majority of couples, sex is safe throughout the duration of pregnancy. But it’s best to speak to your practitioner to nail down the exact details of what's okay for you in terms of sex and what’s not, and whether any restrictions are temporary or apply for the entire pregnancy.

However, if you experience any of the symptoms that serve as red flags throughout pregnancy — which may or may not be related to sex — get in touch with your practitioner right away. That includes heavy bleeding, bleeding with cramps, severe abdominal pain, and painful or burning urination.

Your OB/GYN may ask you to put the brakes on sex at certain times or even for the full nine months if your pregnancy is considered high-risk. If that's the case, it's possible that you may be allowed to have intercourse without orgasm, foreplay without penetration, or penetration only if a condom is used.

Remember that no matter what kind of pregnancy sex problems you encounter, you should decide whether or not you’re ultimately comfortable getting intimate. If you don’t feel like getting busy, consider cuddling, kissing and touching, all of which can foster intimacy too.