8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name

Minor copy updates.

mom choosing baby name

Need baby name help? Get advice on choosing a name for your baby-to-be from members of the What to Expect community.

Some parents have their baby's name picked out before their child is even conceived, while others wait until after their baby is born (and about to be discharged from the hospital!).

If you're agonizing over all the choices out there and need baby name help, you're far from alone. Below, tips on choosing a baby name for your little one from What to Expect parents who have been there.

Key Takeaways

Think about sound, meaning, and practicality when naming your baby. Consider how the name flows, possible nicknames, initials, and the significance or cultural/ethnic meaning behind it.

Balance tradition and originality: You might choose to honor family names or traditions, but don’t shy away from uncommon or unique choices if you prefer; also check popularity if originality matters to you.

Let the baby inspire their name if needed: Some parents wait until birth to see which name truly fits their child, allowing their little one’s personality to guide the final choice.

1. Make it sing

Consider the cadence, and be careful about combinations that could turn your child's name into a joke.

2. Consider nicknames

Make sure you're happy with both the long and short versions of your child's name (e.g. Nate for Nathaniel, Katie for Katherine) because he or she may pick up the nickname whether you like it or not.

"You can’t always control how other people will give a nickname, but you can always use his full name and introduce him that way in hopes that people will follow suit," says What to Expect Community member mergirl2325.

3. Look at initials

If you like the way C.J. sounds, Carl Joseph might be a good combo for your baby-boy-to-be. Or, you might choose to avoid certain initial combinations that you don't love as much.

"My daughter’s initials are EMW… but middle names aren’t really used much so really it’s EW. We thought about it and figured we liked the name too much," says What to Expect user kirstynwoah. "And if kids want to tease her they will find a way even if her initials were different."

4. Honor tradition

You might get creative with the way you use family names and contemplate combining them: his mom is Ann, yours is Mary — welcome little Ann Marie! Use your mother's maiden name, the name of a favorite relative, or a passed-down family name as either a middle or first name.

"We’re looking to combine the names 'Marian' and 'Martha' into a girl’s name and so far we’ve come up with Maren," says What to Expect user CeeJay2012.

5. Don't be afraid to try something new

There's nothing wrong with an uncommon name !

6. Consider what's popular now

Often, a parent hears a name he or she likes — the lead character from a TV show or the heroine of a novel — only to discover that, er, everyone else likes that name, too. If originality is important to you, check out the top girl names and top boy names to see if your choice shows up (and then choose something else!).

7. Analyze the meaning

Parents often choose a baby name by picking one with a special meaning or association. For example, you may feel so-so about "Bryan" until you learn it means strength and honor. Another source of inspiration is the ethnicity and/or its historical associations (a president, famous artist or explorer).

"We named our son Jayden for the meaning behind it — it's a Hebrew name meaning: God has answered your prayers," says What to Expect user chachymom.

8. See what fits

If all else fails, look to your new family member for help. Parents-to-be who can't decide on a name might simply want to wait until their baby is born.

"With [son] Aidan I went through three major phases," says What to Expect member Gidgetgirl. "First he was Caleb. Then it was Joshua. On the way to the hospital I said 'I really like Aidan' and we went with it after he was born. It just fit."

Still debating the perfect baby name? Open the What to Expect app for the top 1,000 names — plus tips for naming your baby from parents who have been there too.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.