8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler

pregnant mom with toddler

Juggling a toddler and a pregnancy can be tough. Here’s how to make things easy — times two.

If you’re looking forward to the arrival of baby number two, this second pregnancy will likely be both similar and different from your first. But here’s one way it will definitely be very different: This time around, you’ve already got a little one demanding your attention.

And that means you’re sure to face a few more challenges, no matter what pregnancy symptoms you encounter. While you once had plenty of time to rest and prep for your baby’s arrival, now your hands are definitely full (and possibly sticky). Here’s what to keep in mind to make the most of being pregnant with a tot in tow.

Enlist help taking care of your toddler

Ask your partner (or Grandma if she lives nearby) to take your little one out for ice cream or a visit to the park. While they’re away, spend some quiet time resting, shopping online for a double stroller or going through old baby clothes. And don’t be shy about asking for little favors, either. Have a friend return your library books or pick up groceries.

Don’t forget to look for any programs your child’s school or preschool offers, or babysitting services at your gym (exercise — like a prenatal yoga class — can actually make you feel less tired). Or ask a teenage neighbor if she’d work as a helper a day or two a week.

Don’t beat yourself up

So the rugs aren’t vacuumed every day and the clean laundry stays in the basket longer than you like. No one is going to notice but you. The priority should be your health and wellness and the needs of your growing family. Find shortcuts for the rest.

Encourage your toddler to be independent

Little ones can be clingy , especially when they’re worried mommy might not have time for them soon. But if you ask him to help you with small chores, he might feel proud and confident to do them while you check things off your to-do list. Things like sorting silverware or putting away laundry are tasks even a preschooler can accomplish. If possible, dedicate a childproof area where your child can safely play while you relax (or simply dash to the bathroom).

Nap when possible during pregnancy

When you find yourself dragging in your first (or second, or third) trimester, these little catnaps are key. Sneak them in while your toddler naps or is off at preschool and don’t feel guilty about them. By fighting fatigue now, you’ll have more energy later to take on that mommy-and-me class or finish that last bit of work for the day.

Limit time spent running around

Packing up the diaper bag, struggling to strap your toddler in the car seat (where’s the sippy cup?) and heading out just to run a few errands you can do from home is a waste of time and energy.

Try to do as many errands as possible online, from ordering groceries for delivery to using mobile banking. Things like diaper subscription services and online drugstores that let you reorder from your list (tear-free shampoo? check) make things quick and easy.

Tackle chores in the evening

Yes, you’re exhausted by this point, but with your little one in bed you can take on some non-taxing tasks, like preparing breakfast for the next morning (or lunch if your child’s in school), picking out tomorrow's outfit or whatever else you can get out of the way before tomorrow, when your attention will otherwise be divided.

Play with your toddler in ways you can manage

Puzzles, board games, kid-friendly video games, coloring, a tea party with the stuffed animal collection — engaging with your toddler from the comfort of the couch or on the floor will save your feet, your back and your sanity. Suggest you play hospital and you’re the patient lying on the couch with your feet propped on a pillow. Or break out a few movies you can watch together.