8 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a raspberry.

Though you’re probably not showing yet, your clothes may be getting a bit tight and you certainly may feel pregnant if you’re among the 75% of women who experience morning sickness .

At 8 weeks pregnant, your baby is growing at a rate of a millimeter a day and the lips, nose, and eyelids are forming.

Your Baby at Week 8

At a Glance

Here's looking at you!

Baby blue? Sea green? Coffee brown? You won’t see your baby’s eyes for a while, but this week the retinas have begun to form.

Blue or pink?

Your baby-to-be’s boy or girl parts are beginning to develop, but it’s still too soon for your doctor to detect which sex your baby will be.

All systems go

By the end of the week, all the essential organs and body systems have begun to develop.

8 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 8 weeks pregnant, you're in month 2 of your pregnancy. Only 7 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 8 weeks?

Your baby is growing at an amazing rate. How's she measuring up this week? At a length of about half to three-quarters of an inch right now, your little one has graduated from blueberry-sized to raspberry-sized.

Baby's growing fast

Meanwhile, how big baby is has become a bit harder to estimate. Though growth occurs at about the rate of a millimeter a day, it isn't necessarily just in height. Spurts can happen in the arms, legs, back, and other parts of that tiny body, meaning big changes are coming every which way in the next few months. You can follow your baby's growth in the What to Expect app !

You can follow your baby's growth in the What to Expect app !

Baby's got lips, a nose and eyelids

What else is changing at 8 weeks pregnant? A close-up view of your little embryo would reveal your baby is looking a lot less reptilian and a lot more baby-like.

Even though baby has webbed hands and feet, teeny fingers and toes are just starting to differentiate and the tail is almost gone. You'd see an upper lip forming, the protruding tip of that cute button nose, and tiny, very thin eyelids.

Baby is on the move!

All this growing is exciting for your baby too. How do you know? Even though you can't yet feel it, baby's tiny trunk and limb buds are now twitching and making spontaneous movements.

Your baby's digs are getting bigger too. Amniotic fluid volume is increasing and your womb is expanding to accommodate its growing tenant.

Your Body at Week 8

Morning sickness

While your babe isn't exactly causing you to show yet, chances are your clothes are feeling a little tight around the tummy. That's because your uterus, usually the size of a fist, has grown to the size of a large grapefruit by week 8 of pregnancy.

Admittedly, that's still pretty small. But while it's unlikely you look pregnant from the outside, you almost certainly feel pregnant on the inside, especially when those insides threaten to come out all day long.

Yes, it's that notorious pregnancy rite of passage: morning sickness — though the name can be misleading. If you're among the estimated 75% of pregnant women who have morning sickness, you know all too well that it may start in the morning — but it can linger all day and all night.

No one knows for sure what causes that queasy feeling — and does it really matter when you're about to toss your cookies for the third time today? — though theories abound. It could be because of the increased levels of hCG and estrogen circulating in your body or the relaxation of the muscles in the digestive tract, making digestion less efficient. It could also be due to rising progesterone levels or the rapid stretching of the uterine muscles.

Whatever the cause, take heart — your baby feels just fine, even while you're hugging the bowl. Try to eat often but only a little at a time, which should also help your body battle another symptom that may be coming your way soon: heartburn.

If you're really struggling with morning sickness — say, you've lost at least 5 pounds or can't keep anything down for more than eight hours — ask your doctor whether you should take a pregnancy anti-nausea drug like Zofran or Diclegis .

The good news, however, is that nausea and vomiting usually subside between weeks 12 and 14, so hang in there — only four to six more weeks until you get some relief!

Eating fruit during pregnancy

Fruit is always your friend — but consider it your best friend while you're expecting. Not only does nature's sweetest bounty contain essential vitamins and other nutrients that are good for you and your baby, but it plays a starring role in keeping you regular — pass the prunes, please!

More sweet news: The right fruit can stand in for just about any vegetable you're shunning when pregnancy aversions and nausea may be keeping you from bellying up to the salad bar. For instance, opt for dried apricots when you can't stomach broccoli.

A good rule when it comes to fruits and veggies: Brighter colors (especially on the inside) spell better nutrition. Select your produce by the color of its "inner" rainbow and you'll find nutrients worth their weight in gold.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 8

Fatigue

What’s making you so tired these days? Try everything! Pregnancy is hard work, and you should ask for help — from your partner, your family, and your friends. Having someone lend a hand means you might have enough energy to go out for a walk and then go to bed!

Nausea and vomiting

Those queasy feelings may still be sticking around this week. Try eating foods with ginger, like ginger cookies, real ginger ale, or ginger candies. Ginger has been shown to help relieve nausea and vomiting during pregnancy. You might also try taking your prenatal vitamin during dinner rather than on an empty stomach. The chewable kind could make you feel less queasy.

Bloating and gas

Along with bloating and constipation comes another common scourge of pregnancy: flatulence. The aptly named hormone relaxin, along with progesterone, is working to relax the muscles in your body, including those in your gastrointestinal tract. This causes food to move along more slowly, which leads to indigestion and gassiness. What can you do about it (except apologize to those around you)? Try to relax when you eat — tension can cause you to swallow air along with your food and form gas pockets in your stomach.

Constipation

Fiber can be your BFF in the fight against those sluggish intestines, so add some fiber to every meal. But pace yourself if you’re not used to a fiber-rich diet or you’ll find yourself gassier than ever before. For instance, replace that white rice with brown and serve it along with your roasted chicken and veggies — but don’t overload your system with a dish of brown rice, tofu, and broccoli.

Food cravings and aversions

Craving weird substances such as clay or laundry starch? Call your practitioner. These types of cravings are called pica and could be a sign of a nutritional deficiency, especially of iron.

Increased vaginal discharge

It's yet another symptom coming to you courtesy of estrogen — the increase in leukorrhea, a thin, milky vaginal discharge. When estrogen boosts blood flow to the pelvic area, it stimulates the body’s mucus membranes. Leukorrhea protects the birth canal from infection by maintaining a healthy balance of bacteria.

Tips for You This Week

Get a handle on headaches

Along with your expanding belly may come new aches and pains above the neck. Your blood volume will increase by just under 50%, which — along with those pregnancy hormones — may spur headaches .

Along with your expanding belly may come new aches and pains above the neck. Your blood volume will increase by just under 50%, which — along with those pregnancy hormones — may spur

Got one? Talk to your doctor about trading aspirin, ibuprofen, and naproxen for baby-safe alternatives like acetaminophen.

Start a baby registry (or two)

It's not too soon to start thinking about what you'll need to buy before baby's arrival. Baby registry must-haves range from big-ticket items (like the crib and stroller) to everyday essentials (think: diapers, wipes, and burp cloths).

It's not too soon to start thinking about what you'll need to buy before baby's arrival.

range from big-ticket items (like the crib and stroller) to everyday essentials (think: diapers, wipes, and burp cloths).

If you'd prefer to let us do the research about where to register and what should go on your baby registry , you can use What to Expect's baby registry tool to get customized recommendations.

Slather on the SPF

Out, out, damned spot! For many women, hormone surges in pregnancy can cause melasma , or dark spots on the skin and face, or at the very least, make the skin more sensitive .

Out, out, damned spot! For many women, hormone surges in pregnancy can cause

That means your skin, freckles, and moles may look darker, and there's probably a dark line down the center of your abdomen (the linea nigra ). Your areolas could be a deeper shade too.

). Your areolas could be a deeper shade too.

Don’t worry, you’re not alone — this condition affects 50 to 75% of expectant mothers. You may be able to prevent melasma from getting worse, however, by wearing a wide-brimmed hat and sunscreen with SPF 30 or higher when you’re outside, since sunlight makes the condition more pronounced.

Bleeding after sex? Don’t panic

During pregnancy, your cervix becomes tender in preparation for childbirth. Those changes could cause you to feel extra sensitive during sex, leading to light bleeding .

During pregnancy, your cervix becomes tender in preparation for childbirth. Those changes could cause you to feel extra sensitive during sex, leading to

While spotting — even if it’s not after sex — is usually normal this early on in your pregnancy, it’s smart to check in with your doctor about it, even if it’s only for extra reassurance.

Remember too that vaginal bleeding early in the first trimester can be a sign of implantation .

Unless your doctor tells you that intercourse is unsafe , keep it up (for now). Regular sex can help lower your stress levels and boost your relationship with your partner.

Skip the hot tubs

You don’t have to switch to cold showers, but it’s smart to skip the hot tubs and saunas until after you deliver.

Anything that raises your core body temperature to over 101 degrees Fahrenheit and keeps it there for a while could be harmful to your developing baby, especially during the early months of pregnancy.

If you can’t resist a soak, make sure the temperature is set at around 97 to 98 degrees and try to limit your time in the tub to less than 10 minutes.

If you’ve already been in a hot tub or sauna, don’t stress. Most women get out before their body temperature reaches the uncomfortable level of 101 degrees, so it’s likely you did too.

Wondering if you’re having a boy or a girl? You’ll have to wait until the 20-week ultrasound to be certain, but there’s no harm in guessing baby’s sex with the Chinese gender predictor .

Wondering if you’re having a boy or a girl? You’ll have to wait until the

The chart takes the mother’s birth date and the estimated date of conception or the baby’s due date and converts the numbers into the mom’s lunar age during pregnancy and the lunar date of conception. The result: a prediction about whether you’ll be having a boy or a girl.

and converts the numbers into the mom’s lunar age during pregnancy and the lunar date of conception. The result: a prediction about whether you’ll be having a boy or a girl.

Sure, there’s no real evidence to show that Chinese gender calendars actually work, but they can certainly be entertaining!

Soothe an upset stomach

Need to quell a queasy stomach ? Try noshing on a snack that's rich in protein and complex carbs, like whole wheat crackers and cheese or some granola and yogurt. Or skip the solids and sip on soup or a smoothie.

that's rich in protein and complex carbs, like whole wheat crackers and cheese or some granola and yogurt. Or skip the solids and sip on soup or a smoothie.

Make sure you get eight to 10 glasses of fluids from all sources a day, especially if vomiting is leaving you dehydrated. Ginger can also be good for what ails you. Use it in cooking — like in ginger-carrot soup or ginger muffins — infuse your tea with it, nibble on some ginger biscuits, nosh on some crystallized ginger, or suck on some ginger candy.

can also be good for what ails you. Use it in cooking — like in ginger-carrot soup or ginger muffins — infuse your tea with it, nibble on some ginger biscuits, nosh on some crystallized ginger, or suck on some ginger candy.

And if your symptoms are particularly rough, ask your practitioner about taking a vitamin B6 supplement or switching your prenatal vitamin from one loaded with iron to one higher in B6.