9 Best Swim Diapers to Keep Your Baby’s Poop Out of the Pool

best swim diapers july 2023

Quick Summary

The best reusable swim diaper is the Green Sprouts Eco Snap Swim Diaper, while the best disposable swim diaper is Huggies’ Little Swimmers Disposable Swim Pants. These two options have been proven to contain even the biggest blowouts so baby can keep splashing.

Nothing ruins a pool day faster than a sudden evacuation — especially if it was triggered by your baby who pooped. (Hey, accidents happen!) But you don’t have to avoid public watering holes or hold off on swimming lessons until your child is potty trained . You just need one of the best swim diapers.

Designed to contain a baby’s fecal matter — not pee — swim diapers fit like regular diapers but look and feel like a bathing suit. Most importantly, they won’t swell after coming in contact with water. Most pools require young children to wear swim diapers because they can help contain bowel movements, which pose a risk to other swimmers. So lest you want to recreate the doodie scene from Caddyshack , you should invest in some swim diapers ASAP.

How I Chose the Best Swim Diapers

I spoke to What to Expect editors to learn which brands their children have worn without worry. I also combed through the community boards, where plenty of pool- and beach-going parents shared their favorites. Based on their feedback, I weeded out options that didn’t fit the following criteria:

Adjustable, with the exception of pull-up disposable diapers

Available in a wide range of sizes

Machine-washable, in the case of reusable diapers

But bear in mind that the below list is not fail-proof. You’ll want to check on the state of your little one’s swim diapers frequently (an hour or so is ideal!).

Best Reusable Swim Diaper

Green Sprouts Reusable Absorbent Baby Swim Diapers

Range of cute designs

Snaps at the side

Runs small

Material : Recycled polyester

Type : Reusable

Size : 6M—5T

Count : 1

Why We Love It

An overwhelming majority of parents in the What to Expect community swear by Green Sprouts swim diapers (formerly i play ). The rebranding only improves upon the original — thin enough to wear under a swimsuit without the extra bulk and side snaps for easy changes. Still available in a whole rainbow of shades and patterns, these swim diapers include three different layers of material: A wicking liner that helps pull moisture away from baby’s skin, a second absorbent layer that keeps messes in, and a third outer waterproof layer to help prevent messes from leaking out. The gussets, a new feature on this year’s diapers, add extra leak protection. Many caregivers appreciate the triple-layer design to mitigate accidents while maintaining a reasonable price point. (It’s also machine washable, and can be put in the dryer on low.)

An overwhelming majority of parents in the What to Expect community swear by Green Sprouts swim diapers (formerly i play ). The rebranding only improves upon the original — thin enough to wear under a swimsuit without the extra bulk and side snaps for easy changes. Still available in a whole rainbow of shades and patterns, these swim diapers include three different layers of material: A wicking liner that helps pull moisture away from baby’s skin, a second absorbent layer that keeps messes in, and a third outer waterproof layer to help prevent messes from leaking out.

What really stands out, however, is the snap design, with three on one side of the diaper. This makes taking them off after an accident much easier than pulling the whole thing down and potentially making a mess. The snaps also allow for quick diaper checks.

Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director at What to Expect, has used this swim diaper with her daughter, Olivia. “It was easy to put on because it snaps only on one side,” she says. “Olivia was in a wriggly stage so you have to hold her down to get things on, it made it easier that it was just one side and not both sides. Would use again!"

Another bonus: the fabric is UPF 50+, which helps block out harmful UV rays from the sun — crucial for protecting your baby’s sensitive skin. One important thing to note before buying is that some parents said these diapers run small and that they had to size up for their child, especially for bigger babies.

Community Reviews

For swim diapers, we have reusable ones by Green Sprout. They have pull up style or ones that snap at the hip.

We use Green Sprouts reusable and they work really well! My daughter has been in them since she was 3 months and we have never had an issue. They make them for toddlers and the sizing is pretty accurate. I prefer them to the disposable bc they have more fanny coverage for my girl.

"We use iPlay reusable swim diapers most of the time. I like them a lot better than the disposables, which always feel slimy when they're wet."

"We use iPlay, too, and really like them…they fit LO much better and feel comfier than disposables."

"iplay all the way!!! So easy, way comfy and a great value."

"First, we’ve got amazing reusable swim diapers for our 2.5 year old daughter that have held up through loose stool several times: I Play (ruffle butt as I call them) from Target."

"I work at a swim school and we require iPlay reusable swim diapers for babies/children not 100% potty trained. We don’t allow disposable as they just don’t work as well. The iPlays work great and you just toss them in the wash after being worn (but we recommend you air dry them!)."

"iPlay makes a great reusable swim diaper with snaps on the side so it's easier to get off if they poop in it. I just keep a regular diaper on her until right before we head in the water."

“We use the reusable ones! I believe the brand is green sprouts.”

“I love that these don’t get heavy like a disposable diaper. We don’t use floaties with our LO, so perhaps we notice it more than usual, but it really helps as she’s learning to swim not to feel the extra weight of a soaked diaper."

Best Disposable Swim Diapers

Huggies Little Swimmers Disposable Swim Pants

Includes easy re-closable sides

Flexible material

May run small

Material : N/A

Type : Disposable

Sizes : 3 (16-28 lbs), 4 (27-37 lbs) or 5-6 (37+ lbs)

Count : 40

Why We Love It

Huggies’ Little Swimmer Disposable Swim Pants feature double leak-guards that wrap around your baby’s legs to help contain messes. But the material is stretchy so it won’t squeeze their legs or waist. Many parents appreciated the easy-to-open sides that allow you to make a quick change in case of an emergency, adjust the fit or check that your baby hasn’t gone potty. Others noted that the side tabs were easier to maneuver than pull-up diapers when cleaning up after an accident in the pool.

Such was the case for Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor, who used the Huggies swim diapers with her daughter. “They are easy to use, slide right on — and pull off — and seemed to do the job very well, which is the most important part,” she says. “My daughter liked them because they weren't bulky and felt just like a normal pull-up so there was no fussing about putting them on.”

For Stephanie Porter, Creative Director at What to Expect, the Huggies Little Swimmers provided total convenience. “We liked how similar they were to the regular diapers,” she says. “It was also nice for travel because we could buy them when we got to where we were going instead of having another thing to pack.”

Community Reviews

"I prefer the Huggies, because they have tabs on the sides to undo them."

"We’ve only tried the Huggies Little Swimmers so I can't compare but we loved the huggies! LO wears size 3 diapers is just over 18 pounds and we went with size small."

"We used the huggies swim diapers small size when my LO was ~ 4 months. I was worried that they were too big on her (definitely loose). But once I put on her teeny tiny bathing suit, that pinched the diaper in place just fine. Definitely take spares because your LO will inevitably decide to poop while wearing it."

"Huggies little swimmers for sure! Love them. The smallest size says it starts at like 16 pounds but we used them on lo at 10 pounds and they worked fine! Happy swimming."

"My baby boy is in the 90th percentile and does fine in Huggies Lil Swimmers. I originally bought him a reusable swim diaper but like many other things, it left red marks on his chunky legs."

Best Adjustable Swim Diaper

Beau and Belle Littles Nageuret Reusable Swim Diaper

Cute designs

Soft material

Adjustable sizes

Runs small

Material : 100 percent PUL polyester and polyester mesh

Type : Reusable

Size : One size (fits 6-35 lbs, waist 7.75-19.5 inches, legs 5.5-10 inches)

Count : 1

Why We Love It

The Nageuret Reusable Swim Diaper from Beau & Belle Littles can be adjusted to fit babies from 6 to 35 pounds. This means that you can buy just one swim diaper (or a couple to have on hand!) and adjust it as needed to properly fit your baby for years. The Nageuret diaper is also made of PUL polyester material, a special soft, waterproof fabric that’s easy to clean in the washing machine. Each diaper also has comfortable elastic waist and leg openings that will contain messes without chafing baby's delicate skin. If your little one has an accident in the diaper, all you have to do is knock solids in the toilet and toss the diaper in the washing machine and dryer. Also nice: The patterns are super cute, so baby can wear the diaper with a rash guard and still look adorable.

Esembly’s waterproof outer covers — part of a reusable cloth diaper system — also deserves an honorable mention as a highly recommended adjustable option by the What to Expect community . “Esembly is definitely fool-proof, which I love. Never had any leaks,” one mom shares. They’re also widely available at Amazon and Target for $18 and sold in two sizes (for those between 7 and 17 pounds or 18 and 35 pounds) that can be tightened or loosened thanks to the side snap-lock mechanisms.

Community Reviews

“We use these, as our swim school requires reusable!”

"Can't recommend enough. If the baby poops, just unbutton it so you don't have to slide it down their legs and dump it in the toilet. Then I rinse it out with water and it's good to go."

"I have this one for my baby. She’s 3mo but still newborn size and it fits great. It has a bunch of snaps so it goes from size nb-5. Plus it’s a great price- what you would pay for one pack of regular swim diapers."

Best Swim Diaper for Toddlers

Hudson Baby Toddler Swim Diapers

Largest size offering

Slim fit

UPF 50+ sun protection

Sold in pairs

No side snaps or adjustable features

Material: Nylon

Type: Reusable

Size: 0-6M, 6-12M, 12-18M, 3T, 4T, 5T

Count: 2

Why We Love It

For toddlers who have yet to perfect potty training , there aren’t many options of swim diapers large enough to fit the 3-and-older crowd. Enter: Hudson Baby . Sold at Target in 2-packs, sizes are available in 3T, 4T and 5T. The waterproof nylon material is machine-washable and offers a slim fit more similar to underwear. The cute, nautical-inspired patterns are also a big perk ( sharks , turtles, sea horses, flamingoes!), and while totally fine to wear on their own, parents love that these fit comfortably underneath trunks without noticeable bulk.

, there aren’t many options of swim diapers large enough to fit the 3-and-older crowd. Enter:

. Sold at Target in 2-packs, sizes are available in 3T, 4T and 5T. The waterproof nylon material is machine-washable and offers a slim fit more similar to underwear. The cute, nautical-inspired patterns are also a big perk (

, turtles, sea horses, flamingoes!), and while totally fine to wear on their own, parents love that these fit comfortably underneath trunks without noticeable bulk.

Community Reviews

natsisam "My favorite brand is Thirsties — their size 2 swim diaper is for kids 18-40 lbs, so it’ll last my LO for at least two summers!"

Most Comfortable Swim Diaper

Charlie Banana Reusable Swim Diaper Snaps

Lyocell material sustainably sourced

Snaps on both sides

Not adjustable

Material : Polyester, polyurethane, lyocell

Type : Reusable

Size : XS (under 14 lbs), S (12-20 lbs), M (16-28 lbs), L (22-34 lbs)

Count : 1

Why We Love It

Charlie Banana swim diapers are made with a lyocell fabric that’s known for being incredibly soft and smooth, on top of stretchy and absorbent, making it a super comfortable pick for baby. Parents appreciate that the snaps on both sides of the diaper make it easy to take off when there’s a mess to clean up. And, it holds in number two just as well as any other option thanks to its snug back and leg elastics. Eco-minded parents might also appreciate that lyocell fabric in the lining is made with sustainably-sourced wood pulp, making it an even more environmentally-friendly option than other reusable swim diapers on the market.

The downside? This diaper is not adjustable, meaning that this may only last you one summer depending on how fast your kiddo grows.

Community Reviews

"We use Charlie Banana reusable swim diapers. Super cute patterns that could be worn without a cover over them, or you can get plain white if it’s going to be covered anyway."

We use reusable swim diapers the Charlie banana brand is cute but all brands work the same essentially. I recommend getting some with snaps at least on one side as they are harder to pull down when wet.

I bought a reusable swim diaper from Charlie banana- really cute stuff! I think I also got a couple from the honest company. But I do prefer the Charlie banana brand

Best Wetsuit with Swim Diaper

Splash About Happy Nappy Wetsuit

2-in-1 swimsuit design

Wide range of sizes

Helps baby maintain their core temperature

Often recommended by swim schools

Fun patterns and colors

Cannot be put in the dryer

Material: Neoprene

Type: Reusable

Size: 0-4M, 3-8M, 6-14M, 12-24M,

Count: 1

Why We Love It

A big concern of parents — aside from accidents in the pool or ocean! — is sensitive skin. Rashes and irritation from chlorine in the pool or salt and sand at the beach can also shorten the length of time you spend posted-up by the water. For a one-and-done solution, Splash About built its popular swim diaper system into a wet suit (just don’t forget the Nappy Wrap liner !).

A big concern of parents — aside from accidents in the pool or ocean! — is sensitive skin. Rashes and irritation from chlorine in the pool or salt and sand at the beach can also shorten the length of time you spend posted-up by the water. For a one-and-done solution, Splash About built its

A bit pricier in comparison ($35 versus $17), this 2-in-1 swimsuit replaces the need to deal with three-plus layers when it comes time to change. The neoprene material is rated UPF 50+, keeping your little one’s entire core covered and warm while still preventing leaks. Parents love the snug fit at the thigh and elastic waistband that isn’t as tricky to remove as you may think. Plus, the top attached layer can be zippered off.

Community Reviews

“We’ve used happy nappy swim diapers from the beginning and love them. We have had accidents and they stay completely contained to the diaper (poop, not pee).“

“you can get a. Happy nappy that is just a nappy or you can get a suit that has the happy nappy part built in. We have it built into a short arm/leg suit for our baby swim classes so for hols in the summer I wanted a separate nappy so I bought a reusable one on Amazon!”

“We use happy nappy swim duos (reusable) because that’s what our swim school requires”

Best Trunk-Style Swim Diaper

Green Sprouts Classic Trunks with Built-In Reusable Absorbent Swim Diaper

UPF 50+ protection

Bathing suit and swim diaper in one

Easy to pull on

May run long for some babies

Material : Polyester

Type : Reusable

Size : 6M—4T

Count : 1

Why We Love It

If you want your little one’s swim diaper to look less like a diaper and more like swimwear, you’ll love these lightweight Green Sprouts trunks (formerly i play). Beneath each adorable pattern is a convenient built-in, reusable swim diaper that will help contain any accidents. And just like the i play diaper already featured, the swim diaper inside these trunks helps wick away moisture and keeps messes securely inside. It also has UPF 50+ sun protection built-in and is machine washable.

Community Reviews

nrmahaney88 I work at a swim school and we require iPlay reusable swim diapers for babies/children not 100% potty trained… The iPlays work great and you just toss them in the wash after being worn (but we recommend you air dry them!). You can get them in diapers and swimsuits/trunks and they just came out in their new prints... SO CUTE!”

WitchoftheWaste I use the iPlay brand. They sell reusable swim diapers and suits with diapers built in. My toddler had to use them for swim class and I really like them. They're made really well.

Best Splurge-Worthy Disposable Diaper

Coterie The Swimsuit

Breathable and ultra-soft

No-swell core

Cute illustrations (in skin-safe ink!)

Pricey

Pull-up design

Materials: Cellulose fiber

Type: Disposable

Sizes: S (14-26 lbs), M (20-34 lbs), L (30-40 lbs)

Count: 20, 18, 17

Why We Love It

If you’re of the mindset that swim diapers are plastic-y and scratchy, Coterie may be a welcome reprieve for rash-prone little ones. The premium brand has been described by the What to Expect community as the softest, most absorbent diaper out there (perfect for overnight protection) and totally “worth the hype.” So it’s no surprise that its swim diapers are just as great. The original’s hypoallergenic design has been re-imagined as a water-resistant disposable, featuring the same plant-based material (no fragrance, lotions or other additives), but reinforced with leak-guard leg cuffs and interior side barriers for a secure fit. While they certainly cost a pretty penny, one mom shares they held up for five-plus hours at the beach, and I can’t think of a better seal of approval than that.

If you’re of the mindset that swim diapers are plastic-y and scratchy, Coterie may be a welcome reprieve for rash-prone little ones. The premium brand has been described by the What to Expect community as the softest, most absorbent diaper out there (perfect for

are just as great. The original’s hypoallergenic design has been re-imagined as a water-resistant disposable, featuring the same plant-based material (no fragrance, lotions or other additives), but reinforced with leak-guard leg cuffs and interior side barriers for a secure fit. While they certainly cost a pretty penny, one mom shares they held up for five-plus hours at the beach, and I can’t think of a better seal of approval than that.

Best Budget-Friendly Reusable Diaper

ALVABABY Swim Diapers

Unbeatable value

Elastic waist and legs that are snug but not too tight

10-plus color combos

Can be combined with cloth inserts for play on land

Adjustable height and waist width (3x3 lower snaps and 6x2 upper snaps)

Hang dry

Materials: Polyester outer and inner mesh

Type: Disposable

Sizes: Small, Large

Count: 3

Why We Love It

Spoiler: our favorite top-rated, pocket-style cloth diaper also comes in a waterproof, moisture-wicking version . And it’s just as affordable. Scoop up this three-pack of reusable swimmers for just $15, and you’ll always have a clean back-up at the ready. The outer shell is almost entirely covered in easy-to-use snaps that can accommodate babies as they grow anywhere from a mere 6 pounds to over 30 pounds (or roughly 0 to 2 years). Between the price point and that level of adjustability, further extending the usability, this trio is a no-brainer. But parents also appreciate the thick, durable material and some even swear these hold liquids as well as solids.

. And it’s just as affordable. Scoop up this three-pack of reusable swimmers for just $15, and you’ll always have a clean back-up at the ready. The outer shell is almost entirely covered in easy-to-use snaps that can accommodate babies as they grow anywhere from a mere 6 pounds to over 30 pounds (or roughly 0 to 2 years). Between the price point and that level of adjustability, further extending the usability, this trio is a no-brainer. But parents also appreciate the thick, durable material and some even swear these hold liquids as well as solids.

Community Reviews

estude “I like these ones!”

FAQ

Do swim diapers actually work?

Yes, to some extent. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), swim diapers are designed to hold solid feces , but no manufacturer claims they are 100 percent leakproof. Still, most pools require swim diapers because they can help prevent or slow downcertain infection-causing germs and parasites (like Cryptosporidium, which causes diarrhea ) from leaking into the pool as possible. Swim diapers are not designed to contain pee or diarrhea; if the latter occurs it’s important that you take your baby out of the pool as quickly as you can and change their diaper.

What is the difference between disposable swim diapers and reusable swim diapers?

Much like regular diapers, disposable diapers are meant to be tossed after each use while reusable diapers are typically made of multi-layered, waterproof fabrics. In the case of swim diapers, disposable diapers are cheaper and good if you aren’t a frequent pool-goer. Reusable swim diapers, on the other hand, are better if you essentially live at the pool (or beach, or lake.) They are also preferred by most swimming instructors. For younger babies, diapers with adjustable features or newborn-sized disposables are best.

Do swim diapers catch pee and poop?

Swim diapers catch solid poop (not diarrhea), per the CDC. They are not meant to absorb water, including urine. That’s why you should regularly check swim diapers (around every 60 minutes), change in an area away from the pool, and use regular diapers when your little one is not in the water.

Do you need to put a regular diaper under a swim diaper?

You do not need to (and shouldn’t!) put a regular disposable diaper on under a swim diaper. A swim diaper (whether it’s reusable or disposable) covered by a swimsuit is perfectly sufficient. If you add a regular diaper to the mix, it will only swell when submerged in water and could make baby uncomfortable or break apart, leaking not only waste but absorbent beads.

Take it from one What to Expect mom who used to work at a public pool : “They can explode when they get too full (which they will get full fast of pool water), and the stuff that helps the diaper absorb water will be ALL over the pool. It’s so gross and hard to clean up! I used to work at a public pool, and once someone snuck in a regular diaper (against the rules), and it was a disaster…”

How should swim diapers fit?

For a swim diaper to do what it’s made to do — hold accidents in — they need to fit a bit more snugly than your average diaper. That’s why many have cinched sides, waists or leg openings. Like regular diapers, most pool diapers are sized by weight, so check the packaging and manufacturer sizing charts for guidance. And don’t be surprised if the diaper seems a little on the tight side.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Swim Diapers , April 2022. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Cryptosporidium: General Information for the Public , February 2021.

Your Next Read

Cloth Diapers vs. Disposable Diapers: Which Should I Use? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

14 Ways to Save Money on Diapers Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Diaper Size Chart: Your Weight-Based Diapering Guide Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When It Comes to Diapers, What's on The Inside Matters By Elizabeth Buxton, Director of Commerce Content Strategy

How to Wash Cloth Diapers Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Change a Baby’s Diaper Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Potty Training Methods to Finally Get Your Toddler Out of Diapers Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Manage a Squirmy Baby During Diaper Changes Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

5 Best Formula Dispensers That You Can Safely Stash in Your Diaper Bag Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

How to Clean Baby Clothes By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Eager to Ditch the Diapers? 9 Signs Your Toddler Is Ready to Be Potty Trained Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window