9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups

Best Baby Eczema Creams

Quick summary

The best baby eczema cream is the CeraVe Baby Moisturizing Cream because of its thick formula that moisturizes and protects skin and that it's easy to apply, according to parents.

It can be heartbreaking to watch your little one deal with itchy, inflamed skin that often accompanies baby eczema . Trust me: I watched my two sons battle with eczema for years. But one important item to have in your medicine cabinet that can help soothe the irritation and keep their skin properly moisturized is baby eczema cream.

Of course, every baby’s skin is different, and what works for one may not work for another. The eczema creams we used to keep my oldest’s skin moisturized, for example, didn’t help my youngest’s. So, it’s no surprise that parents often go through multiple products before finding the best baby eczema cream (or combination of treatments) that finally works to relieve irritation and help hydrate their skin.

As someone who has had my fair share of experience with eczema as a parent and even as a sister when growing up, I’ve applied my own experience — as well as expert advice — to find the best baby eczema creams worth trying out. (And don't forget that there are gentle baby washes and lotions designed for eczema-prone skin that will help, too!)

How I Chose the Best Baby Eczema Cream

When considering the best eczema cream for babies, I not only leaned on my personal experience but also reviewed feedback from parents in the What to Expect community:

I considered more than 50 of the most recommended eczema creams for babies to compile a comprehensive list of the best options available.

Then, I sought expert guidance from Julie McClave, MD, FAAP , a pediatrician with Akron Children’s Pediatrics, to learn what to look for in eczema creams for babies. According to her recommendations, I ensured that the products I considered:

I also paid particular attention to eczema cream options that were given a seal of acceptance by the National Eczema Association , as these are guaranteed free of fragrance, known irritants or allergens.

By ensuring that each product recommendation met expert guidance, was easy to apply, and proved effective according to parents who tested them, I was able to narrow my list down to the nine best baby eczema creams.

A Doctor's Note on Eczema Creams

“The most important aspect of choosing the right moisturizers for your child is finding one that they seem to tolerate the best and can be used daily,” says Dr. McClave.

Although cream or ointment-based moisturizers tend to be most effective, sometimes the ointment can be too greasy, or a child may not like having it applied, Dr. McClave advises. In this case, it might be best to have a more lightweight option that they’ll tolerate to keep your child’s skin hydrated.

“Fragrance-free and dye-free ‘hypoallergenic’ moisturizers also tend to work well,” she says. This is the most important aspect to look for when buying an eczema cream, Dr. McClave adds.

Best Baby Eczema Cream Overall

CeraVe Baby Moisturizing Cream

Developed with pediatric dermatologists

long-lasting

Pricier than others

Key ingredients: Ceramides, hyaluronic acid

Sizes available: 5 ounces, 8 ounces

Why We Love It

CeraVe Baby Moisturizing Cream comes highly recommended by doctors; it was actually the first eczema cream our pediatrician recommended we try. Created by pediatric dermatologists and boasting the National Eczema Association Seal of Acceptance, this rich moisturizing cream tops our list of best baby eczema creams. Parents love how this thick cream creates a true barrier across the skin to deliver soothing relief to their babies. It contains essential ceramides to help protect and restore baby’s natural skin barrier, and parents rave about how soft baby’s (and their own!) skin feels after using it. Many also note that it doesn’t leave behind a greasy or sticky residue, which makes frequent application much easier and tolerable for baby (as does its quick absorption).

comes highly recommended by doctors; it was actually the first eczema cream our pediatrician recommended we try. Created by pediatric dermatologists and boasting the National Eczema Association Seal of Acceptance, this rich moisturizing cream tops our list of best baby eczema creams. Parents love how this thick cream creates a true barrier across the skin to deliver soothing relief to their babies. It contains essential ceramides to help protect and restore baby’s natural skin barrier, and parents rave about how soft baby’s (and their own!) skin feels after using it. Many also note that it doesn’t leave behind a greasy or sticky residue, which makes frequent application much easier and tolerable for baby (as does its quick absorption).

Community Reviews

After we switched to Cerave cream (not lotion) twice daily onto moistened skin a few weeks ago, the eczema just melted away and we have been able to put the hydrocortisone away! Wish I tried Cerave cream sooner!

“I use cerave for babies every day and a little cortisone at night if he really flares up… seems to work pretty good.”

“Both my July baby and I have eczema and very sensitive dry skin! The pediatrician said to lotion 2x per day and use hydrocortisone 1% on the eczema patches. She said CeraVe was the best cream to use! Currently I use CeraVe cream (not lotion) and Vaseline or Aquaphor both in the morning and at night all over the body.”

“Try cerave products. Esp the moisturizing cream.”

“Try cerave products. Esp the moisturizing cream.”

Best Baby Eczema Face Cream

Mustela Stelatopia Emollient Face Cream

Lightweight

plant-based ingredients

More expensive than other creams

Key ingredients: Sunflower oil, avocado perseose

Sizes available: 1.35 ounces

Why We Love It

Mustela's lightweight, fast-absorbing face cream hydrates with essential lipids derived from natural plant ingredients like sunflower oil and avocado. You can use it all over your baby’s body, but this National Eczema Association-approved cream is especially good for faces thanks to its lightweight formula. One drawback is that it comes in a small tube (1.35 ounces) and is pricier per ounce compared to other options. However, if you’re only using it to tackle eczema on your baby’s face, a little will likely go a long way. What to Expect parents love Mustela products for their simple ingredient lists and effectiveness — many claim that this cream works quickly to relieve eczema and keep it at bay.

hydrates with essential lipids derived from natural plant ingredients like sunflower oil and avocado. You can use it all over your baby’s body, but this National Eczema Association-approved cream is especially good for faces thanks to its lightweight formula. One drawback is that it comes in a small tube (1.35 ounces) and is pricier per ounce compared to other options. However, if you’re only using it to tackle eczema on your baby’s face, a little will likely go a long way. What to Expect parents love Mustela products for their simple ingredient lists and effectiveness — many claim that this cream works quickly to relieve eczema and keep it at bay.

Community Reviews

“Mustela!!! It’s also on the more expensive side but I swear by it. My little has horrible eczema and we switched completely to mustela and it’s completely cleared up!”

“We use the entire Mustela Eczema line along with Vaseline. And we use it multiple times a day as needed. Our sons eczema is extremely mild now.”

“Mustela has helped my LO with his skin!”

Best Skin-Calming Eczema Cream

Eucerin Baby Eczema Relief Body Cream

Absorbs well

provides 24-hour relief

Hard to squeeze out remaining cream at the bottom

Key ingredients: Colloidal oatmeal, ceramides and licorice root

Sizes available: 5 ounces

Why We Love It

With skin-soothing colloidal oatmeal as one of its main ingredients, Eucerin Baby Eczema Relief Body Cream is a smart choice for calming and relieving irritated, itchy and dry skin. It’s said to provide 24-hour hydration, which should help bolster your baby’s skin barrier and lock in moisture. Many parents found improvements in their baby’s skin after just a few days of using this thick cream, saying that their skin was back to feeling smooth, soft and supple.

is a smart choice for calming and relieving irritated, itchy and dry skin. It’s said to provide 24-hour hydration, which should help bolster your baby’s skin barrier and lock in moisture. Many parents found improvements in their baby’s skin after just a few days of using this thick cream, saying that their skin was back to feeling smooth, soft and supple.

Although it’s not the same formula, my mom’s go-to eczema cream when my sister was young was made by Eucerin, so I trust that the brand knows what they’re doing in terms of providing eczema relief.

Community Reviews

We used eczema cream specifically for babies by Eucerin and it helped so much.

“I use the dove baby unscented for sensitive skin wash and use Eucerin baby eczema cream. I swear by this. No other washes or creams needed.”

“We have been using Eucerin original cream (the thickest) for over a year and has been the best we’ve found for our child’s skin so far.”

Best Eczema Cream for Sensitive Skin

Baby Dove Eczema Care Soothing Cream

Hypoallergenic

made with natural ingredients

Some parents dislike how thick it is

Key ingredients: Colloidal oatmeal

Sizes available: 5.1 ounces

Why We Love It

Ask anyone with sensitive skin which drugstore products they reach for most, and Dove will be somewhere on the list. Made with a hypoallergenic and natural formula, Baby Dove Eczema Care Soothing Cream delivers mega moisture in the gentlest way possible. Parents love how the colloidal oatmeal in this cream keeps baby’s skin super soft while natural probiotics nourish the skin’s moisture barrier. The National Eczema Association approval also ensures that there absolutely no dyes or fragrances in this cream. Pair it with Dove’s soothing eczema body wash as well to really lock in moisture. Although some felt that the extra-thick cream was hard to get out of the tube sometimes, thicker creams are best, per Dr. McClave’s advice.

Ask anyone with sensitive skin which drugstore products they reach for most, and Dove will be somewhere on the list. Made with a hypoallergenic and natural formula,

delivers mega moisture in the gentlest way possible. Parents love how the colloidal oatmeal in this cream keeps baby’s skin super soft while natural probiotics nourish the skin’s moisture barrier. The

National Eczema Association approval also ensures that there absolutely no dyes or fragrances in this cream. Pair it with

as well to really lock in moisture. Although some felt that the extra-thick cream was hard to get out of the tube sometimes, thicker creams are best, per Dr. McClave’s advice.

Tested by Christine Mattheis , mom of two and What’s to Expect’s VP of Content & Brand Solutions:

"My son, Miles, had horrible eczema as an infant. There were patches all over his little body, and his skin was practically raw inside his elbows and behind his knees. We tried several washes and lotions and even did a round of prescription hydrocortisone cream. Finally, the product that calmed his skin down was the Baby Dove Eczema Care Soothing Cream. This product is super thick and free of artificial dyes and fragrances. Unlike other eczema creams we tried, this one doesn't have a medicinal smell — it smells lightly sweet and nutty, likely from the colloidal oatmeal in the cream. Miles is 18 months old now, and we still apply it to his whole body after every bath."

Community Reviews

“I love baby dove! We tried several soaps/lotions with my LO, like expensive supposed to be the best brands for sensitive skin/eczema. But baby dove has been the only one that helps his eczema!”

After each bath, we use baby dove eczema lotion. Cortisone 10 on the spots that are bad when needed. Oatmeal and/or milk baths occasionally. We got a prescription for a stronger steroid cream to use sparingly as well, but mostly the OTC stuff works well.

We use dove eczema therapy lotion and body wash, a bath every night, lotion directly after the bath when still a little wet, and although I use the dove lotion I save that for mornings and we use Aquaphor at night per the pediatrician recommendation. It’s getting much better.

Best Nighttime Baby Eczema Cream

Aveeno Baby Eczema Nighttime Balm

Absorbs quickly

easy to apply

Some people don’t like the way it smells

Key ingredients: Colloidal oatmeal, ceramides, glycerin

Sizes available: 11 ounces

Why We Love It

With all of the moving your baby does while they sleep, a nighttime baby eczema cream that soaks into their skin and keeps working while they dream is… well, a dream come true. The Aveeno Baby Eczema Therapy Nighttime Relief Balm is specifically designed to soothe and moisturize dry, itchy and sensitive skin overnight with a formula that consists of a soothing triple oat complex and moisturizing ceramides and glycerin. Plus, parents like that it isn’t greasy, so it’s easy to apply and rub into baby’s skin.

With all of the moving your baby does while they sleep, a nighttime baby eczema cream that soaks into their skin and keeps working while they dream is… well, a dream come true. The

is specifically designed to soothe and moisturize dry, itchy and sensitive skin overnight with a formula that consists of a soothing triple oat complex and moisturizing ceramides and glycerin. Plus, parents like that it isn’t greasy, so it’s easy to apply and rub into baby’s skin.

Endorsed by the National Eczema Association, it provides long-lasting relief and strengthens the skin's barrier. While it does not contain any added fragrances, some parents don’t like the way this particular formula smells.

Community Reviews

“Second baby with eczema and wish I would have found this aveeno balm earlier, lotions and creams never where enough. This balm is dense, almost Vaseline like, I apply during the day too to specific spots. His skin is relieved by second day of application. Dove has an eczema body wash that helps too.”

“We have had success with this. I also use it on my eyelids when I have flare ups!”

“We use aveeno baby and the aveeno baby eczema nighttime cream. Just a little of that every night and moisturize before and after going outside, after baths, and normally in the morning when getting dressed.”

“Nightly application of Aveeno baby eczema nighttime balm and a thin layer of aquaphor on top works wonders.”

“I swear by the aveeno baby eczema line. We used the wash and ointment on my son. It’s the ONLY thing that helped until he got put on prescription ointment.”

Best Ointment for Baby Eczema

Tubby Todd All Over Ointment

Made from plant-based ingredients

has a smooth texture

Expensive

Key ingredients: Colloidal oatmeal

Sizes available: 3-pack 2 ounce tubes, 3.5 ounces, 8 ounces

Why We Love It

An overwhelming number of parents in our What to Expect community claim that when no other cream worked to help their baby’s eczema, Tubby Todd All Over Ointment got the job done. The all-purpose balm is made from natural plant-based ingredients, including colloidal oatmeal to help soothe irritated skin and jojoba and camellia leaf extract for moisturization. Its smooth, creamy texture moisturizes gently and effectively and doesn’t have any added fragrance. Although pricey, many parents think this ointment is worth it because of how well it works to treat their baby’s eczema, dubbing it an unexpected registry must-have .

The all-purpose balm is made from natural plant-based ingredients, including colloidal oatmeal to help soothe irritated skin and jojoba and camellia leaf extract for moisturization. Its smooth, creamy texture moisturizes gently and effectively and doesn’t have any added fragrance.

Although pricey, many parents think this ointment is worth it because of how well it works to treat their baby’s eczema, dubbing it an unexpected registry must-have .

Tested by Liz Buxton , mom of one and What to Expect's Commerce Director:

"Lou had a terrible eczema reaction to the tubs of baby Aquaphor I had diligently stocked up on prior to her arrival. I immediately switched and saw instant results. "

Community Reviews

“Tubby Todd ointment is amazing! Makes such an impact!”

“We tried baby CeraVe and Eucerin, but Tubby Todd is what's worked the best for my LO's eczema. It was mostly on his forehead, and it's almost completely clear now.”

“My son has eczema on his cheeks as well and it does well with Tubby Todd’s all over ointment. I apply it twice daily.”

“I use tubby Todd all over ointment for spot treatment / extra dry areas and their dream cream for his body after the bath. I also use their hair and body wash and it is gentle on the skin :)”

“Tubby Todd All over Ointment (fragrance free) really helped my little one’s sensitive skin (baby acne and eczema). We use Eucerin Baby as a base lotion and use the Tubby Todd on cheeks to lock in moisture. We also bathe her everyday (babyganics shampoo and body wash fragrance free) LO’s face is clear since we’ve had this routine.”

Best Balm for Baby Eczema

Pipette Baby Balm

Super moisturizing

made from plant-based ingredients

Can feel greasy/oily

Key ingredients: Sugarcane-derived squalane, pomegranate sterols, berry-derived wax

Sizes available: 0.5 ounces, 2 ounces

Why We Love It

A good baby balm can work wonders for all sorts of skin issues from diaper rash to cracked nipples, but parents who’ve used the Pipette Baby Balm especially love how soothing it is for their babies with eczema. Developed with input from biologists, pediatricians and dermatologists, the Pipette balm has been rigorously tested to ensure the safety of use on baby’s sensitive skin. It’s super moisturizing, thanks to sugarcane-derived squalane which is an emollient that helps lock hydration in and strengthen the skin barrier. Some parents do note that this balm can be “slippery” when applied to baby’s skin, as it is more oily than it is creamy.

especially love how soothing it is for their babies with eczema.

Developed with input from biologists, pediatricians and dermatologists, the Pipette balm has been rigorously tested to ensure the safety of use on baby’s sensitive skin. It’s super moisturizing, thanks to sugarcane-derived squalane which is an emollient that helps lock hydration in and strengthen the skin barrier. Some parents do note that this balm can be “slippery” when applied to baby’s skin, as it is more oily than it is creamy.

Community Reviews

“Pipette Eczema Lotion is the only thing that helped my little guy.”

“I love the pipette eczema cream. It’s fragrance free and rubs in well. I also pick it in with their baby oil.”

“I use all Pipette products.”

Best Eczema Cream for Babies and Adults

Vanicream Moisturizing Skin Cream

Large size

long-lasting

free from potential allergens and irritants

Slightly sticky texture

Key ingredients: Petrolatum

Sizes available: 2 ounces, 4 ounces, 1 pound

Why We Love It

If your mom or grandma, like my own, kept a jar of this on their vanity, you’re probably already familiar with the silky-smooth texture it can provide when used regularly. For babies with eczema, parents love that Vanicream is easy to spread and absorbs fast. The petroleum-based cream is formulated to relieve redness, itchiness and cracking . It’s also dermatologist-tested, free of potential irritants like lanolin or botanical extracts, and boasts the National Eczema Association Seal of Acceptance.

If your mom or grandma, like my own, kept a jar of this on their vanity, you’re probably already familiar with the silky-smooth texture it can provide when used regularly. For babies with eczema, parents love that

is easy to spread and absorbs fast. The petroleum-based cream is formulated to

Your baby may not love the sticky texture, but according to parents who use it, any struggle to apply this cream to a wiggly, whining baby is worth the results.

Community Reviews

[My doctor] also recommended Vanicream, which has worked WONDERS!

“We use Vanicream everyday, it’s kind of thick and seems to help.”

“My eldest has eczema and dry skin in general. We use Mustela for him for his body wash and hair, and then we use Vanicream for his lotion. The Vanicream is really good for dry skin and eczema specifically. Non scented and a really thick cream. I’ve been using pipette for the baby who has less finicky skin and it’s working well so far!”

“I second the vanicream statement from above! The best cream for ezcema.”

Best Natural Eczema Cream

Roe Wellness Biome Barrier Cream

Made with plant-based ingredients

creates strong skin barrier

Contains coconut oil

Key ingredients: Aloe leaf, apple extract, coconut oil, macadamia seed oil, grape seed oil

Sizes available: 4 ounces

Why We Love It

Created by a mom and nurse practitioner who was tired of wasting money on products that irritated her baby’s skin, Roe Wellness Biome Barrier Cream is my oldest son’s current go-to eczema cream. The plant-based formula is vegan, containing ingredients derived from natural sources like coconuts, sugar beets, apples and olives. Parents like how gentle it is on sensitive skin and that, despite being nice and thick, it still goes on smoothly. For my son, we use the “power combo” serum with this cream, which is particularly amazing at combating his hard-to-treat areas like the backs of his knees and inside of his elbows. Though we didn't start using it until last year and my son is 9 now, the brand is actually geared toward babies/toddlers. Although you may not yet be aware of allergies that your baby has, some parents reported that babies who are sensitive to coconut oil did not do well with this cream. On the flip side, it’s this exact ingredient that works to maximize hydration and lock in moisture.

is my oldest son’s current go-to eczema cream. The plant-based formula is vegan, containing ingredients derived from natural sources like coconuts, sugar beets, apples and olives. Parents like how gentle it is on sensitive skin and that, despite being nice and thick, it still goes on smoothly. For my son, we use the “power combo”

with this cream, which is particularly amazing at combating his hard-to-treat areas like the backs of his knees and inside of his elbows. Though we didn't start using it until last year and my son is 9 now, the brand is actually geared toward babies/toddlers.

Although you may not yet be aware of allergies that your baby has, some parents reported that babies who are sensitive to coconut oil did not do well with this cream. On the flip side, it’s this exact ingredient that works to maximize hydration and lock in moisture.

Community Reviews

“Our current daily regimen is to spot treat with Roe Wellness probiotic serum followed by their biome barrier cream and I do that over any especially rough/dry/flared areas or just where I know she tends to get those like the backs of her knees even if she doesn’t currently… I see a big difference in how quickly flares resolve with the Roe Wellness serum and barrier cream and then also really love the California baby to keep all her skin pretty soft and moisturized.”

“Try Roe Wellness!!”

“I second toe wellness! They have some awesome products.”

What to Know When Buying Baby Eczema Cream

In addition to expert guidance to choose eczema creams that are thick and free from fragrances and dyes, there are a few other important factors to keep in mind when buying a baby eczema cream:

Cream formulas don't necessarily need to be organic. Just because you see “all natural” or “organic” on a product, does not automatically mean that the product is fragrance-free or does not contain irritants. A cream you can find at the drugstore may be just as effective, or even better, for your little one.

Some creams may not work right away. “I typically recommend thick moisturizers — creams and ointments tend to work a little better than lotions — and frequent application daily,” says Dr. McClave, noting that consistent application is the key to treating baby eczema. Don’t get discouraged if your baby’s eczema doesn’t get better right away. It may take time — up to two weeks — for a product to start working. (But there may still be trial and error involved after that.) You will, however, want to stop using a product if their eczema gets worse or seems to be reacting badly to the cream. “If you notice any yellow crusting, sores, or blisters on the eczema patches, it is important to see your child's doctor to have it evaluated,” says Dr. McClave.

Only use steroid-free creams, unless directed by a doctor. If the cream you’re considering has an added steroid like hydrocortisone, it’s important to check with your doctor to ensure that it is safe for your baby. Not every infant with eczema will require steroid treatment, and not all steroid creams are safe for babies.

WhatToExpect.com, Infant Eczema (Atopic Dermatitis and Contact Dermatitis) , August 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, How to Treat & Control Eczema Rashes in Children , November 2023. National Eczema Assocation, Controlling Eczema by Moisturizing , Accessed May 2024. Julie McClave, MD, FAAP , pediatrician, Akron Children's Pediatrics, Ohio.

Your Next Read

The 10 Best Baby Lotions, Creams, and Ointments for Sensitive Skin Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Infant Eczema (Atopic Dermatitis and Contact Dermatitis) Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

6 Stretch Mark Creams Moms-to-Be Can’t Stop Buying (and Derms Approve, Too) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Dry Skin in Babies Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

The 9 Best Cradle Cap Shampoos and Treatments to Keep Baby’s Scalp Soft and Healthy Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Why Your Eczema Is Flaring Up During Pregnancy (and No, It's Not Just Your Soap) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Best Nipple Creams to Help You Find Relief While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

How to Care for Newborn Skin Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Winter Skin Care for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Diaper Rash in Babies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Common Types of Skin Rashes in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

How to Give Your Baby an Oatmeal Bath Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Dry Skin in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Baby Hives Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window