9 Diastasis Recti Exercises for Postpartum Ab Separation

Updates throughout to copy, sourcing and formatting, including a new medical review for accuracy.

Diastasis Recti Exercise

Ab separation after pregnancy is common, but you can work on strengthening your core and healing diastasis recti with these at-home exercises.

During pregnancy, your body undergoes some incredible changes to accommodate your growing baby. One of them is the expansion of the muscles in your abdomen: As your pregnancy progresses, the right and left sides of the rectus abdominis muscle separate while your linea alba (the tissue between that set of muscles) stretches to make room for baby.

Because of this, after pregnancy, many women will notice an indentation in the middle of their bellies, right down the center of the “six-pack” area. But for some moms, that gap is wider than average and needs help being repaired. This wider separation is called diastasis recti. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicDiastasis RectiSee All Sources [1]

Diastasis Recti

Some postpartum ab separation is normal, but it’s considered diastasis recti when the gap is significant. Diastasis recti is common, and around 60% of women experience the condition postpartum.

Ab separation often heals on its own, but targeted exercises that activate your deep core muscles may help improve diastasis recti.

How to know if you have diastasis recti

You might already suspect that you have diastasis recti if you notice symptoms, which can include back pain, abdominal weakness, or a bulge in the middle of your abs. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineDiastasis Recti RehabilitationSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineDiastasis Recti RehabilitationSee All Sources

Your tummy may also "dome" or form a cone shape when you lean back or get up from lying down.

It’s best to have a doctor, physical therapist , or trained professional diagnose your diastasis recti during an exam, but you may be able to detect it yourself at home too.

To test for diastasis recti:

Lie on your back with your feet flat on the floor and knees bent.

Curl your head up off the floor so your rectus or "six-pack" muscles are engaged, and feel along the indent down the center of your stomach. That’s the linea alba, the tissue that stretched when you were pregnant.

Start at the belly button and feel just above and below in a vertical line. If your fingers can press down, you may have ab separation.

How to Test for Diastasis Recti

Again, a small gap is usually considered normal. It’s important to determine the width of the gap and push down gently to see if there is any tension or pushback, or if your fingers sink right down. You want to assess the width and, more importantly, the depth of the split, which your doctor or a physical therapist can confirm.

You can also try to measure the width with your fingers: One- to two finger-widths is likely normal; three or more could be a sign of diastasis recti.

Your provider may also measure the area; in general, a gap greater than 2 centimeters is considered to be abnormal.

"My physical therapist diagnosed me with diastasis recti," says What to Expect Community member ninap38 . "I have a bit of a tummy bulge at 10 weeks postpartum and am doing daily core exercises to heal the abdominal separation."

The best exercises for diastasis recti

Diastasis recti sometimes heals on its own. But exercises that strengthen the transverse abdominis (TVA) muscle, the deepest abdominal muscle, can provide support for those muscles that have been stretched and facilitate healing.

The exercises below may help rebuild your TVA muscle. But it’s also very important to regain strength in your pelvic floor and diaphragm, which work in conjunction with your ab muscles. Remember to breathe and engage your pelvic floor when doing these exercises.

The more TVA strengthening you do, the more tension you will feel. Track your progress over time — when your gap feels fairly resilient, like a trampoline, you should be ready to add additional ab work.

Healing "is totally possible with the right exercises that your therapist should recommend," says What to Expect Community member julie1214 . "My pelvic floor therapist said there was separation, and after two weeks of exercises, it seems to be coming together."

Avoid any crunches and planking until you have regained strength in your abs and have started to close the gap, since doing exercises that are too difficult can actually make diastasis recti worse.

Ready to get started? The below workouts from Julia Neto , a trainer and regional manager at Body Conceptions studio in New York City, can strengthen your abdominal muscles and help heal diastasis recti over time.

Keep in mind that if you're just getting back into exercise postpartum, doing all of these moves at once might be too much. Before you start, speak with your practitioner to discuss the best progression for you.

1. Umbrella breathing with Kegel

Start in a standing position with knees slightly bent, or sitting on a yoga ball or chair.

Imagine that your ribcage is an umbrella opening 360 degrees as you inhale.

Initiate your exhale with a Kegel . Empty out your low belly, then middle and finally your chest, engaging your abdominal muscles up and in as you go.

You can do 10 concentrated breaths standing, and then continue to use this breathing pattern for the rest of the exercises.

Diastasis Recti Exercise

Body Conceptions by Mahri

2. Pelvic tilts on hands and knees

Begin on your hands and knees with a neutral spine.

Take a big inhale into the sides of your rib cage, then exhale with a Kegel, drawing your tailbone down and under into a curled spine.

Inhale as you return to neutral. Be sure to relax your glutes and move from your lower abs. Cow position (arching upwards) is not advised for severe diastasis recti.

Perform 10 tilts, moving slowly.

Diastasis Recti Exercise

3. Kneeling leg and arm extension with knee tap

On hands and knees, begin by exhaling and drawing your core up towards the spine.

Maintain your core contraction as you inhale, then reach your right arm ahead and left leg straight behind you.

Exhale and tap your right elbow towards your left knee, inhale, extend both limbs long, and return to neutral.

Alternate sides for 10 reps on each side.

Diastasis Recti Exercise

4. Toe taps lying on back

Lying flat on your back, bring your legs into a tabletop position, with knees directly over your hips. Be sure you aren't arching your back or tucking your pelvis.

Inhale into your rib cage and exhale as you tap your right foot down to the floor, drawing in your core and maintaining pelvic alignment.

Inhale as you return to neutral.

Perform 10 reps on each side.

Diastasis Recti Exercise

5. Single leg reach lying on back

Beginning in tabletop position and keeping your pelvis still, reach your right leg long on a high diagonal on your exhale.

Inhale as you return to neutral.

Perform 10 reps on each side.

Diastasis Recti Exercise

6. Leg extension with weights

Try this exercise without weights until you feel stable, then add 1- to 2-pound weights.

Begin flat on your back with your feet planted hips-width apart, inhale and draw your right knee into tabletop position with your arms framing your knee.

As you exhale, reach your leg on a high diagonal with arms just slightly overhead, without letting your back arch.

Inhale and return to tabletop.

Perform 10 reps on each side.

Diastasis Recti Exercise

7. Double leg extension

Once you feel strong in a single leg extension, try this move. Again, don’t use any weights at first, then add them if you feel ready.

Starting with both legs in tabletop position, inhale as your arms frame your knees, and exhale as you reach your legs on a high diagonal with arms slightly overhead, keeping your back flat and pelvis still.

Return to neutral on the inhale.

Perform 10 reps.

Diastasis Recti Exercise

8. C-curving

Begin sitting high on your sit bones, feet wide, and hands behind your knees.

Gently rock back without sinking your chest in.

Staying back, exhale as you pulse backwards, hollowing out your low belly.

Go for 20 to 30 pulses.

Diastasis Recti Exercise

9. Side plank

Side plank is a good alternative for high plank if you're in a workout class and the instructor asks everyone to plank. Side plank can be done throughout your postpartum journey, while high plank and elbow plank should not be done until you have nearly healed your diastasis recti and have a strong TVA.

Place your elbow directly underneath your shoulder and stack your top leg in front of your back leg, so both feet are touching the floor.

Make sure your shoulders and hips are stacked so they are in line with your head and feet.

Keep breathing and drawing in your core as you hold this pose. Don't hold for longer than 15 to 20 seconds to start.

Diastasis Recti Exercise

Diastasis Recti Exercise

KEY TAKEAWAYS

It's normal to have some ab separation after giving birth, but it’s considered diastasis recti when that gap is significant.

Diastasis recti is common, and around 60% of women experience the condition postpartum.

Ab separation sometimes improves on its own, but exercises that target your transverse abdominis (TVA) muscle, the deepest abdominal muscle, can provide support and possibly speed up healing.

It's a good idea to consult your OB/GYN or a physical therapist about diastasis recti, too. That's especially important if you notice any red flags while doing these core moves, such as doming, pain, increased vaginal or pelvic pressure, or worsening urinary incontinence.

doming, pain, increased vaginal or pelvic pressure, or worsening urinary incontinence.

Remember: Always listen to your body and pay attention to what is going on in your core. In addition to doming, look out for red flags like pain, increased vaginal or pelvic pressure, or worsening urinary incontinence — all “are concerning signs,” says Katie Propst , M.D., a urogynecologist at the University of South Florida in Tampa, Florida, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board , and you should consult a provider before continuing your core work.