9 Pairs of Postpartum Underwear, Tested and Approved By Moms

Best Postpartum Underwear

QUICK SUMMARY

The best postpartum underwear is Kindred Bravely High Waist Postpartum Underwear , according to testers from the What to Expect staff and user community, because they’re soft, comfortable, and roomy enough for a pad or ice pack.

I knew I’d feel uncomfortable in those first weeks postpartum, but I didn’t anticipate just how long that discomfort would last. Like many new moms, I experienced soreness, swelling, and bleeding for around six weeks after I gave birth — and I quickly learned my regular underwear was not suited for helping my recovery. So, following many friends’ advice, I invested in a few pairs of postpartum underwear to help me feel a little more supported while I healed.

When it comes to all the stuff you buy to aid your recovery , the best postpartum underwear is often overlooked. But it can really come in handy. Just take it from Rebecca Amaru , M.D., an OB/GYN practicing in New York City and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. "It prevents you from ruining your own underwear when you are invariably bleeding heavily and unpredictably postpartum,” she says. “And, it’s more comfortable than most of the underwear you would typically wear at a time when your perineum is sore and you need to accommodate heavy absorption pads.”

How I Tested and Chose the Best Postpartum Underwear

To find the best postpartum underwear, I spoke to three OB/GYNs: Rebecca Amaru, M.D., an OB/GYN practicing in New York City and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board; Rebecca Levy-Gantt, D.O. , an OB/GYN based in Napa, California; and Jill Hechtman, M.D. , an OB/GYN based in Tampa, Florida. I asked each of these experts about the most important features to look for in postpartum underwear based on the type of delivery a mom had, as well as the postpartum symptoms she might experience. Along with their insights, I referenced guidance on postpartum care from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).

Next, I consulted several moms on the What to Expect editorial team about their experiences trying different postpartum underwear brands.

I also canvassed the What to Expect Community message boards to learn about the postpartum underwear new moms in our community felt were most comfortable to wear and use. And since I’m a mom of two and former parenting editor who has also tried a number of postpartum underwear styles, I took my personal experience into account, too.

Based on all of this feedback, I reviewed and selected the best postpartum underwear based on the following criteria:

Best Overall Postpartum Underwear

Kindred Bravely High Waist Postpartum Underwear

Comfortable

Attractive design

Roomy for pads

Some moms dislike the lace waistband

Material: 95% rayon, 5% spandex (excluding lace) for the body; 100% cotton for the gusset

Size Range: S to 1XL

Why We Love It

Kindred Bravely is known for stylish yet functional postpartum apparel, and these cute high-waisted undies are no exception. Although Kindred Bravely specifically recommends this pair for C-section recovery, moms who have given birth vaginally also rave about these soft, comfortable panties.

are no exception. Although Kindred Bravely specifically recommends this pair for C-section recovery, moms who have given birth vaginally also rave about these soft, comfortable panties.

The fabric has a bit of spandex, which many moms appreciate for the stretch it delivers, but — crucially! — these undies also don’t get too stretched out even after many washes. They’re also wide, so there’s plenty of room for large pads. The classic, feminine design might also help you feel a little more human during those tough early days while also giving the underwear some longevity. Many moms say that they find themselves still sporting a pair when their baby is 3, 6, or even 12 months old — these undies are that good.

If you’re not a fan of the style, many other Kindred Bravely undies also come highly recommended from What to Expect moms. Try the brand’s Signature Cotton French Cut Brief if you don’t love lace details (one of the only "cons" we could come across); it has a high waistband made of a thin elastic instead of lace.

Tested by Steph Fisher , mom of two and What to Expect's Senior Director of Multi-Platform Content Strategy:

"I wore the Kindred Bravely high-waisted ones for like five years."

Community Reviews

“These are the ultimate pregnancy and postpartum undies. The stretch is insane but they never get loose and fall down. They don’t pitch or have tags or tight elastic bands. I wish they were less expensive but it’s worth the splurge. They go on sale too and you can bundle and save a lot.”

“LOVE my Kindred Bravely underwear. They are so soft and super comfortable. I gave birth a year ago and never stopped wearing them and here we are again.”

“Kindred Bravely makes some awesome high-waisted underwear and they’re even pretty! I’m 10 weeks postpartum and still wear them because they’re so comfy.”

“I just bought a pack of Kindred Bravely high-waisted briefs and they’re very comfy! And C-section friendly because of the high waist.”

“I got Kindred Bravely high-waisted underwear and they’re good! I only recently wore pre-pregnancy bikini cut underwear and I’m 13 weeks postpartum.”

Best Postpartum C-Section Underwear

Depend Fresh Protection Adult Incontinence Underwear for Women

Affordable

Leak-proof

High waistband

Comfortable

Unscented

Bulkier than “real” underwear

Material: Polypropylene, sodium polyacrylate, wood pulp, polyester, polyethylene, polyurethane elastics, adhesives, colorants

Size Range: S to XXL

Why We Love It

Although most high-waisted undies are appropriate for C-section recovery, What to Expect moms say Depend disposable underwear is particularly great. Many women end up switching to “real” underwear after a few weeks (the Innersy, Kindred Bravely, and UpSpring styles on this list are all popular choices), but Depend offers tons of convenience in those early days.

is particularly great. Many women end up switching to “real” underwear after a few weeks (the Innersy, Kindred Bravely, and UpSpring styles on this list are all popular choices), but Depend offers tons of convenience in those early days.

Because they’re technically designed for incontinence, Depend underwear is ultra-absorbent, so you don’t need to worry about leaks. Plus, the waistband is high and leaves plenty of room to accommodate an incision. They’re also incredibly comfortable: The material is soft and fabric-like, despite being disposable underwear. And although they’re on the bulky side, they look and feel as close to real underwear as you can for disposables, moms say.

Community Reviews

“I bought Depends after my last C-section. Best. Decision. Ever. They came up nice and high and I didnt have to worry about if a pad would fill up too fast.”

“I slept so good knowing I could just bleed everywhere and not worry about it [because] nothing left the brief. it was BLISS.”

“The BEST thing ever were the Depends adult ‘diapers.’ They came up high, so did not bother the incision, and they were super comfortable. I didn't have to worry about leaking or anything. They felt like undies. I wore them a month straight. I am definitely going to wear them again with my next baby who is due in July. I weighed 170 pounds, and wore the small size.”

“I ended up having a C-section and have been using Depend and a pad in them. I change the pad throughout the day and then the Depends one to two times a day. They just feel more secure then the mesh undies and I like that the Depends are a back-up if the pad can't get everything. I am plus-sized (size 16-18) and got the Depend XL discreet brand and they fit perfectly.”

Best Postpartum Underwear With Compression

UpSpring C-Panty C-Section Recovery Underwear

High waist

Comfortable silicone panel

Supportive

Great for those who have had a C-section

Expensive

Material: 92% nylon, 8% spandex

Size Range: S/M, L/XL, XXL/XXXL

Why We Love It

If you’d prefer underwear that has some light compression to help support your postpartum recovery, the UpSpring C-Panty C-Section Recovery Underwear is a great choice. This well-made, multi-tasking undergarment is pricey, but it comes with several features your postpartum self will appreciate. What to Expect moms particularly love the cushiony silicone panel, which sits gently over your scar to help reduce irritation. Meanwhile, the high-waisted silhouette and nylon-spandex material provides some support without being constricting.

is a great choice. This well-made, multi-tasking undergarment is pricey, but it comes with several features your postpartum self will appreciate. What to Expect moms particularly love the cushiony silicone panel, which sits gently over your scar to help reduce irritation. Meanwhile, the high-waisted silhouette and nylon-spandex material provides some support without being constricting.

You can get these undies in sleek black or nude — and the material is luxe enough to help you feel a little pampered while you recover. Just keep in mind that if you have had a C-section, your incision should be fully closed and healed (with no remaining scabs) before you wear them.

Some moms do find the compression on these undies to be a little tight, especially if you wear them for a long time, so you may want to purchase just one pair at first to make sure you find them comfortable.

Community Reviews

“After the bleeding calmed down I wore the UpSpring C-panty. They are AMAZING! They have a silicone panel on the inside of the underwear to go over your incision, so no stitches or scabs getting caught on the fabric!”

“I have the C panty and I love it! I didn't start wearing it until 3 weeks postpartum, just because I was in pain and nervous. It provides support without making me feel too compressed. The silicone patch in the front is very comfortable on my last dissolvable stitch that's still hanging out. I just wish it was machine washable!”

“I'm 2 weeks postpartum and I started using it 1 week postpartum. It's really nice — tucks you in a bit but this is NOT a girdle. Just gives comfortable support.”

Best Mesh Postpartum Underwear

Frida Mom Disposable Postpartum Underwear

Very stretchy

Available in both high-waisted and boyshort styles

You still need pads with these

Material: Mesh-free microfiber and spandex

Size Range: Petite (23 to 34 inches), Regular (28 to 42 inches)

Why We Love It

What to Expect moms rave about the Frida Mom disposable postpartum underwear . Though many people refer to these as “mesh undies,” and they do have a mesh-like look and feel, they’re actually made of a stretchy non-mesh microfiber with spandex. Some moms prefer this option over true mesh because it gives them the same ease without being see-through, plus, offers a bit more support than typical hospital underwear. The fabric also doesn’t have any tags, so it’s non-irritating on sensitive skin.

. Though many people refer to these as “mesh undies,” and they do have a mesh-like look and feel, they’re actually made of a stretchy non-mesh microfiber with spandex. Some moms prefer this option over true mesh because it gives them the same ease without being see-through, plus, offers a bit more support than typical hospital underwear. The fabric also doesn’t have any tags, so it’s non-irritating on sensitive skin.

Frida Mom sells this underwear in two styles ( high-waisted and boyshort ) and two sizes for each: petite, which stretches up to 34 inches in the waist, and regular, which goes up to 42 inches.

) and two sizes for each: petite, which stretches up to 34 inches in the waist, and regular, which goes up to 42 inches.

The one downside, moms say, is that Frida Mom’s disposable underwear doesn’t include a pad and is instead designed to help keep pads in place. Some people prefer this because it means that the underwear itself is more breathable and lightweight, and you can add in your own pad or padsicle. But others prefer disposable underwear that has built-in padding, so if that’s the case for you, this may not be the right option.

Doctor's Note:

“I highly recommend the mesh panties that the hospital gives you after delivery,” says Dr. Hechtman. “They are comfortable and can hold the Maxi pads in place since you should not use tampons. If you ask the nurses, they will give you some to take home.”

Tested by Leah Rocketto , mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Commerce Director:

“I’m so glad I packed these in my hospital bag . It felt like real underwear, which helped me feel more comfortable postpartum. They also stayed in place much better than the hospital option, which was great for nighttime.”

Tested by Lisafe Carreon, mom of one and What to Expect's Senior Product Manager:

"They are so comfortable. Definitely better than the ones the hospital gives to you. They're not scratchy or bulky, and they fit great."

Community Reviews

“I SWEAR by the Frida Mom mesh underwear. They fit a million times better than the hospital ones. I just felt like it kept everything together.”

“I love my Frida products! Don’t get me wrong, the hospital stuff is fine, but once I was home I still needed some essentials! I also love the undies as they allow for better airflow.”

“I loved the [Frida Mom] undies and ended up ordering more from Amazon. They were so much more comfortable with a pad than wearing [disposable] diapers.”

“I didn’t use the c section but their regular version and I LOVED them. This time around I stocked up on them (and c section version just in case). They are really comfy and like that they feel like actual underwear for a sense of normalcy so I don’t feel like I’m in diapers all day.”

“Frida Mom postpartum kit is AMAZING. I loved these underwear/shorts so much. Even after I stopped bleeding I wore them for a while because they’re so comfy and hold you in but aren’t too tight.”

Best High-Waisted Postpartum Underwear

Innersy Women's High Waisted Underwear

High-waisted

Very comfortable

Affordable

Good size range

Light compression might feel tight around the belly to some

Material: 95% cotton, 5% spandex

Size Range: XS to XXXL

Why We Love It

Made mostly of cotton with just a touch of spandex, the Innersy High-Waisted Underwear will give a little extra support without making you feel like you've been stuffed into a girdle. The double-layer waistband is wide, which helps prevent it from rolling down, and there are several different color options and a decent size range (available up to 3XL). Plus, the gently supportive material is also snug enough to hold a pad in place.

will give a little extra support without making you feel like you've been stuffed into a girdle. The double-layer waistband is wide, which helps prevent it from rolling down, and there are several different color options and a decent size range (available up to 3XL). Plus, the gently supportive material is also snug enough to hold a pad in place.

A number of What to Expect moms specifically recommend Innersy underwear for those who have had a C-section, because the high waist leaves plenty of room for your incision.

Note that these are not designed as postpartum underwear, so you'll likely want to size up for a comfortable fit. What’s nice about them not being a postpartum style, however, is that many moms say they continue wearing Innersy underwear long after they’ve recovered.

Community Reviews

“I got these from Amazon, very nice and high-waisted. Comfy for around the house, but pretty granny panty-ish and will show panty lines through clothes.”

“I had these with my first. They hold everything in tight which I appreciated. I still wore them on my period for nights after the postpartum period.”

“I bought disposable diapers in preparation for postpartum, but never used them. I did better with these.”

Best Plus-Size Postpartum Underwear

Bodily The All-In Panty

Can take you from pregnancy to postpartum

Soft and stretchy

Available in extended sizing

Doesn’t work as well under clothing

Material: 93% micromodal, 7% elastane

Size Range: S to 3X

Why We Love It

Bodily’s All-In Panty is designed to do it all: These undies are ultra-soft and supportive during pregnancy, but they can easily transition to the postpartum period regardless of whether you gave birth vaginally or via C-section. They’re a popular choice among plus-size moms, too, since the brand offers extended sizing up to 3X (size 22-24).

is designed to do it all: These undies are ultra-soft and supportive during pregnancy, but they can easily transition to the postpartum period regardless of whether you gave birth vaginally or via C-section. They’re a popular choice among plus-size moms, too, since the brand offers

Moms rave about Bodily’s soft, comfortable, and high-quality fabric. Made of a micro modal and elastane blend, the material is OEKO-TEX certified, which means it’s been tested against up to 350 toxic chemicals. These undies are also stretchy enough to grow with your body, though some moms recommend sizing up if you want to accommodate a pad or ice pack. The waistband is high enough to clear a C-section incision, with a soft elastic that doesn't dig into skin, and the wide crotch area is perfect for holding a pad.

Robin Hilmantel, What to Expect's Senior Director of Editorial Strategy and Growth, agrees that these Bodily undies are extremely comfortable.

These undies are also full coverage, but some moms say they can occasionally ride up in the back.

Tested by Liz Buxton , mom of one and What to Expect's Commerce Director:

"I’m usually a commando girly, but postpartum called for a little more support. These were the only undies I could tolerate near my healing incision — insanely soft, buttery, and stretchy in all the right ways. They held up great in the wash (no pilling!) and somehow still look cute, not like grandma panties. I’m nearly a year out and still wear them to bed. That’s how comfy they are."

Tested by Robin Himantel , mom of two and What to Expect's Senior Director of Strategy and Growth:

"The Bodily panty is super soft and also really high-wasted. It's great for wearing under a robe or PJs because it's somehow luxurious but also comfy while you're recovering. That said, it isn't super-practical for wearing under clothing since it is so high-wasted."

Community Reviews

“The Bodily All-In panty is great. I've been wearing them during pregnancy, and plan to afterwards as well. Their site has some really great things to choose from.”

“Bodily All-In high-waisted panty — I’ve been wearing them with pads since I got home from the hospital.”

“Bodily has amazing postpartum underwear that you can also wear during maternity (size up). They are so soft and stretchy. I am 3 months postpartum and don’t think I will ever go back to other underwear.”

“The All In Panty from Bodily is great!”

Best Affordable Postpartum Underwear

Hanes Women's Cool Comfort Cotton Brief Underwear

Affordable

Comfortable

Breathable

Not specifically designed for postpartum

No absorbency

Material: 100% cotton

Size Range: S to 3XL

Why We Love It

Comfortable? Check. Lower in price than others? Check. Won’t be upset if you bleed all over them? Check . These are just a few of the reasons why countless What to Expect moms — including experienced moms who have given birth multiple times — buy Hanes for the postpartum period.

Not only are Hanes undies affordable — for $10, you can get six pairs, making them just $1.66 each) — but they’re also ultra comfortable to wear. Moms appreciate how soft they are (this pair is made of 100% cotton) and that they’re stretchy yet fitted enough to keep a pad in place.

The waistband is soft enough not to be binding or uncomfortable against your stomach. Plus, because they’re so affordable, many moms tell us they have no problem stocking up and aren’t worried about them getting stained or dirty. Both the cotton briefs and boyfriend shorts styles are popular with postpartum moms. (Keep in mind that because these aren’t designed for postpartum women specifically, you’ll definitely want to size up.)

Tested by Leah Rocketto , mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Commerce Director, who switched to Hanes when she came home from the hospital:

“I appreciated the waistband on the Hanes underwear; tight enough to keep the underwear in place, but not so tight that it put extra pressure on my stomach. They also had enough room for my very large padsicles, which were crucial to my initial recovery. Because they hold pads so well, I still wear them at night when I get my period.”

Community Reviews

“I bought a pack of Hanes briefs and overnight pads. They worked great after my first baby.”

“I bought some soft Hanes “granny panties” from Target. Used them with my first and they were perfect.”

“Hanes boy shorts were my fave and I still wear them now.”

Best Disposable Postpartum Underwear

Always Discreet Incontinence Underwear

Great leak protection

Comfortable

Affordable

Bulky

Limited size options

Material: Polypropylene and polyethylene (fabric-like materials), cellulose, polyester, polypropylene, absorbent gel, elastics

Size Range: S/M, L/XL, XXL

Why We Love It

Lochia (which is postpartum vaginal blood) flow tends to be heaviest in the early postpartum days. Some moms may opt for mesh underwear during this time, but others prefer disposable underwear, which offers superior leak protection and usually doesn’t require adding a pad.

When it comes to disposable postpartum underwear, What to Expect moms recommend Always Discreet Incontinence Underwear time and time again. Although Always designed these rave-reviewed undies for incontinence, new moms have been using them for years with great success. There’s a built-in pad that offers maximum protection, making them ideal for those first few days after giving birth. I purchased one pack for the beginning of my recovery, then fully switched to “real” underwear when it ran out.

time and time again. Although Always designed these rave-reviewed undies for incontinence, new moms have been using them for years with great success. There’s a built-in pad that offers maximum protection, making them ideal for those first few days after giving birth. I purchased one pack for the beginning of my recovery, then fully switched to “real” underwear when it ran out.

The catch? You probably don’t want to rely on these alone for the fourth trimester since they’re not very breathable and are very bulky. I found that they were best suited for the first few days, then for overnight use after that (especially because you won’t have to worry about pads shifting while you sleep).

Always sells both a fragrance-free (which is the pack listed here) and scented version of this product, so if you prefer to avoid fragrance (as many new moms do to avoid irritating their already-sensitive vagina), make sure you buy the unscented option.

"I needed a little extra comfort those first few days, and I like that this underwear gave me excellent leak protection without the bulk of an extra-absorbent pad. It was especially great during nighttime: I toss and turn a lot, and pads don't always... follow your movement. With the underwear, I knew leaks would be contained no matter how much I moved, saving my clothes and bedding."

"I honestly still wear them sometimes when I get my period because they are just so much comfier than a pad and easier on the body postpartum than a tampon! Love me a cute adult diaper."

Community Reviews

“I bought the Always Discreet because I’d rather not worry about leaking out of the pads.”

“With my first I used the “Always Discreet Boutique diaper underwear and they were amazing. I wish I switched to them sooner from the hospital than using those huge pads & mesh underwear. I will be using them with my second too!”

“I did the Always Discreet. I’m 8 days postpartum and stopped needing the underwear after 6 days and have switched to regular pads.”

“Pads move and leak, these stay in place, especially overnight . Less mess, disposable… just makes sense for me.”

“They’re definitely worth it the first few days and way more comfy than giant pads.”

Best Postpartum Period Underwear

Bambody Absorbent Panty

Thick

Absorbent

Comfortable

Good size range

Expensive

Material: 95% bamboo rayon, 5% spandex; Leak-proof layer: Polymer laminated bamboo rayon

Size Range : 4 to 12

Why We Love It

Many postpartum moms rely on period underwear to absorb postpartum bleeding without needing to constantly wear a pad. Although pricey, the Bambody Absorbent Panty is said to hold up to four tampons-worth of absorbency. Moms love that these are comfortable to wear, plus that they’re designed so you don’t have to worry about bulky pads. And they’re made from bamboo, which means they’ll be extra soft and gentle against your skin.

Other than price, the only downside is that you’ll need to wash them frequently, especially in the first few days after you come home from the hospital. Luckily, they’re safe to put in the washing machine on a cold, delicate cycle, but you’ll have to let them air-dry. Also, keep in mind that many reviewers note they had to go up one to two sizes for these undies to fit comfortably postpartum.

Community Reviews

timefortwo “I love the period underwear! I’ve tried several different brands and my favorite is Bambody on Amazon. I don’t get how they work but they totally do! I usually use them with a panty liner or a tampon so that they’re kind of secondary protection, but I’ve also used them on their own and I’ve never had an issue with leaking or smell or anything.”

corba “[B]ambody feels like a diaper but my favorite for nighttime backup and has never leaked.”

A Doctor's Note on Postpartum Bleeding

Let’s talk about something every new mom goes through but few are prepared for: postpartum bleeding , or lochia. Whether you had a vaginal birth or a C-section, your body will shed the extra tissue from pregnancy.

Bleeding is typically heaviest in the first week postpartum, or the first stage of lochia, before gradually lightening over time. During the second stage of lochia, you can expect pink or brown blood for roughly 12 days. In the final stage of lochia, you'll likely see spotting or a yellowish discharge for up to six weeks.

During this time, postpartum underwear is your first line of defense. These super-comfy panties are roomy enough to hold maxi pads or ice packs for soreness; you shouldn't use tampons or menstrual cups until your doctor gives you approval, as there is a heightened risk of infection during this time.

FAQs

What type of underwear is best after giving birth?

The best postpartum underwear for you will depend on personal preference. For instance, do you prefer a compression panel? How do you feel about the environmental impact of disposables?

It will also depend on how you gave birth. New moms who had a C-section usually prefer a higher waistband, for example.

From disposable underwear to underwear with built-in silicone pads to cover a cesarean incision, the best type of postpartum underwear will vary from person to person.

How many pairs should I buy for early postpartum?

This depends on a number of factors, including the type of postpartum underwear you’re thinking of getting. Many women find that they only need to use disposable underwear for the first week or so after giving birth, after which point they switch to regular underwear with a pad. So if you’re going the disposable route, you may find that you just need enough for a few weeks. (Assume you’ll be changing them often in the first few days.)

The quantity of non-disposables you need just depends on how frequently you want to do laundry. Even with a pad, it’s possible to experience leaks in the early days, so having a few more pairs than you think you need is always a good idea.

Are disposable underwear good for postpartum?

Immediately after delivery, you'll likely wear the disposable undies you're given in the hospital. In fact, docs often suggest stashing a bunch of these to take home, if you can.

If you prefer disposable mesh underwear, know that you can also buy more pairs to use at home in those first few weeks. Disposable postpartum underwear means less laundry, but it also means buying more packs.

Can I wear normal underwear after a C-section?

If you’re a C-section mom, you should avoid bikini briefs (or anything that hits low) for several weeks, since most people have a surgical incision right above where their pubic hairline starts. High-waisted underwear is usually what those who had a C-section opt for, as well as underwear that has some compression or support to hold you in. There are also some pairs of postpartum underwear that have a silicone band designed to go over your incision to help prevent it from getting irritated.

How long do you need to wear postpartum underwear?

This can vary a lot from mom to mom, but most women experience their heaviest lochia , or postpartum bleeding, for the first 10 days after giving birth. After that, lochia usually transitions into lighter bleeding or spotting for four to six weeks. Postpartum underwear will probably come in handy the most during these first few weeks and months. But many moms find postpartum undies to be especially comfortable and continue wearing them beyond that point (in fact, some of the pairs on this list have rave reviews for working as “regular” underwear, too).

What size postpartum underwear should I get?

When shopping for postpartum underwear, you may want to order a size larger than you normally would to accommodate your postpartum body and have room for pads, particularly if the underwear is a non-postpartum style. If you’re buying underwear specifically marketed for maternity or the postpartum period, it might be safe to go with your regular size — just check the brand’s sizing chart to be sure.

Think of postpartum underwear like burp cloths — you’ll want more than you think. My advice is to have enough to keep on rotation without having to stress about doing laundry on the daily. I consider 6 to 10 pairs a general sweet spot, though it'll depend on your personal needs. As far as disposable underwear goes, make sure you have enough on hand for the first week.

What styles work best with maxi pads or ice packs?

High-waisted, full-coverage pairs of underwear are best. However, if you've had a C-section, be mindful of where the band sits on your incision.

How do I wash postpartum underwear safely?

It's always best to check with the brand's care instructions. In general, to keep your underwear clean and extend its lifespan, I recommend washing these on a gentle cycle with a mild detergent. Line dry when you can, otherwise, opt for low heat.

WhatToExpect.com, Lochia , August 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Postpartum Symptoms , September 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Postpartum Perineum Pain , June 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Postpartum Recovery Timeline , April 2023. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Optimizing Postpartum Care , May 2018.

Your Next Read

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Best Products for Postpartum Stretch Marks Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

9 Best Swim Diapers to Keep Your Baby’s Poop Out of the Pool Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

Products to Make Postpartum Sex More Comfortable Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

I Survived 3 Weddings Newly Postpartum. Here Are My Hacks to Actually Enjoy the Night By Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

When to Buy and Start Wearing Maternity Clothes Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

5 Things I Wish Other Moms Told Me About Postpartum Body Image Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

What to Expect After a C-Section: Real-Mom Tips for Healing and Newborn Care By Heidi Murkoff

Diaper Size Chart: Your Weight-Based Diapering Guide Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Postpartum Sweating Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window