9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real"

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

tiny onesie and other baby stuff, times pregnancy gets real

Pregnancy can feel like a dream, until reality hits.

Most women don’t "feel" pregnant the second they get a positive reading on a pregnancy test . In fact, even for women who are feeling nauseous as all get-out the first trimester, that "Oh my God, I’m really pregnant" feeling doesn’t hit until sometime in the second trimester . (Maybe because they’re concentrating so hard on trying to keep their food down.) When that feeling does hit, though, it’s kind of a trip.

From realizing you can’t sleep on your belly anymore (sob!) to discovering you can no longer see your kneecaps (yikes!), here are nine moments when pregnancy "gets real." There’s a surprise around every corner!

Key Takeaways

Reality sets in fast . Early on you won’t feel that pregnant, but once you start to show or need to buy maternity pants, your condition will finally seem real.

Little things add up. Yup, baby gear will start to arrive and your body starts to change big-time, which means your wee one really is arriving (and soon!).

It’s emotional too. Holding tiny shoes and sharing your big news brings out many feelings, allowing you to bond with your baby-on-board.

1. When your family and friends start noticing how "big" you are

There comes a point when you really "pop" and get bigger, and the people in your life actually take notice of your growing belly. And chances are good they'll comment on it too, sometimes saying inappropriate things like, "Wow! You look like you're due any day now!" when you're only six months pregnant.

Good times. And definitely a moment when you’ll feel super pregnant.

2. When you have a visceral reaction at the sight of a tiny onesie or a super small diaper

Because your due date is so far off in the beginning, it’s hard to feel a little something extra at the sight of anything newborn-related early in pregnancy. But later, things change and your entire being will simultaneously smile and want to cry at the site of itty-bitty baby socks. Yep. It’s on.

3. When you tell people your news

Most people don’t let the pregnancy cat out of the bag until the second trimester, so things don’t always seem “real” during those first 13 weeks. On the other hand, though, once you tell your friends and family, everything suddenly feels super real.

4. When you buy your first maternity outfit

Many women go on wearing their usual clothes — maybe with some adjustments — during their first trimester. And if said women are feeling okay, well, they probably forget they’re pregnant on occasion! What to Expect Community parent CaiterTots says she had to wear maternity clothes earlier with her second, around the start of the second trimester. “With my first, it was probably closer to 16 weeks that I got uncomfortable in my regular pants ... and then I made the switch."

Regardless of when it happens, at some stage, things just don’t fit anymore and you have to hit the maternity store or aisle — and for a lot of mamas-to-be, that’s when it really sinks in.

5. When you can’t sleep on your tummy anymore

For stomach sleepers, this is a biggie and a huge adjustment. Just when you were starting to get your energy back and feel like yourself again, boom! Pregnancy hits you with another whammy and your favorite sleeping position gets the boot, at least for now.

Track all the milestones and get smart tips from the What to Expect app, your go-to guide for every “whoa — this is really happening” moment.

6. When shaving your legs becomes an undertaking (legs? what legs?)

It’s the little things that you don’t often think about that wind up making the biggest impression during pregnancy sometimes. Take shaving your legs , for example.

It’s a small ritual that one day becomes bizarrely difficult and awkward, in part because you can't really fully see those legs you're trying to remove hair from anymore. In case you forgot you were pregnant, this is your reminder!

7. When you get winded walking up the stairs

You’re fit. You’re healthy. You’ve never had a problem walking up the stairs before. And suddenly you're super short of breath now when you do.

What gives? Oh yeah, the growing baby in your uterus that’s slowly but surely scrunching up your organs and compressing your lungs. One of the less glamorous “this just got real” moments.

8. When a stranger or someone you don’t know well notices you're pregnant — and comments on it

Until it’s very, very obvious that you’re pregnant, most people don’t say anything. And who can blame them? No one wants to mistakenly congratulate a woman on her "pregnancy" only to find out she’s actually not expecting.

Once the world feels they have free range to comment on your baby bump, you’ll definitely feel pregnant.

9. When baby gear starts filling up your apartment or house.

You've announced your happy news to pretty much everyone in your life, and you've registered. And then the flood of gifts starts arriving (often well before you've even had the baby shower if this is your first, or the baby if this is your second or third). Suddenly your house or apartment resembles a sea of baby gear, clothes, toys, and blankets.

Get used to it, Mom. It's only the beginning of one of those universal maternal truths: Babies take over your life!

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

What to Expect When You’re Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Here’s How to Remove Unwanted Hair Safely During Pregnancy , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Sleeping Positions During Pregnancy , December 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Shortness of Breath During Pregnancy , September 2022. WhatToExpect.com, When to Tell People You're Pregnant , June 2024.

Updates history

December 1, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Laughing, Crying, Cleaning the Window Sills? 11 Pregnancy Emotions You May Have When You're Expecting Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

How the Second Trimester Brings Relief, New Milestones, and Big-Time Baby Growth Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

10 Things to Know About Your Baby Bump Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

When Will Your Baby Bump Show? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnancy Symptoms: 14 Early Signs of Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Let’s Get Real: You Can Be Grateful for Your Baby and Still Not Love Being Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Want a Good Laugh? Moms Share 17 Hilarious (and Slightly Cringey) Pregnancy Moments Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

10 Things I Wish Someone Had Told Me About the Third Trimester of Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Moms on What Labor Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

When to Tell People You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

Hot Days, Cool Mocktails, and a Baby Bump: What Summer Pregnancies Really Feel Like Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

When to Buy and Start Wearing Maternity Clothes Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window