9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

exclamation point made of multicolored candies or beads, thoughts pregnant moms have in the first trimester

Here's what you may be thinking and feeling after you find out you're pregnant.

One minute you’re on cloud nine, the next you’re feeling pretty blue. But don’t worry, it’s all normal, and you’re definitely not alone.

Here are nine thoughts every mom has in the first trimester. Buckle up!

Key Takeaways

All-over-the-place emotions are very normal. Feelings of joy and apprehension — even at the same time! — are expected during the first trimester.

This trimester fades fast. The nausea, headaches, and fatigue you’re feeling early on should ease up once the second trimester begins (you got this!).

Your journey is valid. Every pregnant mom has been there! From worrying about when to share the big news to concerns about what’s “safe,” you’re definitely not alone.

1. Yay!

Whether it happens right after you pee on a stick or it takes a few days (weeks, months) to kick in, there will definitely be times when you’re giddy and beyond excited about your pregnancy.

Maybe you were trying for a while or maybe you got pregnant on the first try — it doesn’t matter! Those visions of baby snuggles will make their way into your brain somehow. It's a great feeling.

2. Noooo!

Annnnd just like you’re all but guaranteed to have moments of euphoria during the first trimester when thinking about what’s to come, you’re also bound to have moments of sheer, utter panic.

"What have I done?" you may find yourself thinking as you aimlessly walk through the grocery store in search of ginger ale or something (anything!) that’s appetizing. "DEAR GOD, WHAT HAVE I DONE?!"

3. Will I ever feel normal again?

When you’re in the trenches of the first trimester (and you’re extra tired , extra moody, and extra queasy ), you may wonder if you’re ever going to feel like your old self again.

It's hard to imagine when you're in the thick of it. Thanks, pregnancy hormones ! I can always count on you guys to come through!

You don’t have to navigate the first trimester solo. Download the What to Expect app for smart advice, expert tips, and trusted guidance during the early weeks of pregnancy.

4. How — seriously, how — am I going to make it through the rest of this pregnancy?

If you feel icky during the first trimester, you without a doubt will find yourself wondering how on earth you’re going to make it through six more months in the second and third trimesters .

You will. And you most likely won't be feeling this way. It just may not seem like it now, when you can barely keep your eyes open for 10 minutes of The Bachelorette. But trust us. It gets better.

5. Is it okay if I catch a cold/work out/have spicy food/go to a haunted house?

Oh, the internet searches that happen during the first trimester. What can and can't you safely do now that you're with child?

Those initial three months are, after all, the most sensitive time for a baby on board (which is why most women don’t reveal their pregnancies until a bit later), so it’s only natural to consult Dr. Google on practically everything you do or think of doing.

And then, of course, you walk away from your computer even more confused because of all the conflicting advice out there. Fun times!

6. Should I tell my friend/MIL/coworker? I’m the worst liar!

As if the first trimester weren’t tricky enough, there’s the whole "having to lie to people” aspect. Nobody likes to lie!

There likely will be many times when you wonder if you should just make things easier and tell everyone you're pregnant — but then maybe you’ll renege and decide to just keep quiet. Isn't inner turmoil fun?

What to Expect Community parent TinyHiney2 says she’s not telling her news for a little while longer. “I haven’t told my child or my parents yet. I’m 10+5 but since this is my second baby, the bump isn’t too far away for me. I can only pretend I’m chunking up on holiday goodies for so long before it’s obvious!”

7. I guess I’m just going to hide out for these 12 weeks and hope no one notices.

There definitely will be points during the first trimester when you can think of no better solution to feeling yucky and lying to people you love than just, you know, not leaving your house for months on end. And TBH, it probably doesn’t sound all that unappealing.

8. Is it too early to start decorating a nursery and buying onesies?

The first trimester may seem a little premature to start picking up baby stuff (and it probably is), but everyone has those sneaking thoughts about what the baby's room will look like and whether or not they should buy that adorable tiny dress they saw at Baby Gap.

9. Second trimester, I have a lot of faith in you!

If you have told a few trusted people you’re expecting (or if you’ve read any pregnancy books or websites), you’ve probably heard that there’s a light at the end of the tunnel and it’s called the second trimester .

So are you holding high expectations about months 4 to 6? You bet. Some people fantasize about trips to the Amalfi Coast. You? You’re fantasizing about having a little more energy and not rushing to the bathroom to pee every hour. It’s the little things these days.

Updates history

December 8, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The 11-Step First Trimester Checklist That’ll Keep You Sane While Growing a Human Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Laughing, Crying, Cleaning the Window Sills? 11 Pregnancy Emotions You May Have When You're Expecting Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

10 Things I Wish Someone Had Told Me About the Third Trimester of Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

How the Second Trimester Brings Relief, New Milestones, and Big-Time Baby Growth Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Anxiety During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Is Breast Tenderness in Early Pregnancy Normal? What to Expect in the First Trimester Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Mood Swings Happen and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

I'm Struggling With Separation Anxiety During My Pregnancy. It Turns Out I'm Not the Only One Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Depression During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Your Vivid Pregnancy Dreams Are Totally Normal. Here's What They Mean Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnancy Sex Through the Trimesters Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window