9 Weeks Pregnant

Your baby is as big as a green olive.

Feeling exhausted? Fatigue kicks in for many moms-to-be around week 9 of pregnancy. The (very important) reason? Your body is working overtime in the first trimester to develop the placenta , the lifeline between your baby and your own blood supply.

Your Baby at Week 9

At a Glance

Getting stronger

This week, tiny muscles are starting to form, but it will be at least another month or two before you'll be able to feel those little punches.

Big-hearted baby

Your baby's heart is growing larger and developing quickly this week. It could even be audible with a hand-held Doppler by now, though you'll probably have to wait a while longer for your doc to let you hear that glorious sound at one of your appointments.

Hi, baby

The spinal cord "tail" at your baby-to-be's rump has all but disappeared! He's looking more and more like a tiny human.

9 weeks pregnant is how many months?

If you're 9 weeks pregnant, you're in month 3 of your pregnancy. Only 6 months left to go! Still have questions? Here's some more information on how weeks, months, and trimesters are broken down in pregnancy .

How big is my baby at 9 weeks?

At 9 weeks pregnant, your little one is now about 1 inch long, the size of a medium green olive — but no martinis, please.

The embryo period ends

Would you believe your baby is only an embryo for one more week and is already developing into a fetus?

The head has straightened out and is more fully developed and the ears are continuing to grow, making baby look more human. Plus, toes are visible, and all of baby's essential organs like the heart, brain, kidneys, liver, and lungs have begun to develop.

The arms and legs in your soon-to-be-fetus are also spontaneously moving now that minuscule muscles are beginning to develop, though you won't feel your tiny dancer for at least another month or two.

Baby's heart is growing fast

At this stage, your baby's heart is developing rapidly and growing bigger by the week. Though in theory, by now, fetal cardiac activity may be detectable using a handheld ultrasound device known as a Doppler , your practitioner likely won't take it out and give it a try until around week 15.

So you have to wait a bit longer to hear that sweet, sweet sound. And when you do, be still your beating heart!

Your Body at Week 9

Feeling so tired!

When it comes to pregnancy symptoms , you may feel like you've already reached your limit at 9 weeks pregnant: Your clothes are getting tighter around the waist, you're busting out on top, and you're still running to the bathroom 100 times a day — and if it isn't because you're sick, it's to pee.

But wait, there's more. You're having trouble lifting your head off the pillow, you're dragging your feet all day, and you can't wait to crawl into bed as soon as you arrive home at night.

Sound familiar? Extreme pregnancy fatigue is a common symptom, especially in the first trimester. And for good reason: Making a baby is hard work. Your body is working overtime preparing for motherhood as it develops the placenta , your baby's lifeline.

What's more, your body's metabolism and hormone levels have increased significantly, which triggers a decrease in blood sugar and blood pressure — a recipe for fatigue. Try these tips to combat fatigue safely during pregnancy .

The good news: Relief is around the corner as your energy level increases and morning sickness decreases over the next few weeks, once placenta construction is completed in the second trimester.

The not-so-good news: Tiredness is likely to reappear during the third trimester as the demands of toting around a larger fetus increase. But since staying active is important for your health (and your baby's!), try these tips to work out when you're tired during pregnancy .

Snacking well

Even if you're still grappling with morning sickness , try not to worry too much. Your baby will still get the necessary nutrients to grow and develop.

Focus on eating six mini-meals or snacks rather than three big meals a day. And snack smart to satisfy your baby's and your nutritional needs without offending your less-than-settled tummy.

Snacks like saltine or whole grain crackers topped with mild cheese, ginger in various forms (tea, ginger ale, candy or even small meals cooked with fresh ginger), applesauce, bananas, plain toast or bread, and modest servings of plain rice or pasta can all do the trick.

Pregnancy Symptoms Week 9

Fatigue

It’s a drag when you’re dragging yourself through the day. Try to fit in enough sleep — it seems obvious, but between racing to the bathroom at midnight and your mind racing with pregnancy worries, you may find it tricky to get the rest you need. Shut off your phone and computer before bed (they can leave you wired), and try to turn in earlier. The extra Zzzs will help!

Bloating and gas

Dealing with extra bloating and gas? Don’t worry — you're in good company. To keep the uncomfortable feeling (and potential for embarrassment in public) to a minimum, eat smaller, more frequent meals so you won’t overload your system.

Breast tenderness and changes

Another thing that could be keeping you up at night: your breasts, which may be bigger and more tender. The increased blood flow to the area and other changes can make them ultra sensitive — and make you more uncomfortable at night. Wear a cotton sports bra or wireless bra and size up if needed. A warm or cold compress can also offer relief.

Frequent urination

If your sleep is interrupted by that gotta-go feeling, try double-voiding — in other words, when you think you’re done peeing, go again. This will help empty out your bladder completely and maybe buy you an extra hour of shut-eye.

Constipation

To avoid even more bloating, try to get those bowels moving at their normal — or at least, pre-pregnancy — pace. Besides drinking lots of water, have a go at fruit and vegetable juices, which can help you stay regular. And try warm water with lemon first thing in the morning or last thing at night. Some pregnant women swear by it!

Heartburn and indigestion

Need a quick trick for banishing your next bout of heartburn? Chew some sugarless gum, which is safe in moderation for pregnant women. Chewing increases saliva, which neutralizes stomach acid. OTC antacids can ease the burn and give you a calcium boost (but check with your doc first). Opt for six mini-meals instead of three big ones, and stay upright for a couple of hours after eating.

Tips for You This Week

Fight heartburn

Are you feeling the burn — heartburn , that is? For many, heartburn is among the earliest symptoms of pregnancy, beginning around the second month.

, that is? For many, heartburn is among the earliest symptoms of pregnancy, beginning around the second month.

If avoiding spicy and greasy foods isn’t helping, try taking antacids. They contain extra calcium, which you need during pregnancy anyway. You can also try to cut out citrus and tomatoes from your diet, avoid lying down for four hours after eating, and sleep more upright, if it’s comfortable.

Talk to your doctor about whether you should get a blood test called noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) — a screening for chromosomal abnormalities that many pregnant moms now take. It can be given as early as week 10 of pregnancy, and can also tell the sex of your baby !

— a screening for chromosomal abnormalities that many pregnant moms now take. It can be given as early as

Just remember that it only tells the likelihood or probability of certain conditions, unlike amnio or CVS , which are invasive but give more definitive answers about your baby’s health. And be sure to check with your insurance about whether NIPT is covered or not.

, which are invasive but give more definitive answers about your baby’s health. And be sure to check with your insurance about whether NIPT is covered or not.

If you’re 35 or older or if you have a family history of genetic conditions, you’ll definitely want to consider not only NIPT but also CVS (chorionic villus sampling) , performed between 10 and 13 weeks, and amnio (amniocentesis) , typically done between week 15 or 16 and week 20.

Get your Zzzs

If your favorite sleep position is tummy-down, that’s perfectly fine — at least, until your tummy is the size of a watermelon, at which point you’ll have to switch positions for obvious reasons.

is tummy-down, that’s perfectly fine — at least, until your tummy is the size of a watermelon, at which point you’ll have to switch positions for obvious reasons.

During the second and and third trimesters, sleeping on your side is ideal for you and your baby-to-be.

This position allows for maximum blood flow and nutrients to the placenta, since it puts less pressure on a large vein called the vena cava and enhances kidney function.

Avoid at-home fetal Dopplers

It’s around now that your baby’s heart is developed enough to potentially hear it on a Doppler device , though it's not likely you'll be given the chance until around week 15 .

If you're feeling more excited than patient about that pregnancy milestone, you may be tempted to buy an at-home Doppler so you can check — and hear — that little pitter-patter early at your house, or any time (and place!) you like.

so you can check — and hear — that little pitter-patter early at your house, or any time (and place!) you like.

Not so fast. While the variety used by doctors is reliable and safe, those sold for home use aren’t accurate and can cause unnecessary anxiety among expectant parents.

So skip the OTC Dopplers and save the heartbeat jam sessions for your prenatal appointments .

Expand your carbohydrate horizons

Has the word “carb” become synonymous with “saltines”? You have more options to nourish your baby and fuel your energy needs.

Has the word “carb” become synonymous with “saltines”? You have more options to nourish your baby and

Here's a list of complex carb options that reads like the roster of a nutritional all-star team: fresh fruits, dried and freeze-dried fruits, fresh vegetables, whole grain breads, crackers, cereals, baked potatoes (with skins on), beans, and peas.

Prevent constipation

Constipation — it's a pregnancy symptom that no one wants to talk about.

— it's a pregnancy symptom that no one wants to talk about.

Need some tips to get things moving? First, scrutinize your supplements. Ironically, many of the supplements that do a pregnant body good (prenatal vitamins, calcium, and iron supplements) can also contribute to constipation.

Talk to your practitioner about possible alternatives , such as a slow-release formula, an iron-free prenatal, or a vitamin that contains a stool softener.

, such as a slow-release formula, an iron-free prenatal, or a vitamin that contains a stool softener.

You can also get things going more smoothly by fitting in some kind of exercise (a brisk walk, yoga, even a swim) daily.

And don't forget, when you gotta go — go. As soon as possible. Holding it in can weaken your bowel muscles, making it harder to push out the poop. And remember to stay away from medications, including herbal ones, until you've checked in with your practitioner.

Use cold compresses

Breast tenderness is extremely common among the pregnant set, with symptoms ranging from a dull ache to feelings of fullness and sharp, shooting pains.

is extremely common among the pregnant set, with symptoms ranging from a dull ache to feelings of fullness and sharp, shooting pains.

There's a reason for all this activity, though: Your body is building fat and increasing blood flow to the area, which will help prime you for breastfeeding once baby is here.

Until the pain subsides — usually in the second or third trimester — apply an ice pack wrapped in a towel to your breasts. Or, if you prefer heat, take a warm (not hot) shower.