What Every Black Mom Should Have in Her Birth Plan

Updated to add an editor's note.

Birth plan for Black moms

"Black mothers, we have to advocate for ourselves. Speak up and often."

Editor’s note: Every mother deserves a safe pregnancy, but there are vast disparities in maternal health care based on where a mom lives, her ability to pay and the color of her skin. That's unacceptable, and it's why we started #BumpDay. Our goal is to raise awareness about the need for equitable care for every mom, everywhere, and to urge elected representatives to take action to support safe pregnancies and healthy babies. This article was originally published as part of our #BumpDay 2021 package, but it continues to be relevant today. To learn more about the critical issues impacting moms in 2022, visit our #BumpDay 2022 editorial package here .

There is a point in your pregnancy when you start to count down the weeks. You take all the necessary steps to prepare to meet your little one, like creating a birth plan .

Pinterest is full of aesthetically pleasing, color-coded birth plans that you can customize, print out and bring with you to the hospital. These ready-made plans include checkboxes like:

Who should be in the room?

What type of pain management would you like offered?

When should the umbilical cord be cut?

Where should the baby be placed immediately after birth?

For Black mamas, though, I think our birth plans need to include a lot more. For example:

How will you advocate for yourself with your medical team?

How will you make sure you survive and go home with your new child?

How will you prevent yourself from becoming another Black maternal mortality statistic?

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Black women are two to three times more likely to die from pregnancy-related complications than white women. Black women have less access to quality maternal health care and are at higher risk for certain pregnancy-related complications , such as HELLP syndrome and postpartum hemorrhage .

Institutional racism also plays a role, and Black women's pain is often not taken seriously by medical professionals. There’s no Pinterest-ready chart to help you prepare for that.

Jenny LeFlore

I’m a 40-year-old Black woman. For women like me, a birth plan should not only include who will be in the room. It should also include a serious conversation with that person about advocating for you if you become unable to do so.

My OB/GYN is a white woman. I trust her tremendously and have full confidence in her abilities. Four years ago, she delivered my first son, and the delivery went off without a hitch.

Since we have such a great rapport, I didn’t sugarcoat my concerns as we made arrangements for my second birth. I said plainly: “Dr. Lisa, I want to go home with my baby and my husband. If I say I am in pain, I want to be taken seriously. If I am in a position where I cannot speak up for myself, my husband will do so. In this case I am trusting he will not be perceived as an aggressive Black man. Instead I hope you will look at him and see a man passionate that his wife and son live.”

I went on to repeat these wishes to every medical professional that played a part in my delivery. After my lead nurse administered my COVID-19 test, we had a heart-to-heart while we waited for the results. When there was a shift change after I had been in labor for over 12 hours, a new nurse came in and introduced herself. She asked if there was anything she could do to make me more comfortable. Again, like a broken record, I gave her my speech.

When it was go time, I pulled out the notes I had typed up in my phone during those final weeks of pregnancy. I knew I wanted to create a welcoming atmosphere to labor in. We played music the entire time, the lights stayed low. I wanted to labor with props like a labor ball and pillows, and get an epidural for pain management. The golden hour, that first hour after birth, was very important to me. I wanted my son with me as much as possible. I wanted my care team to talk to me as much as possible. The last note, in bold, said: "Mama and baby home safely."

My birth plan was a success. I labored in various positions, just like I asked. My son was born at 7:13 a.m. with Gospel music on full blast. We did skin-to-skin right away. He latched immediately and instantly my heart grew.

After the delivery, I thanked my medical team. They turned around and thanked me . Through my vulnerable conversations and being transparent with my concerns, we developed a cooperative relationship. Forty-eight hours later, I took my baby home. As I sat in the backseat with him, my husband at the wheel, I took a deep breath. I made it. We made it.

Black mothers, we have to advocate for ourselves. Speak up and often. It is never too early to have this conversation with your doctor. This is truly a case of life and death.

Speak life. Speak life over you and your baby. Use your voice — it’s the most powerful tool we have.

WhatToExpect.com, 10 Pregnancy-Related Complications Black Women Should Know About , May 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Why the Maternal Mortality Rate Is so Much Higher for Black Moms in the U.S. — and What We Can Do About It , July 2020. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System , November 2020. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Vital Signs, Pregnancy-Related Deaths , May 2019.

Updates history

July 7, 2022

Editor: Kathleen Felton

Updated language to add an editor's note.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

25 Champions of Black Maternal Health By Kelly Glass

How to Create a Birth Plan That Feels Empowering — And Realistic Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnancy-Related Complications Black Women Should Know About (and How to Protect Yourself) Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Why Culturally Competent Care Is Critical to Ensuring Every Mom Has a Safe Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

The Pregnancy Bill of Rights: 10 Things You're Entitled to During Pregnancy and Birth Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

A Mom's Guide to a Hospital Birth Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

8 Things Your Labor and Delivery Nurses Want You to Know About Childbirth Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

What to Know Before Having a Planned Home Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

17 Ways Dads and Partners Can Advocate for a Healthy Pregnancy, Birth and Postpartum Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

How Braids Help Pregnant Black Moms Prepare for Birth and Postpartum Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

When Birth Doesn’t Go as Planned, It’s Okay to Grieve — Here's How to Heal Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

5 Things Every Partner Should Do for a Mom-to-Be Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

Tons of Pregnant Women Feel Dismissed by Their Doctors. Here's How to Make Sure You're Not One of Them Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window