A Literal Pain in the Neck? Why Neck Pain Happens in Pregnancy

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Pregnancy and Exercise

From posture shifts to restless nights, pregnancy can strain your neck and shoulders. Here’s what’s you can do to feel better.

It seems like headaches and backaches get all the attention during pregnancy, but neck pain can be common too — and just as uncomfortable.

In fact, it’s a pregnancy double whammy: Many women already carry tension in their neck and shoulders, and as your belly grows, posture changes can throw you off balance, especially in the third trimester . The result? A literal pain in the neck.

Here’s what causes neck strain and tightness during pregnancy — and what you can do to feel better.

Key Takeaways

Neck pain is common in pregnancy — especially later on. Extra weight, posture changes from a growing belly, and disrupted sleep can all strain the neck and shoulders, making discomfort possible throughout pregnancy and especially likely in the third trimester.

Most pregnancy neck pain is manageable at home. Stretching, improving posture, using heat or cold, upgrading your pillow, and getting a massage can all help ease tension and stiffness.

Certain symptoms warrant a call to your provider. Seek medical care if pain worsens, spreads to your arms or legs, follows a fall or accident, or comes with numbness, tingling, or a severe headache.

What causes neck pain during pregnancy?

Neck pain can stem from the many changes that your body is going through to support your growing baby. Here’s what may be behind it: Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBack Pain During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBack Pain During PregnancySee All Sources

Added pounds. Increasing weight means more work for your muscles and increased stress on your joints, including those in your neck and back.

Poor posture. A sway-back or “U” shape in your spine due to your swelling belly can strain your neck. Hunching over a laptop, cradling your phone on your shoulder, or sitting in a less-than-ergonomic desk chair can make it worse. "I've had horrible neck and shoulder pain since 8/9 weeks," says What to Expect Community mom channychan. "I think it's my posture."

Spotty sleep. Tossing and turning to find a comfortable position can leave your neck stiff and painful and the morning. "I'm 12 weeks and I slept wrong two nights ago, and now I'm in terrible pain in my neck and shoulder area," says What to Expect Community member meggers27.

Types of neck pain you might experience during pregnancy

There are a variety of neck pain types and symptoms. If you’ve got a sore neck in pregnancy, it could be one of the following: Trusted SourceMayo ClinicNeck PainSee All Sources [2]

Neck Pain

Muscle strain. Knots in your neck from overuse or holding a position for too long can cause sore muscles. Reading in an awkward position, crouching over a computer keyboard, or even gritting or grinding your teeth are all possible culprits.

Neck spasm. A sudden tight or stiff neck, especially in the morning, may be caused by muscles that tensed up involuntarily while you slept.

Headache-related pain. Pain at the back of your head may radiate down your neck (ouch!).

Pinched nerve. Sharp pain, tingling, or "pins and needles" sensations that travel into your arms or hands may signal a compressed nerve.

Neck injury. Tripping, falling , or a sudden stop in the car can fling your neck back and forth, causing pain and injury from whiplash.

Referred pain. Neck pain may be caused by pain in another part of the body. Trusted SourceHarvard Health PublishingNeck Pain: Symptoms, Causes, & How to Relieve ItSee All Sources [3]

Not sure which ache you’re feeling? The What to Expect app helps you track symptoms and connect with other moms-to-be who understand.

How to relieve neck pain during pregnancy

Once you’ve pinpointed the likely cause of your pregnancy neck pain, try these strategies to ease your discomfort:

Stretch it out. Gently bring your chin to your chest and hold for about 15 seconds. Turn your head to the left, and hold 15 seconds, then to the right and hold 15 seconds. Tilt your head (ear towards shoulder) to each side, holding 15 seconds. Repeat several times a day — at your desk, in the waiting room, or at home. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicDon't Just Sit There: Exercises for the OfficeSee All Sources [4]

Try heat or cold. A warm shower, bath, or heating pad set on low can relax tight muscles. Cold packs for 20 minutes a few times a day may reduce inflammation. You can also alternate between the two. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, U.S. National Library of Medicine, MedlinePlusNeck Pain or Spasms - Self CareSee All Sources [5] "Alternating a heating pad and ice packs has helped me," says What to Expect Community member katie777777.

Stand tall. Keep your shoulders down and back, rather than allowing them to round forward. Lightly engaging your abs while sitting or standing can improve alignment and help prevent strain.

Upgrade your pillow. For a more solid night of Zzzs, consider a pregnancy pillow or supportive memory foam pillow that can offer better support for your head, neck, and body. "I used tiger balm, heat pads and bought a new memory foam pillow," says What to Expect Community member MummySarah29. "I'm finally starting to feel back to normal."

Get a massage. Gentle rubbing can loosen tight muscles and feel amazing on a tight neck. Do it yourself, have your partner rub you down, or research prenatal massage practitioners in your area for a full body treatment. "I try to get a massage once every month or so and it really helps with the tension and pain in my muscles," says What to Expect Community mom MrsPeacock.

Ask about OTC relief. Check with your doctor about over-the-counter pain medications that are safe to take when you’re expecting.

Try acupuncture. Some moms-to-be find that acupuncture helps their neck and back pain. As a bonus, it may also ease other pregnancy symptoms, including morning sickness , pelvic pain , and headaches.

When should you call your doctor about pregnancy neck pain?

Fortunately, most neck pain in pregnancy gets better with home remedies and some patience. But call your doctor if the pain:

Worsens over several days

Spreads to your arms or legs

Comes with numbness, tingling, or weakness

Is accompanied by a severe headache

Seek immediate care if neck pain follows a fall, sports injury, or car accident.

While neck pain during pregnancy can be frustrating, it’s usually temporary and often improves with a few simple adjustments to your posture, sleep setup, and daily routine. Listen to your body, take breaks when you need them, and don’t hesitate to loop in your provider if something doesn’t feel right.

With a little TLC, that literal pain in the neck should ease up so you can get back to focusing on the more exciting parts of pregnancy.