Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme

sweet one birthday

Candy, cupcakes and confections abound with the sweetest first birthday party imaginable.

A candy-hued color palette and collection of over-the-top confections is the sweetest way to celebrate your little one, which is why a Sweet One birthday theme is such an enticing first birthday party idea .

"Having a Sweet One birthday theme is a lovely and memorable way to celebrate your baby with family and friends," says Justyna Ogrodnik, who co-founded the event design company Blooms & Balloons by JB with her sister Bozena Roszkowski.

Read on for their professional advice on how to plan an enchanting Sweet One birthday party that'll leave you with the sweetest memories for years to come.

Sweet One birthday party decor

Lean into pastels for a Sweet One birthday theme

sweet one birthday color scheme

"Soft pastel colors are the most popular choice for Sweet One birthday decor," Ogrodnik says. "Shades of pink, yellow, light purple and light blue go well together." Use balloons, banners, streamers and other party decor to establish your chosen color scheme.

Go over-the-top with sweets-inspired accents

sweet one birthday balloons

"Adding props to your balloon backdrop or garland elevates your party theme and creates a Candy Land-inspired atmosphere for guests," Roszkowski says. Consider decorating with giant gummy bears, cupcakes, lollipops, donuts or a huge balloon ice cream cone.

Create a welcoming spot for guests to chill

sweet one birthday tablescape

Make your party set-up kid-friendly and memorable by surrounding a low picnic table with assorted pastel floor pillows. If sitting at a low table isn't feasible, you can also pile pillows or poufs in a corner for little ones to lounge in.

Sweet One birthday party food

Design an enticing treat table set-up

sweet one birthday dessert table

"A Sweet One birthday theme calls for a dessert table or candy bar that's overflowing with different kinds of sweet treats, from colorful gummy bears and marshmallows to sprinkled donuts, cupcakes, cake pops and cookies," says Ogrodnik. "Freshly made cotton candy or a self-serve ice cream bar are also great options for a Sweet One birthday theme."

Get creative with your drinks and desserts

sweet one birthday cupcakes

Extra confectionary accents can take your Sweet One birthday theme to the next level. Donut-topped cupcakes are the perfect example, but you can also add rock candy swizzle sticks to drink glasses or serve sprinkle-coated popcorn.

Pile on treats for the sweetest cake of all

sweet one birthday cake

Add all of the candy-licious goodies you can find to make your baby's first birthday cake an over-the-top success. "Decorate your cake with different kinds of sweets and candies, donuts, macaroons and sprinkles for a delightful first birthday cake that is fun, colorful and oh-so-sweet," says Roszkowski.

Party safety tip : Remove the add-ons from whichever layer you use as a smash cake , since hard candies and things like lollipop sticks can pose a choking risk.

Go simple with an ice cream cone cake

sweet one birthday ice cream cone cake

For a cleaner look that's still tons of fun, "A cake that looks like a melting ice cream cone is the perfect eye candy!" says Ogrodnik. Plus, this themed cake is fairly easy to make. The "ice cream cone" on top is a cake ball covered with ganache and topped with a sugar cone.

Sweet One birthday party games

Engage kids with an edible necklace-making activity

For an adorable Sweet One-themed craft, "Let kids make a 'healthier' version of candy necklaces using different types of cereals that have holes," suggests Roszkowski. It'll keep little hands busy without adding to the sugar rush.

Set up an artsy sweets-making station

sweet one birthday party activity

"Building an ice cream sundae out of play dough is the perfect Sweet One birthday activity," says Ogrodnik. "Or you can set up an activity station where kids can decorate mini ceramic cupcakes with paint and glitter."

Sweet One birthday party favors

Send guests home with Sweet One-themed favors

sweet one birthday party favors

"Lollipop candy kabobs, customized thank you cookies, cotton candy to go or goodie bags with mixed candies all make scrumptious Sweet One birthday party favors ," says Roszkowski. "For a non-confectionary take-home gift, you can gift guests bubbles or lollipop-themed play dough kits."

Justyna Ogrodnik, Co-Founder, Blooms & Balloons by JB . Bozena Roszkowski, Co-Founder, Blooms & Balloons by JB . WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a First Birthday Party , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes , January 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Birthday Party Dos and Don'ts , November 2022.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Celebrate 'Mr. Onederful' With a Dapper First Birthday Bash Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Host a 'Wild One' Birthday That's a Roaring Good Time Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Turn Baby's First Birthday Party Into a 'Winter Onederland' Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Space Birthday Party Ideas That Are Out of This World Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Dog-Themed Ideas for a Pawfect Puppy Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window