Aaron K Styer

Aaron K. Styer, M.D.

About Aaron K. Styer, M.D.

Dr. Aaron K. Styer is a founding partner and medical director of Colorado Center for Reproductive Medicine (CCRM) Boston in Newton, Massachusetts. A reproductive endocrinologist, he is board-certified in obstetrics and gynecology, as well as its sub-specialty reproductive endocrinology and infertility.

Dr. Styer received his medical degree from Vanderbilt University School of Medicine and his undergraduate degree from Duke University. He completed his residency in the Harvard Integrated Program in Obstetrics and Gynecology at Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH), where he later practiced for a number of years. He did his clinical fellowship in Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility at MGH/Harvard Medical School.

Board certifications

Dr. Styer is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Styer is affiliated with Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston and Newton Wellesley Hospital in Newton.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Styer is an associate professor of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Biology at Harvard Medical School.

Passionate about patient education, advocacy, and expanded access to fertility care, Dr. Styer is an active member of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM), the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), and the Society for Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility (SREI).

He serves on the board of directors for the national infertility advocacy organizations All Paths Family Building and Fertility Within Reach, and is a member of the medical advisory board for Progyny.

Awards

Dr. Styer has been honored by his peers annually as a Boston Magazine Best of Boston Top Doctor and a Castle Connolly Top Doctor from 2018 through 2024.

He is committed to the continued advancement of transformative access and patient-centered care in fertility medicine, and to the continued empowerment of patients and couples during their family-building journeys.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window