About What to Expect

What to Expect is the world’s best-known, most trusted pregnancy and parenting brand. The What to Expect brand mission drives everything we do, and it's as simple as it is powerful: “Support happy, healthy pregnancies and happy, healthy babies."

What to Expect's app and website are produced by What to Expect's founder, Heidi Murkoff , alongside a team of award-winning journalists, editors, physicians and other pregnancy and parenting health experts. Our team is committed to high standards of objectivity, accuracy and relevancy in coverage, and adheres to the quality standards set forth by the Trust Project .

All the content on What to Expect is accurate, up-to-date and continuously reviewed by the What to Expect Medical Review Board and other pregnancy and parenting health experts.

What we do: our app and website

Empowering, positive, personalized and relevant, What to Expect offers must-have information, support and community for every step of the parenting journey, from preconception and pregnancy to the baby years and beyond. Here's a look at what we do to meet the needs of today's parents and parents-to-be:

What to Expect mobile apps: pregnancy and baby app for iOS and Android

What to Expect's top-rated app guides you through pregnancy and baby’s first year day by day and week by week (even hour by hour!) on iPhone , iPad , Apple Watch and Android devices. Based on your due date or your child’s birthdate, receive personalized resources and information and access to a tight-knit community of other parents and parents-to-be. You’ll get tools and support to help you prepare and feel in control every step of the way—helping you achieve a happy, healthy pregnancy. Once your baby is born, you’ll get monthly videos, information on milestones, a handy feeding tracker and more as you navigate life as a new parent.

WhatToExpect.com

Millions of parents and parents-to-be visit the What to Expect website every month for medically reviewed answers to their questions about pregnancy and parenting, delivered with empathy, warmth and a sense of humor — plus, a vibrant community that’s millions of moms strong. With a new community post every 3 seconds, we're proud to say that What to Expect is the most supportive and empowering digital community for moms.

What to Expect adheres to the highest standards of journalistic integrity, with sourcing guidelines relying only on peer-reviewed medical journals, academic institutions, government agencies and highly respected medical organizations. See more >>

Advertising policy

What to Expect regularly seeks sponsorships from relevant organizations and manufacturers dedicated to providing pregnancy, parenting and preconception information. However, we adhere to a strict policy of separation between editorial and advertising content and never allow advertisers to influence editorial content. See more >>

Product reviews policy

What to Expect’s editors and product writers independently research, test and recommend the best products for parents and babies. Our recommendations include tried-and-true favorites, as well as new and innovative products designed to make life with a baby easier than ever. Content is approved by a professional fact-checker or member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board prior to publishing. What to Expect may earn commissions from shopping links, which helps support all the work we do. However, this does not impact what products we choose to cover. See more >>

What to Expect Community

The What to Expect Community was created to be a supportive environment where parents can share joys and concerns with others going through similar experiences through message boards, discussion threads and other user-generated features. With a new post every 3 seconds, we're proud to say that What to Expect is the most supportive and empowering digital community for parents.

Community members are required to abide by a set of Community Guidelines based on the Terms of Use that users accept when they create a What to Expect account. We reserve the right to edit or delete posts we deem offensive, inaccurate or misleading. Readers should be aware that member-generated content is not independently verified nor subject to our editorial review process.

Our recent awards

2024

The Webby Awards Nominee

2023

Anthem Silver Award in Diversity, Equity & Inclusion: #BumpDay

2022

Anthem Bronze Award in Health Awareness: #BumpDay

2021

Webby Award Nominee in Apps and Software: Health & Fitness

2020

2020 Webby Award Honoree, Social: Best Use of Stories for Pregnancy & Parenting Stories

2020 Webby Award Nominee, Social: Health & Fitness (Series & Campaigns) for World Breastfeeding Week

2019

2019 Webby Award in the Apps, Mobile and Voice category for Due Date Calculator

2018

2018 Ava Digital Gold Award for #BumpDay

2018 Ava Digital Honorable Mention for The What to Expect Awards

2017

2017 Ava Digital Platinum Awards for Alexa Skill

2017 Ava Digital Platinum Award for #BumpDay

2017 Digiday Publishing Awards Finalist for Best Use in Technology

2017 MM&M Healthcare Consumer Media Brand of the Year

2016

2016 Folio Magazine Award for Best Use of New Technology for our Alexa Skill

How to contact us

Editorial: Christine Mattheis, VP/Editorial Director, edit@whattoexpect.com

Advertising: https://www.ehg-pp.com/contact-us/

PR: press@whattoexpect.com

General support: support@whattoexpect.com

Community support: communityadmin@whattoexpect.com

Mailing address: 360 Park Avenue South, 17th Floor, New York, NY 10010

Careers at What to Expect

Interested in working for What To Expect? Please visit our LinkedIn page for job postings.

Disclaimer

If you have a medical issue, please contact a health care provider. The material on this website is provided for educational purposes only and is not to be used for medical advice, diagnosis or treatment, or in place of therapy or medical care.

Founding date

WhatToExpect.com was founded in 2005. In December 2016, What To Expect became a subsidiary of Ziff Davis, Inc. (NASDAQ: ZD).

Your Next Read

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

You're Going to Need to Track Your Baby’s Feedings, Diaper Changes, Sleep, and More. Here's How Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Pregnancy A to Z: A Complete Guide to Every Term Fact Checked by Karen Miles, Contributing Writer/Editor

8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Free Baby Samples? Yes, Please! How to Score Diapers, Formula and More By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Want a Good Laugh? Moms Share 17 Hilarious (and Slightly Cringey) Pregnancy Moments Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

A Mom's Guide to a Hospital Birth Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Your Guide to Well-Baby Visits Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Expecting Two? Here Are 10 Surprising Facts About Twins Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

11 Questions Your OB/GYN Wishes You’d Ask When You Get Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Create a Birth Plan That Feels Empowering — And Realistic Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

I Tried the Tinder of Baby Name Apps and It Was Not What I Expected Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window