Aimee Eyvazzadeh

Aimee Eyvazzadeh, M.D.

About Aimee Eyvazzadeh, M.D.

Aimee Eyvazzadeh, M.D., M.P.H., also known as the "egg whisperer," is an OB/GYN and a fertility specialist in San Ramon, California. She's been practicing medicine for more than 22 years.

Dr. Aimee graduated from the UCLA School of Medicine and did her residency in Obstetrics & Gynecology at Harvard Medical School. She also completed a fellowship in Reproductive Endocrinology & Infertility and holds a Masters in Public Health Management and Policy from the University of Michigan.

Board certifications

Dr. Aimee is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Aimee is affiliated with Mills-Peninsula Medical Center and Stanford Hospital.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Aimee is a fellow of the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology and contributes to research in the field of reproductive endocrinology and infertility. She has presented her research at the national meetings of the American Society of Reproductive Medicine, the Endocrine Society, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.

She has a weekly video series called The Egg Whisperer Show that teaches viewers about fertility, fertility care, fertility testing, and reproductive medicine.

Dr. Aimee is the mom to four children under the age of 10.

Research and publications

Dr. Aimee's research has been published in several medical journals, including Fertility and Sterility , The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism , Obstetrics and Gynecology, and Menopause .

She has co-authored book chapters on ultrasonography and male infertility with leaders in the field of reproductive endocrinology.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window