'Airplane Goodie Bags' Have Parents Divided

airplane gifts

Should you make a bag of treats for the passengers surrounding you and your baby when flying?

A growing trend among traveling parents is taking off — airplane goodie bags. Delta Air Lines flight attendant Brianna Fletcher has noticed more parents handing out small consolation gifts to fellow passengers when flying with babies, especially during peak travel seasons like the holidays and spring break.

One recent instance went viral when a mother handed a seatmate a goodie bag while settling in with her newborn. Inside: candy, a granola bar and earplugs, along with a note that read:

"It’s my first flight! I promised to be on my best behavior — but I can’t make any guarantees. I might cry if I get scared or my ears hurt. Here are some treats to make your flight enjoyable. Thank you for being patient with us. Have a great flight!"

Creator Elliot Norris shared a video of the gesture , writing, “I’ll help take care of the baby!” alongside sobbing emojis. Reactions were mixed — some praised the extra thoughtfulness, while others lamented that parents feel pressured to apologize for their babies simply existing.

So, are airplane goodie bags becoming an expectation? We asked parents, passengers, flight attendants and an etiquette expert to weigh in.

The practice of handing out goodie bags is gaining momentum

The idea of goodie bags isn't necessarily new, but more and more families are doing it now than ever, says Fletcher.

“The passengers give us the goodie bags when they first come on board,” Fletcher tells What to Expect. “They typically have some variation of candy, hand sanitizer, hand cream, lip balm and a hand-written note.”

Some moms add personalized touches to the bag, like Hope Chambers, who ordered custom cookies for passengers on her son’s first transatlantic flight. “I’m so dramatic for doing this,” she tells WTE. “But he was only 3 months old and we were flying to London with him!”

Airplane goodie bags are all well and good for the craft-inclined or if you’re just excited to commemorate your little one’s first flight, but it's not the expectation that all parents must do this.

Jo Hayes, etiquette expert

The purpose of the bags is clear: to win over your seatmates in case your baby, well, acts like a typical baby. Chambers hoped the custom cookies would preemptively smooth things over with fellow passengers in case her son got cranky.

airplane goodie bags

Should you make goodie bags when you fly with your baby?

You should never feel like you have to give gifts when traveling with your baby. After all, babies have to get around just like grown-ups. But if you love putting together gifts and treats, go for it.

From a flight attendant’s perspective, there's really no harm as long as you avoid including any food that may be an allergen . Fletcher has not seen this disrupt the boarding process in any way. "Parents typically give out the goodie bags at the boarding door and quickly go to their seats thereafter," she explains.

However, if you don't want to hand out goodie bags, there's absolutely no need. You have enough to worry about ahead of a trip without the added hassle of packing these bags.

"Airplane goodie bags are all well and good for the craft-inclined or if you’re just excited to commemorate your little one’s first flight , but it's not the expectation that all parents must do this," says Jo Hayes, an etiquette expert who has conducted academic research on the topic. "Heaven knows, parents have enough pressure on them as is."

Traveling with a baby or toddler isn’t easy, Hayes continues. While a baby crying on a plane may happen, fellow passengers can and should be compassionate, she adds.

“I think any human, parent or not, with any semblance of heart and empathy, can understand the work and overwhelm that accompanies traveling with infants,” says Hayes. “It's an enormous job…to add the task of creating goodie bags on top of that, would, understandably, be too much for many parents."

Instead, Hayes says, just stick to the basics: “getting you and your baby to your destination, safe and well.”

If you *want* to make a goodie bag, here are some ideas to pack

You can stock goodie bags with anything you want, but remember: Keep it TSA-approved so you don’t inadvertently create a nightmare for yourself while going through security. That means nary a liquid above 3.4 oz. Here are some ideas:

Candy and gum

Snacks, like a small bag of chips or a granola bar. (Make sure they are free from common allergens, such as milk, eggs, wheat, soy and peanuts)

Travel-sized bottles of hand sanitizer or wipes

Hand lotion

Chapstick or lip balm

A cute handwritten note “from the baby”

Foam earplugs (just in case!)

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

What to Pack When Traveling With Baby Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Great Goodie Bag Ideas for Toddlers and Preschoolers That Aren't Junk Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Products You Can Take On a Plane By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

11 Tips to Make Flying With a Toddler Go More Smoothly Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Should You Bring Your Child’s Car Seat on an Airplane? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

13 Tips to Make Flying and Traveling With Twins Less Stressful Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

What Parents Need to Pack in an Emergency Go Bag Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Every Mom Needs to Know Before Bringing a Baby to a Sporting Event Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Baby First-Aid Essentials Every Parent Should Have on Hand Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Smart Tips for Getting Your Baby to Sleep Anywhere (Yep, Even on Vacation) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your No-Nonsense Hospital Bag Checklist: What to Pack and What to Skip Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Your Ultimate Guide to Traveling While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

10 DIY Baby Shower Gifts Moms-to-Be Will Actually Use Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

What to Put on Your Baby Sprinkle Registry Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window