Alexandra Paetow

Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

About Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Alexandra Paetow is a registered dietitian nutritionist (R.D.N.), mom of two and founder of Thrive and Bloom Nutrition, a virtual nutrition practice based in New Jersey.

She completed her clinical dietetic internship at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts.

Paetow has a Bachelor of Science in Health and Exercise Science from Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and a Master of Science in Nutrition Education from Teachers College Columbia University in New York City.

Other relevant positions

Paetow previously worked as an inpatient clinical dietitian covering surgical and obstetric populations at Montefiore Medical Center in New York City, where she served on the hospital breastfeeding committee. She also worked as a research dietitian on a prenatal nutrition research project at New York University.

Paetow is a member of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, the New Jersey Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics and the Women’s Health Dietetic Practice Group.

She specializes in nutrition through preconception, prenatal and postpartum life stages. She uses intuitive eating principles to help women learn to trust and care for their changing bodies by breaking the diet cycle, building a positive relationship with food and healing body image struggles.

Paetow lives in New Jersey with her husband and two (soon to be three!) children. As a mom, she understands the importance of low-stress, practical strategies and the profound impact that a mom’s nutrition and body image can have on the whole family.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window