All Your Questions About Baby Sprinkle Etiquette, Answered

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

pregnant woman with friends at sprinkle party

Is a sprinkle being thrown for you — or are you attending one? These guidelines will come in handy.

In the history of preparing for little ones, baby sprinkles — which are more low-key baby showers to welcome second (or third, or fourth) babies — are a relatively new phenomenon. So naturally, there are lots of questions about what is acceptable and what might not be.

"I want to celebrate our second baby! Our first is only 15 months and will be 20 months when his brother arrives, but I feel like we just haven’t celebrated this baby as much as we did our first," says What to Expect Community user VM2021. "What's the etiquette on a sprinkle? We don’t need all the gifts we had with our first, obviously, but if people ask, should it just be a bring something if you want? Really not sure how a sprinkle works!"

The key to a baby sprinkle is that, unlike a shower, it doesn’t focus on stocking new parents with everything they need for their baby-to-be. It’s a celebration of a new life — which is always appropriate, whether the baby is the first or the sixth.

With the emphasis placed squarely on the support and love of your closest family and friends rather than a focus on big-ticket gifts, a baby sprinkle is a party that, ideally, is relaxed, warm, and laid-back. While there are no hard rules when it comes to baby sprinkle etiquette, here are some tips to help you feel prepared to throw (or attend!) a sprinkle party.

Key Takeaways

Baby sprinkles are for celebrating. Unlike traditional showers, sprinkles are relaxed, intimate gatherings that celebrate a new baby and offer love and support — they're usually less focused on major gifts.

A close friend or relative usually hosts; parents shouldn’t ask for one. Small registries for essentials are fine, and hosts and guests should be thanked afterward.

Attendance and gifts are optional — practical, smaller items are appreciated, and RSVPs help the host plan a warm, low-key celebration.

Who hosts a baby sprinkle?

While there are plenty of differences between a baby sprinkle and a baby shower, the host for both events is often a close friend or sibling. The host of your baby sprinkle may be the same person who threw your first shower, or it may be someone different. Of course, anyone may throw you a baby sprinkle, whether it be a co-worker or another relative.

Just like with baby showers , the host generally organizes all of the details, so you can rest easy and soak up the celebrations rather than worrying about all the ins and outs of planning.

Who should you invite to a baby sprinkle?

While baby showers are typically larger and more involved, baby sprinkles are often intimate and casual, centering around support and encouragement rather than presents and funny games. That's why lots of parents prefer to keep the invitation list small, surrounding themselves with close friends and family rather than a large crowd of loved ones.

Is it okay to have more than one baby sprinkle?

Yes, it's fine to have more than one sprinkle. If a co-worker and your best friend offer to throw showers, and they’re different groups of friends, it’s perfectly acceptable to accept both invitations.

The same goes for sprinkles in honor of baby number three or four — if a loved one offers to organize the celebration, feel free to graciously say yes.

Have more questions about baby shower etiquette? Open the What to Expect app for baby shower and sprinkle ideas, tips on what to register for, and much more.

Baby sprinkle etiquette for parents-to-be

While every baby sprinkle is unique to the host and the guest of honor, these etiquette tips may help you feel more prepared:

Don’t expect someone to throw you a sprinkle. And don’t bring it up to anyone else either — especially not whomever threw your first shower. Leave it to your other close friends or relatives to think of it on their own.

Register for (smaller) gifts. But step away from the scanning gun! Yes, a baby registry is okay, but it shouldn’t, and won’t need to be, as long as your first list (and it shouldn’t be on the invitation — instead it should be given to guests on an as-requested basis or included on a separate card). Set your sights on everyday essentials, like diapers, wipes, baby wash, and the like, plus one or two big ticket items you absolutely need (such as a new infant car seat or double stroller ).

Don’t forget to thank the host. A batch of homemade cookies or muffins with a handwritten note is inexpensive and sure to be appreciated. If you’re not up to baking (or delivering anything for that matter), you can't go wrong sending a bouquet of flowers.

Send thank-you notes. Even if few or no gifts were given at your sprinkle, it’s still nice to let people know you appreciated their presence and support. And just in case baby arrives early, prepare the thank you notes in advance and send along with the birth announcement.

Baby sprinkle etiquette for guests

Many guests who attend baby sprinkles opt to bring a gift — but what you offer is totally up to you. If you're not able to make it, it's up to you whether or not you send a gift. Either way, it's a good idea to RSVP so that the host can prepare for the event adequately.