Allison Bloom

Allison Bloom, D.O., M.P.H.

About Allison Bloom, D.O., M.P.H.

Dr. Allison Bloom is a board-certified OB/GYN and board-eligible reproductive endocrinology and infertility specialist practicing at Main Line Fertility in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Dr. Bloom graduated from the University of Massachusetts with a Bachelor of Science before earning her Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.) and Masters in Public Health (M.P.H.) from Nova Southeastern University College of Osteopathic Medicine in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.

She then completed her residency in Obstetrics and Gynecology at Drexel University College of Medicine/Hahnemann University Hospital in Philadelphia as well as a fellowship in Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility with Main Line Fertility/Drexel University College of Medicine.

Board certifications

Dr. Bloom is board-certified by the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Bloom is affiliated with Lankenau Medical Center, Bryn Mawr Hospital, Paoli Hospital and Chester County Hospital.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Bloom is a member of the clinical faculty at Lankenau Hospital and a board member of the Philadelphia Area Reproductive Endocrine Society.

Dr. Bloom is also affiliated with the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM), Gay and Lesbian Medical Association, American Osteopathic Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology (AOBOG), American Osteopathic Association (AOA) and American Medical Association (AMA).

Awards

Dr. Bloom has received a number of awards, including:

Health Care Hero Award, Penn Medicine

Seymour Stein Memorial Resident/Fellow Annual Research Award, three-time recipient

Educational Chief Resident, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Drexel University College of Medicine

Medical Student Teaching Award Recipient, Drexel University College of Medicine, two-time recipient

Resident CREOG Exam Achievement Award, four-time recipient

Phi Sigma Alpha, National Osteopathic Scholastic Society inductee

Sigma Sigma Phi, National Honorary Service Fraternity, President

Matthew Terry Scholarship recipient for scholastic excellence, service, empathy and congeniality

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window