Is Almond Milk Safe for Babies to Drink?

almond milk for babies, single almond on wood surface

Almond milk is a popular alternative to cow’s milk, but does it belong in your baby's diet?

Almond milk is one of the most popular types of plant-based alternative milks on the market. But if you’re thinking of transitioning from breast milk or formula to "big kid" milk, your best bet is to opt for the cow's kind — and you have to wait until your baby is 1 year old to make the switch.

The reason almond milk isn't recommended for babies older than 1 and toddlers? Compared to dairy milk, plant-based varieties like almond milk usually don’t contain as many of the all-important nutrients your child needs to grow.

Here’s how almond milk stacks up against some of the other kinds of milk out there.

What is almond milk?

Almond milk is (not surprisingly) made from almonds, a nut that’s high in monounsaturated fatty acids. To make almond milk, processors soak the almonds in water and grind them, yielding a milky white liquid that's then strained.

The nutritional content of almond milk can vary by brand or type — for example, sweetened versus unsweetened, flavored versus unflavored — but in general, 4 ounces of almond milk contains about 20 calories, half a gram of protein, and 1.5 grams of fat. It also contains about 50 milligrams of calcium, 95 milligrams of potassium and 50 IU of vitamin D.

Should babies drink almond milk?

No — babies shouldn't drink almond milk. Babies under the age of 12 months should stick exclusively to breast milk or infant formula , whereas children 1 year old and up should only drink cow’s milk, according to the leading children’s health organizations in the United States, including the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).

In fact, experts say that children shouldn’t drink almond milk — or most other plant-based milks — instead cow's milk before the age of 5.

The exception: If your child is at least 1 year old and has lactose intolerance or a milk allergy , or if your family doesn’t consume animal products, you can give him fortified, unsweetened soy milk, but you should check with your pediatrician first and ask which brand would be best for your little one.

Is almond milk good for babies?

Not really, because plant-based and other non-dairy milks don’t contain as many nutrients as cow’s milk, which can be given to babies ages 1 and older.

Plus, not only does the vitamin and mineral content in plant-based milks vary by brand, but some experts believe that our bodies may not absorb nutrients from plants as well as they can from dairy products.

Is almond milk safe for babies?

Babies and toddlers who drink almond milk might be missing out on some of the key nutrients that they need to grow.

Specifically, babies under the age of 12 months should drink breast milk or infant formula, whereas babies over the age of 1 should stick to cow’s milk , an important source of protein, calcium, potassium and vitamins A, D and B12.

And even though certain fortified plant-based milks have added vitamins and minerals, experts point out that these can vary by brand or flavor, and may not be absorbed as easily as those found in cow’s milk.

Almond milk vs. cow’s milk for babies

In general, cow’s milk contains more nutrients than almond and other plant-based milks. For example, 4 ounces of whole milk contains about 74 calories and nearly 4 grams of protein compared to the 20 calories and half a gram of protein in the almond variety.

Similarly, whole cow’s milk contains 138 milligrams of calcium and 161 milligrams of potassium, whereas almond milk clocks in at about 50 milligrams of calcium and 95 milligrams of potassium.

Should I give my baby almond milk if he has a dairy allergy?

No. If your baby is allergic to milk — and only an estimated 2 to 3 percent of babies are — talk to your pediatrician about other options.

If you’re breastfeeding your baby, you may have to cut dairy out of your own diet. If you’re formula-feeding, you may have to switch to a hypoallergenic formula with hydrolysate protein.

If your child is 6 months or older and has started eating solids, it’s okay to give him a few sips of water with his meals, but he still shouldn’t drink milk — almond or cow’s.

While many children outgrow a milk allergy by the time they’re 1 year old, if your child’s allergy or intolerance to lactose (a sugar found in cow's milk) has lingered, talk to your pediatrician about giving him a fortified soy milk — the only type of plant milk that’s officially recognized as a nutritionally adequate substitute for dairy milk in certain circumstances.

When can I give my baby almond milk?

Experts from the leading children’s health organizations in the United States say that children shouldn’t only drink plant-based milks instead of cow’s milk if they’re under the age of 5.

If your child is over the age of 1 and has a milk allergy or intolerance, ask your pediatrician about giving him a fortified, unsweetened soy milk.

When to call the doctor

If you suspect that your baby is experiencing symptoms of a milk allergy — including frequent spitting up, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain and a rash — talk to your pediatrician, who may want your little one to take an allergy or skin-prick test or do an examination of your baby’s stool.

Keep in mind, too, that this may be a temporary issue. Some children outgrow milk allergies between the ages of 2 and 5.

Until your child is ready to start kindergarten, it’s better to give him unflavored cow’s milk instead of almond milk. Aside from certain fortified soy milks, the plant-based varieties that have become so trendy among adults just aren't up to par nutritionally for growing babies and children as compared to breast milk, formula or regular cow's milk.