Am I Pregnant or Is It Just PMS? How to Tell the Difference

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

woman looking at a pregnancy test, quiz am i pregnant

Wondering about your symptoms? Learn the signs and take our quiz to see what they point to.

If you're trying to conceive , those days between ovulation and your expected period can feel endless — every twinge, craving, or mood swing raising the question: Is this PMS, or could I actually be pregnant?

While only a pregnancy test can give you a clear answer, understanding the differences between early pregnancy signs and pre-period symptoms can help. Explore what to look for below, and take our quiz to get a better sense of what your body may be signaling.

Key Takeaways

Early pregnancy symptoms and PMS often look alike . Tender breasts, bloating, fatigue, cravings, constipation, and mood swings can happen with both PMS and early pregnancy, making it hard to tell the difference without a pregnancy test.

A few symptoms lean more toward pregnancy . Signs like darker or enlarged areolas, nipple changes, lingering breast pain, increased urination, stronger sense of smell, nausea, and possible implantation bleeding are more specific to early pregnancy than PMS.

The only way to know for sure is testing and follow-up care . If your period is late, take a home pregnancy test and confirm results with your health care provider. Early prenatal care is important, and appointments often start around 6 to 8 weeks of pregnancy.

Am I pregnant or is it PMS?

Many early pregnancy signs are very similar to PMS symptoms , which means it can be tricky to know the difference until you either get your period or a positive pregnancy test.

As for what's behind both symptoms, you can thank a surge in the hormone progesterone that occurs during both the second half of your cycle and in the early days of pregnancy.

Similar symptoms may include:

Tender breasts and sensitive nipples

Bloating

Fatigue

Food cravings

Constipation

Mood swings

Headaches

But there are a few indicators that may point to pregnancy over PMS, including breast pain that lingers, darker (and larger) areolas, the need to pee more frequently, and a suddenly more sensitive sense of smell — all due to an estrogen increase in your body.

Quiz: Am I pregnant?

1. Is your period late?

A: Yes, and it's usually as on time as a well-tuned Swiss watch.

B: Yes, but I have irregular periods, so this isn't too unusual.

C: No, I got my period.

If you answered "A": Head to the pharmacy for a pregnancy test, stat! There's a very good chance you're expecting, though there are some other reasons for a missed period , so you'll have to see what the test results are and ultimately get them confirmed by your doctor.

If you answered "B": Irregular cycles can make tracking your fertile days challenging. If you're trying to conceive, know that many women with irregular cycles get pregnant and have normal, healthy pregnancies. Take a pregnancy test if your period is more than a few weeks late, and make an appointment with your doctor if you have any concerns about your menstrual cycle.

If you answered "C": You're probably not pregnant, but let your doctor know if you have concerns about any other symptoms you might be experiencing.

2. Have you been experiencing mood swings?

A: Yes! I'm annoyed with my partner, my boss — even the dog! And my period is due.

B: No, I haven't noticed any changes.

If you answered "A": Stock up on the tampons and tissues: This sounds like a classic case of PMS-induced mood swings. While moodiness can happen in early pregnancy, it's usually a little later on. Hold out for another week or two and if your period still hasn't started, try an at-home pregnancy test.

If you answered "B": Not every woman experiences mood swings before her period, so take a home pregnancy test if your period is late.

"I cried at the video of the racoon watching his cotton candy disappear in the water," says What to Expect Community member helfrickm about her early pregnancy symptoms.

3. Have you been feeling nauseous?

A: Ugh, just thinking about fish or looking at raw chicken makes me want to vomit.

B: Nah, I have a stomach of steel.

If you answered "A": Is your period a couple of weeks late too? It could point to pregnancy! You may very well be experiencing the first throes of morning sickness (poorly named, because it can happen all day) due to changing hormone levels that make your sniffer more sensitive and relax the muscles of your digestive tract.

If you answered "B": Fortunately, your meals aren't bothering you, but keep in mind that morning sickness can pop up as late as the 9-week mark, so nausea later on is still possible.

"I never threw up but was nauseous from around week 6 to 9," says What to Expect Community mom newmama0810. "I had to eat saltines and drink ice water every hour to keep the nausea away."

4. Have you noticed any unusual spotting?

A: Actually, a couple of days before my period was scheduled to arrive, I had some light spotting.

B: No, no blood at all.

If you answered "A": It's still a bit early to say, but you might have experienced implantation bleeding — which is when a fertilized egg burrows into the endometrium of the uterus. Most women say it's noticeably different from their usual periods and tends to be light pink or brown in color.

If you answered "B": Implantation bleeding could still occur — or your period might arrive a bit late. What's more, not every woman experiences implantation bleeding, so you could be pregnant even if you didn't notice anything unusual.

5. Are your boobs feeling more tender?

A: Ouch! They're so sore, though my period is due soon.

B: No, they feel pretty normal.

If you answered "A": Both PMS and an early influx of pregnancy hormones can cause this symptom, so give it a few days. If your period doesn't show up, it's time to pee on a stick.

If you answered "B": Lucky you — this symptom is no joke for many women. And, again, not all moms-to-be experience breast tenderness or changes so early on.

"Honestly. Every month I have sore boobs from ovulation until my period, and it was the exact same feeling when I was pregnant," says What to Expect Community mom TTCbabyP.

6. Have you noticed any nipple changes?

A: Um, yes — what's happening? I've got bigger, darker nipples with a few funny little bumps.

B: Well, I do have tender breasts, but my nipples seem the same.

If you answered "A": Changes to your nipples, including a darkening areola, increased size, and tiny bumps (known as Montgomery's tubercles, which lubricate your nipples in preparation for nursing a few months from now) are one of the most surefire early signs you're expecting.

If you answered "B": Breast soreness without changes to the areola is likely a PMS symptom, especially if the pain disappears once your period arrives.

Breast tenderness was an early pregnancy symptom for What to Expect community mom baily 0801. "First they were just sore. It went away for a couple of days and then came back full force," she says. "They also began to get veins over them leading to my areolas."

7. Are you constipated or bloated?

A: I'm as stopped up as Los Angeles morning traffic — and my period is days late.

B: I seem to be rather regular, thank you very much.

If you answered "A": Snag a pregnancy test! That uncomfortable bloated feeling and constipation are often early signs you're expecting, as the pregnancy hormone progesterone slows down your digestive tract. (Keep in mind, however, that there's also a chance it's PMS in disguise.)

If you answered "B": Sensing a pattern here? Although some moms-to-be may notice bloating very early on, others may not experience it until closer to month 3 of pregnancy.

"Holy moly, I am so bloated that my jeans barely fit now at only 5 weeks," reports What to Expect Community member kayray1016.

9. Do you have food cravings?

A: I can't resist egg and cheese sandwiches and coffee milkshakes! And my period is due.

B: I haven't noticed any appetite changes or unusual cravings.

If you answered "A": Food cravings and insatiable hunger are a pretty solid PMS sign, so there's probably no baby yet, unless your period is also late. During pregnancy, appetite changes or cravings tend to emerge at the end of the first trimester .

If you answered "B": Of course, not all women have noticeable cravings before their period is due, but if your period is late and you aren't experiencing some typical PMS symptoms you otherwise would, take a home pregnancy test.

10. Are you more tired than usual?

A: Yes, in fact, a freight train roaring through my bedroom couldn't wake me up lately.

B: No, not more than usual.

If you answered "A": Here's another one of those wait-for-your-period-and-see moments: Fatigue can just as often come with PMS as with early pregnancy.

If you answered "B": Bank your sleep now as pregnancy and parenthood are equal parts exhausting and exhilarating!

"My symptoms were being tired, regularly, for hours at a time ... I even took a nap on Christmas Day. I NEVER nap unless I'm sick. Well, I never got sick!" says What to Expect Community mom TiredButHappy.

Do all women get early pregnancy symptoms?

Even if you're bloated, nauseous, and are experiencing breast changes, you might not necessarily be pregnant. At the same time, you may not have a single noticeable symptom but then end up spying two telltale lines or a plus symbol on your home pregnancy test.

Yep, just as every woman is different, so is every pregnancy, which means you may feel several early symptoms — or none at all.

When to see your doctor

As soon as you spy the positive sign on your at-home pregnancy test, make an appointment for your first prenatal care visit . Seeing a doctor early and regularly is key to having a healthy pregnancy and baby. It's also smart to make the call right away since some practices are busy and may not be able to fit you in for several weeks.

Your health care provider can confirm your due date for you, but you can use our pregnancy due date calculator in the meantime. And once your pregnancy is under way, keep tabs on developments and milestones, get expert advice, and connect with other parents in the What to Expect app .

The first prenatal visit usually happens between weeks 6 and 8 of pregnancy, though if you feel like your condition may be high-risk , either because you have a chronic illness or a history of miscarriage , for example, tell your practitioners' office so they can try to fit you in as soon as possible.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, PMS vs. Pregnancy Symptoms: Can You Tell The Difference? , October 2024 WhatToExpect.com, Frequent Urination During Pregnancy , September 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Has Your Sense of Smell Gotten Stronger During Pregnancy? , January 2023 WhatToExpect.com, Easing the Quease: How to Cope With Morning Sickness During Pregnancy , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Why You Might Feel Bloated When You're Pregnant — and What You Can Do About It , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Managing Pregnancy Cravings and Aversions (From No-Thanks to Need-It Now) , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Pregnancy Symptoms: 14 Early Signs of Pregnancy , July 2025. WhatToExpect.com, What Happens at Your First Prenatal Appointment? , November 2022. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist, Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) , November 2023. Mayo Clinic, Symptoms of Pregnancy: What Happens First , March 2024. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, What are Some Common Signs of Pregnancy? , January 2017.

Updates history

November 23, 2025

Editors: Karen Miles/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

PMS vs. Pregnancy Symptoms: Can You Tell the Difference? Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Pregnancy Symptoms: 14 Early Signs of Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is Cramping a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Help Me, Heidi! Can You Be Pregnant but With No Symptoms? By Heidi Murkoff

Is Bloating a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is Breast Tenderness in Early Pregnancy Normal? What to Expect in the First Trimester Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Should I Be Worried If I Don't Have Breast Tenderness in Early Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

18 Pregnancy Symptoms You Should Never Ignore Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Is Nausea After Eating an Early Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is Back Pain a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

6 Signs You May Be Pregnant With Twins Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Ovulation Symptoms: 10 Signs of Ovulation to Know Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Cramping but No Period? What It Could Mean Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Best Pregnancy Tests Fact Checked by Haley Jena, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window