Andrei Rebarber

Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

About Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Dr. Andrei Rebarber is a board-certified OB/GYN with sub-specialty certification in Maternal Fetal Medicine, and is the co-director of the MFM division for Englewood Hospital.

Dr. Rebarber did his fellowship in maternal fetal medicine at Yale University School of Medicine, in New Haven, Connecticut, and his residency at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York City.

He received his M.D. from SUNY Health Science Center at Syracuse in Syracuse, New York.

Board certifications

Dr. Rebarber is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology and by the Fetal Medicine Foundation.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Rebarber is affiliated with Englewood Hospital in Englewood, New Jersey, and Mount Sinai Hospital in New York, New York.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Rebarber is a clinical professor at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City.

He has also worked on the New York University School of Medicine Faculty, and in 2005, he was a founding member and president of Maternal Fetal Medicine Associates, PLLC and Carnegie Imaging of Women.

Publications and research

Dr. Rebarber has published several book chapters, more than 120 peer review publications and more than 150 abstracts presented at national medical society meetings.

Awards

Dr. Rebarber has been a Castle Connolly Top Doctor from 2013 to the present.

Since 2018, he has been elected as an annual National Board Examiner for the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

He has also received the Patients' Choice Award (in the years 2008-2012 and 2015-2018) and Compassionate Doctor Recognition (2015–2018) from Vitals.com.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window