Anovulation 101: Understanding Why You Might Not Be Ovulating

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

can you get pregnant if you're not ovulating, anovulation, woman looking at a home pregnancy test

Learn the common causes, warning signs, and treatments that can help you have more regular periods and increase your chances for getting pregnant.

Been doing the baby dance for months but no positive pregnancy test just yet? You may be wondering if you're not ovulating. Here's what you need to know about this relatively common condition, also called anovulation, including causes, symptoms, and treatments.

Key Takeaways

Anovulation means your ovaries aren't releasing an egg. Without ovulation, pregnancy can't happen during that menstrual cycle — but many treatments can help trigger ovulation.

Irregular cycles, missed periods, or hormonal symptoms could signal anovulation. Conditions like PCOS, thyroid issues, or high prolactin levels are common culprits.

Many causes of anovulation are treatable. Medications, hormone therapy, or IVF can help you conceive, so talk to your doctor if you suspect ovulation problems.

What is anovulation?

Anovulation is when your ovaries don't release an egg during a menstrual cycle. Ovulation happens about two weeks before you get your period.

Can you get pregnant if you don't ovulate?

If you don't ovulate, you can't get pregnant during that cycle. Fortunately, many treatments can trigger your body to release a mature egg so that you can conceive.

What causes anovulation?

Your brain tells your body to secrete the hormones estrogen and progesterone and stimulates the ovaries to produce a mature egg every month. With anovulation, there is usually a problem with this signaling process.

A few common causes of anovulation include:

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)

PCOS is the most common cause of anovulation. The disorder, which affects between 8 and 10 percent of women of childbearing age, causes an imbalance in the hormonal signals that regulate ovulation.

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HA)

In this condition, your pituitary gland isn't making the hormones that stimulate ovulation. Blood tests reveal that follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) levels are very low.

Ovarian insufficiency

For women over 40, hormone levels might be irregular because there are few eggs left to ovulate. For women under 40, premature ovarian failure is when ovaries stop working normally. In 90% of cases of premature ovarian failure, the cause is unknown.

However, it could be linked to a genetic disorder like Fragile X premutation, a condition that can result in developmental problems, or Turner syndrome, a rare disorder that causes women to be short in stature and have early ovarian function loss. Autoimmune diseases — like Addison disease, a very rare but serious disorder affecting hormone production — can also contribute.

Sometimes, anovulation can be caused by very high prolactin levels (hyperprolactinemia) or severe thyroid dysfunction (hypothyroidism).

Other factors

Anovulation can also be related to:

Poor diet

Insufficient exercise

Obesity

Anovulation symptoms

Women who aren't ovulating usually have irregular cycles, which can include light periods with very little bleeding or heavy ones with unusually heavy flow. A short cycle (meaning there are fewer than 21 days between your periods) or a long cycle (there are more than 35 days between periods) can also point to ovulation problems.

PCOS symptoms vary, but can include breakthrough bleeding between periods, acne, weight gain, and abnormal hair growth. On an ultrasound, your practitioner may note multiple cysts on your ovaries, which appear when your body doesn't release a mature egg.

Other symptoms can include:

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: low libido, decreased energy, mood swings, and weight gain

Hyperprolactinemia: irregular or absent periods, vaginal dryness, and breast discharge when you're not breastfeeding

Hypothyroidism: extreme fatigue and weight gain

Ovarian insufficiency: menopause-like symptoms including missed periods, hot flashes, night sweats, decreased sex drive, and irritability

How does anovulation affect your chances of getting pregnant?

Anovulation can make getting pregnant tricky; in fact, it accounts for an estimated 25 to 30% of infertility cases in women. Even if you do ovulate occasionally, irregular periods can make it hard to time sex.

The vast majority of women with PCOS who go on ovulation medications, however, do conceive. The same goes when you start taking medications to treat other conditions, including hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hyperprolactinemia, and hypothyroidism. “ I had thyroid issues before attempting to conceive and waited for my levels to be "good" before TTC. I got pregnant immediately once my thyroid hormone was normalized,” says What to Expect Community mom BeeLineMitten.

If you're going through ovarian failure, it is possible to spontaneously conceive — but the chances are low, especially if you haven't had a period in several months. Although medications can increase your odds of conceiving by stimulating ovulation, they can't make new eggs grow.

Fertility and other treatments if you don't ovulate

Many treatments can balance the hormones you need to have regular periods.

Clomiphene citrate or letrozole can help regulate your hormone levels if you have PCOS. These drugs can maximize your odds of getting pregnant if you're nearing menopause too. “My almost two year old is a clomid baby. I conceived on my first first cycle and I'm currently 6w6d with my 2nd clomid baby, who was also conceived on the first cycle,” reports What to Expect Community mom taylortots.

Some medications can lower prolactin production and decrease the size of prolactin-producing tumors, while other drugs can regulate thyroid hormone levels to treat hypothyroidism.

If you have ovarian insufficiency, IVF may help you to get pregnant. But since the number of eggs in your body is fixed at birth, you may need to use donor eggs .

When to call the doctor

If you have irregular cycles or any other symptoms of anovulation, schedule a visit with your practitioner. Treating conditions including PCOS, hypothyroidism, and hyperprolactinemia can greatly increase your odds of getting pregnant.

Also call your doctor if you're under 35 and haven't conceived within a year of trying, or if you're over 35 and haven't conceived after six months. He or she may refer you to a specialist who can figure out why you're not getting pregnant and suggest treatments that can help.

If you think you might have anovulation, don't hesitate to check with your doctor. While anovulation is a major cause of infertility, in many cases the problem can be treated to boost the odds that you'll conceive soon.

Get personalized TTC tips, cycle insights, expert guidance, and more — start with the What to Expect app .