This month, your little one's birth flowers reveal a sweetheart who goes with the flow and isn't afraid to socialize.

They say April showers bring May flowers, but you don’t have to wait a month for your little bundle of joy to arrive! While the forecast may be rainy this month, according to your baby's birth flowers , this season is bound to bring you a child who's relaxed and outgoing: a social butterfly who's as sweet as a pea!

What are the April birth flowers?

If you have an April baby, his birth flowers are the fresh daisy and the fragrant sweet pea. And when it comes to predicting your young one's personality, these birth flowers are good news all around. Expect an empathetic, adaptable child who surrounds himself (and everyone who knows him), with friendship, beauty and love.

Daisy: Still waters run deep

Is there anything more crisp and spring-fresh than a daisy first bursting into bloom? Daisies begin flowering in April, making them the perfect symbol for your April baby. These bright white flowers traditionally represent simplicity and innocence, but the biology of daisies reveals they are about so much more. Trusted SourceSarah HaleFlora Fortuna, B.B. Mussey and CompanySee All Sources [1] While a single daisy may look like just that: one flower, it's actually two flowers combined into one. The fuzzy yellow sun in the center is one flower, while the crown of white petals is another. These two flowers work in tandem to attract the most bees possible, Trusted SourceThe Orange County Register Consider the common, yet complex, daisySee All Sources [2] which is why daisies have come to symbolize collaboration, friendliness and true love. Trusted SourceBloom and Wild Daisy Flower MeaningSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceSarah HaleFlora Fortuna, B.B. Mussey and CompanySee All Sources

Trusted SourceThe Orange County Register Consider the common, yet complex, daisySee All Sources

Trusted SourceBloom and Wild Daisy Flower MeaningSee All Sources

Your daisy child will go above and beyond "playing well with others." He is a natural team player with genuine love, curiosity, and empathy for others. Daisies thrive in opposing environments (wet, dry, they don't care!), and this birth flower foretells a child who is easygoing and thrives in every new situation that life throws at him. Trusted SourceBHGDaisy FactsSee All Sources [4] Like the saying "still waters run deep," a daisy child's friendly, easygoing exterior belies a deeper understanding of the inner workings of human nature and how we can all be stronger together.

Daisy Facts

Sweet Pea: sweet as a pea, beautiful as a butterfly

Sweet peas are best known for their enchanting scent: a delightful mix of oranges, honey and jasmine — but don't disregard their beauty — climbing up a wall or trellis, sweet peas' colorful, silky April blooms could be mistaken for butterflies mid-flight. Originally discovered in southern Italy in the 1600's, they have been shared around the world by botanists and plant lovers, these easy-to-grow, aromatic annuals are welcome in any garden! Trusted SourceSweetpeas.orgSweet peas See All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceSweetpeas.orgSweet peas See All Sources

You can expect your April baby to be as sweet as the aromatic sweet pea and twice as beautiful. Just like the sweet pea — that does best when surrounded by others: trees for shade, a trellis to climb and gardeners to appreciate their sweet smell — don't be surprised if your little one's innate friendliness and kindness makes him something of a social butterfly. Trusted SourceSweetpeas.orgGrowingSee All Sources [6]

Growing

Incorporating the daisy and sweet pea into your family's life

Integrating your little one's birth flowers into your home or every day happenings can bring joy to all, but these flowers also serve as a reminder of your baby’s birth season and month as well as their personality and their spirit. Whether you want to head outside and add some color to your yard, or you want to lighten up your child's room, here are some creative ideas:

Watch them grow. Both daisies and sweet peas are easy to grow outdoors, though sweet peas prefer cooler weather. Make sure to give your sweet peas a trellis or fence to climb!

Embrace a neutral pallet. Are you in love with the neutral nursery trend? As the parent of an April baby, you're in luck! With daisy's whites and creams, these flowers make the perfect gently-hued nursery decor. Check out this DIY daisy mobile or just search "rattan daisy mirror" and all your design dreams are sure to come true.

Go retro. Prefer something more polychromatic and playful? Take some inspiration from the 80's and 90's "flower power" decor themes, which stars the daisy flower and lots of pastel colors. Try your hand at a pastel-colored nursery or bedroom, and add crocheted or chenille daisy pillows and daisy decals for your walls.

Get crafty. This DIY yarn flower wall of daisies is bound to make a statement and your young one will learn so much from testing out all of the different textures. While inexpensive, this project can be a little time consuming, so save it for a rainy day at home.

Don't forget the sweet peas! While certainly less popular than daisy decor, with sweet peas, the road less traveled is definitively sweet. Framed prints or photos of sweet peas make beautiful wall decor. Not to mention, a spritz here and there of sweet-pea infused oil or perfume around your home (when safe for your child) is a great way to enjoy the enchanting scent of this special flower year round.

Sources

Flora Fortuna

Show in the article

Consider the Common Yet Complex Daisy

Show in the article

Daisy Flower Meaning

Show in the article

Daisy Facts

Show in the article

Sweet Peas

Show in the article

Growing sweet peas

Show in the article