Are 3D and 4D Ultrasounds Safe? What OB/GYNs Want Parents to Know Before Booking a Boutique Scan

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Pregnant woman viewing 3D ultrasound image

Considering a 3D or 4D sonogram keepsake of your cutie? Here's what you need to know about the latest ultrasounds during pregnancy — from what they do to whether they're safe.

Life-like pictures of your baby in the womb or a cute video of him yawning seems too good to pass up, right? 3D and 4D ultrasound technology is pretty incredible, but the truth is, these sneak peaks of your infant are rarely required, medically speaking. Your best bet? Talk with your doctor and learn about the possible safety risks before get one.

No doubt you're anxious to see your growing baby — after all, nine months is a long time to wait to catch a glimpse of those tiny fingers and toes. And since 3D ultrasounds and 4D sonograms allow you to see your unborn baby in even more depth and detail than a standard ultrasound, you may be eager to book a photo op.

But before you do, it's important to understand what 3D sonograms and 4D ultrasounds are, when they're used during pregnancy (if at all), how much they cost, and — most importantly — whether they're safe for you and your baby.

Key Takeaways

3D and 4D ultrasounds are cool, but not necessary. These super close views of your baby in utero are fun but aren't often a part of regular prenatal checkups.

3D may be required. Certain abnormalities can be picked up via 3D ultrasound, but a 4D appointment is almost never needed for medical reasons.

Don't overdo ultrasound. This technology is safe when performed by the pros, but health care professionals don't recommend extra keepsake scans.

What is a 3D ultrasound?

A 3D ultrasound is exactly what it sounds like: one that produces three-dimensional photos of your baby.

During a 3D ultrasound, a wand (transducer) takes multiple two-dimensional images at various angles. The ultrasound machine then pieces them together to form a three-dimensional rendering. Trusted SourceUT Southwestern Medical CenterWhy to Avoid 'Keepsake' 3-D and 4-D UltrasoundsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceUT Southwestern Medical CenterWhy to Avoid 'Keepsake' 3-D and 4-D UltrasoundsSee All Sources

The actual procedure is similar to that of a standard 2D ultrasound, but the machine produces sharper, clearer, and more detailed photographs. Instead of just seeing a profile view of your cutie's face (think of an old-school Mickey Mouse cartoon), you'll see the whole surface — it looks more like a character in a Pixar movie ... or a regular photo.

3d ultrasound closeup

Your practitioner may opt for a 3D ultrasound if there are "uncertain" findings on a 2D ultrasound and they'd like a more comprehensive picture of your baby, says Shannon Smith, M.D. , a board-certified OB/GYN and partner at Brigham Faulkner OB/GYN Associates in Boston, Massachusetts. "A 3D image can better demonstrate abnormalities detected on 2D imaging, especially of the face, and skeletal and central nervous systems," she explains.

Because 3D ultrasounds are really only necessary if there's a suspected fetal anomaly, "the vast majority are performed solely as a courtesy to patients," says Dr. Smith, who is affiliated with Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston.

Have more prenatal care questions? Download the What to Expect app , your go-to guide filled with expert advice and tips from a community of likeminded mamas.

What is a 4D ultrasound?

A 4D ultrasound is similar to a 3D ultrasound, but the image shows movement, like a video. In a 4D sonogram, you'd see your baby doing things in real time (like opening and closing his eyes and sucking his thumb).

While 4D ultrasound "has been used to study the fetal heart, fetal movement, and fetal behavioral states," says Dr. Smith, "there are no specific indications for ordering or recommending a 4D ultrasound."

That means your doctor will likely only do a 4D ultrasound if you ask for one.

Are 3D ultrasounds and 4D ultrasounds safe?

Although in general, "ultrasound technology is safe," says Dr. Smith, she doesn't recommend booking an appointment for a non-medical 3D or 4D sonogram at your local prenatal portrait center for keepsake purposes.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends pregnant women only get ultrasounds performed by a qualified medical professional when your practitioner deems them necessary or gives you the okay. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsUltrasound ExamsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsUltrasound ExamsSee All Sources

The organization discourages the use of any kinds of ultrasounds (2D, Doppler, 3D, and 4D) for the purpose of creating a memento. That's because the technicians who perform commercial ultrasounds may not be able to address your questions or concerns the way a health care practitioner can, and they likely won't have the expertise to be able to spot any problems with your baby's development.

What's more, some commercial sessions last for 45 minutes — much longer than a medical scan. A long session (or repeat sessions, as some of these centers offer) can be intrusive and disruptive to a baby who's using womb time to grow, develop, and sleep.

If you're considering getting any type of ultrasound outside of a medical setting, check with your practitioner first. If you do get the okay, try to limit your visits to one or two, with each scan no more than 15 minutes in length if possible.

Are there other ultrasounds and fetal monitoring options?

Yes, there are several other ways of monitoring your baby and checking her health in the womb. Here are some you may be offered at an upcoming prenatal appointment.

2D ultrasounds

If you've visited the doctor, you've probably already experienced a 2D ultrasound and know that it can be a pretty exciting, magical experience.

For this exam, a transducer is placed on your belly or into your vagina to send sound waves through your body. The waves bounce off internal organs and fluids, and a computer converts these echoes into a two-dimensional image (or a cross-sectional view) of the fetus on a screen. The resulting photo is a flat black-and-white image.

Doppler

With Doppler fetal ultrasound , your practitioner uses a hand-held ultrasound device to amplify the sound of fetal cardiac activity with the help of a special jelly on your belly.

Nuchal translucency (NT)

The NT screening is a specific ultrasound that's performed at the end of the first trimester, between weeks 10 and 13 of pregnancy. Doctors measure a portion of the back of the baby's neck known as the nuchal fold, which they use to help determine a baby's risk of having a genetic disorder. It's frequently combined with a blood test and used to screen for several types of trisomy, including Down syndrome.

Non-stress test (NST)

During your third trimester, your practitioner may recommend an NST if you have certain complications or your due date has passed . You may be more likely to have an NST, for example, if you have gestational diabetes or low amniotic fluid levels.

The test, which takes roughly 20 to 40 minutes, ensures your baby is healthy and active. Your practitioner will wrap a stretchy band around your belly that has a Doppler transducer, to track your baby's heart rate; and a pressure transducer, to measure your baby's movements and your uterine contractions. You'll sit back and relax while they monitor a graph of your baby's vitals and activity.

Biophysical profile (BPP)

Another test that you might encounter in the third trimester, the BPP involves an NST plus other measurements, including amniotic fluid levels and baby's muscle tone and breathing. You may need a BPP for a number of reasons, such as if you have complications like preeclampsia, are carrying twins , or your baby has fetal growth restriction.

The test, which lasts up to 30 minutes, involves the same band used in the NST test. The doctor will also run an ultrasound wand over your tummy to get a better picture of what's going on inside your uterus.

How much is a 3D ultrasound or a 4D ultrasound?

If your doctor performs a 3D or 4D ultrasound, it should be covered by your insurance if you have it as part of basic prenatal care, though it depends on your situation and plan.

If you do wind up deciding to go to a stand-alone ultrasound clinic for a keepsake ultrasound, you can expect to pay between $100 to $400, depending on where you live, the clinic, and the package of options you choose.

The vast majority of...

When can you get a 3D or 4D ultrasound?

Because there are very few medical reasons to perform a 3D ultrasound (and none for a 4D ultrasound), there isn't a standard recommended time to perform these scans.

If your doctor agrees to offer a 3D or 4D ultrasound as a professional courtesy to you, the ideal time to get them done is toward the end of your pregnancy when you can get "the best views of the baby," says Dr. Smith — usually between week 28 and week 32 .

Why are ultrasounds used during pregnancy?

ACOG recommends that women with low-risk, complication-free pregnancies should have at least one ultrasound, between 18 weeks and 22 weeks of pregnancy .

Many practitioners perform additional ultrasounds, even in healthy and uncomplicated pregnancies. Some reasons you may get an ultrasound include:

Confirming your estimated due date

Making sure the pregnancy isn't ectopic and is in the uterus

Confirming the number of babies in utero

Making sure baby is developing properly and at the appropriate pace

Checking and measuring baby's major organs, including the heart

Assessing the placenta and umbilical cord

Measuring the length of your cervix

Measuring the size of your baby

Checking amniotic fluid levels

Ruling out certain birth defects

Determining baby's sex

Giving parents a look at baby and providing reassurance that all is going as it should be in the pregnancy

Medical practitioners use 2D and Doppler ultrasounds in uncomplicated pregnancies to examine the fetus, assess amniotic fluid, and make sure all is well with the baby's development and growth, among other reasons.

Ultrasounds in 3D and 4D are performed only to closely examine suspected fetal anomalies, such as cleft lip and spinal cord issues, or to monitor something specific.

In other words, 3D sonograms and 4D ultrasounds are not part of routine prenatal exams — although many practitioners will perform 3D scans for curious parents, especially if asked.

Remember: There will be plenty of opportunities to take photos and make memories when your baby is born. In the meantime, try to keep ultrasounds limited to those recommended or offered by your practitioner ... and look forward to the day you can see your baby in person (no technology necessary!).

Ultrasounds In 3 Words