Are Masturbation and Sex Toys Safe During Pregnancy?

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Pregnancy and sex toys

Both generally get the green light when you’re expecting, with a few caveats.

Sex toys and masturbation can spice it up in the bedroom, but are they okay when you're expecting? The good news about sex during pregnancy is that almost anything that feels good for you is generally safe for your baby, as long as you have your doctor's okay. Always stick to the basic rules of pregnancy safety, and you and your baby will be fine.

Here are some guidelines when it comes to masturbation and sex toys.

Key Takeaways:

Masturbation is generally safe during pregnancy as long as your doctor hasn't advised against orgasm or penetration.

Vibrators, dildos, and other sex toys are fine to use while you're expecting — just keep them clean and avoid anything that causes pain or discomfort.

Your baby is completely protected during your intimate moments , so you can focus on enjoying yourself.

Is it safe to masturbate while pregnant?

Unless orgasm is off the table because of a high-risk pregnancy or concerns about premature labor, masturbating during pregnancy, either solo or with your partner, is perfectly safe. Plus, it's a great way to release any extra tension you might be feeling these days.

"I masturbate every day and have sex maybe once per week (although it's slowing down, heh). No problems throughout my whole pregnancy. It's important to find pockets of pleasure in your day!" says What to Expect Community mom soniasonata.

As long as your practitioner has given the go-ahead for vaginal penetration and orgasm (which are, rarely, off-limits for a number of reasons), self-pleasuring and sexual activities can be perfectly safe.

Curious about what's safe week-by-week? The What to Expect app can help you track your pregnancy and get answers to common (and uncommon) questions about your body, intimacy, and more.

Is it safe to use vibrators, dildos, and other sex toys during pregnancy?

Sex toys like dildos and vibrators are safe during pregnancy. Just make sure that anything you introduce into the vagina is clean before you use it.

Silicone toys that don't vibrate can be cleaned by boiling for five to 10 minutes or putting in the top rack of the dishwasher. For those that do vibrate, wash in warm water with antibacterial soap for about 20 seconds (special cleaning instructions should be followed for toys made of other materials including hard plastic, rubber, nylon, and leather).

While it's always smart to avoid penetrating the vagina too deeply with a sex toy (and you should never use one with sharp edges that cause you pain), you don't need to worry about piercing the placenta or hurting the baby. The mucus plug in your cervix safely seals off the uterus — and your little one — from the outside world.

And as with all things sex and pregnancy, don't worry that your fetus is "watching." While the baby might be lulled by uterine contractions during orgasm, he can't see what you're doing and definitely won't remember it.