Educational Videos for Babies

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"A friend of mine gave me a couple of educational DVDs as a baby-shower gift. Now I hear that watching them might actually harm my baby. Is that true?"

Chances are you’ve heard that you should limit screen time for babies and kids. But you’re also just as likely to come across YouTube videos geared at babies or receive some educational DVDs. So what’s up with these learning videos, and can they really boost a baby’s development?

The research overwhelmingly says to hit pause instead of play, at least until your child’s older. Here’s when and how to introduce educational videos to older kids — and how to occupy your little one in the meantime.

Are educational videos good for babies?

Even though there's an entire school of baby educational videos marketed to stimulate babies' learning, the science behind those claims is about as solid as the rice cereal you'll soon be serving your little one. In fact, these products may do more harm than good by actually delaying language development instead of beefing up brainpower, recent research has found.

One study looked at Baby Einstein and Brainy Baby DVDs and videos and found that babies ages 8 to 16 months knew six to eight fewer words for every hour per day spent watching these videos compared with tots who weren't watching them. Why? Researchers believe that the excessive screen time preempted valuable one-on-one time with their caregivers, which is when babies best learn how to talk .

Other studies have found a connection between excessive TV viewing and an increased risk for attention problems, obesity and poor school performance in children later in life.

For these reasons, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) discourages TV time altogether for babies under 2 years of age. And it doesn't matter whether the show's educational or not. Research shows that educational programming is only beneficial if a child can understand what's going on on-screen, and little ones have a hard time grasping this before age 2.

Unfortunately, many aren't taking heed to the AAP's recommendations. One study showed that 90 percent of parents to children under 2 admitted that their little one spent an average of one to two hours a day in front of a screen. By the age of 3, almost a third of children have their own TV in their bedroom (which can interfere with a bedtime routine and lead to poor sleeping habits).

Plus, up to 60 percent of families constantly keep a TV on in the background. Is this a problem if no one's watching? Yes, even "secondhand TV" can distract parents, decrease parent-child interaction (which is, after all, the best way to boost your baby's development ) and interfere with your little one's focus. (Did you know that kids will shift their gaze to a background TV three times every minute?)

Alternatives to baby educational videos

The AAP says that both encouraging independent play and talking to your baby (even if the conversation's one-sided) are far more likely to up your cutie's IQ than a DVD or YouTube stream, so think of new ways to engage your baby instead of reaching for the remote:

Read books together, a surefire way to boost brainpower and language skills.

Sing songs, ditto.

Channel your inner child by improvising goofy dances or getting on your hands and knees to play a game of "Name This Animal Sound."

As every busy mom can confirm (and what mom isn't busy?), there are times when you need to take a break from entertaining your baby (because you need to make a quick phone call, start dinner, put yet another load of laundry in — or just grab five minutes of "me time"), and that's when it's tempting to turn on the screen.

Before you do, consider turning to some fun interactive activities instead. Set her down on a colorful play mat with building blocks, stacking rings or a toy piano or other musical instrument — any engaging toy that will keep her busy for a few minutes. Be sure to leave her in a safe spot where you can see her.

How to watch educational videos with your baby

If you do decide to turn on the tube, make the most of it by trying the following:

Watch educational videos in minimal doses and choose commercial-free options.

Co-view as much of the program as you can with your baby.

Talk to her about the pictures on the screen to nurture her language skills. ("Look at the dog! Dogs say 'woof, woof!'")

Offer running commentary on the program's content. ("That boy is clapping his hands! Can you clap your hands?").

The bottom line: When it comes to educational videos or TV for your baby, less is more. And when it comes to helping your baby's brain grow, nobody does it better than you do.

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Young Children and Computers: Some Pros and Cons , February 2019. WhatToExpect.com, Toddlers and TV , March 2019. WhatToExpect.com, Kids and iPads: The Pros and Cons , March 2019. WhatToExpect.com, Tips for Toddler Tech Success , March 2019. American Academy of Pediatrics, Food and Media: Not a Healthy Mix , December 2016. American Academy of Pediatrics, Healthy Digital Media Use Habits for Babies, Toddlers & Preschoolers , November 2019. American Academy of Pediatrics, Pediatrics , Media Use by Children Younger Than 2 Years , November 2011.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

When Can Babies and Toddlers Watch TV? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Musical Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Promote a Baby’s Social and Emotional Development Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Teach Your Baby Sign Language Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Lano, M.S., CCC-SLP

Tummy Time for Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Games to Play With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Kids and iPads: The Pros and Cons By Heidi Murkoff

Benefits of Mirror Play for Babies Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 9-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 6-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Reading Books to Your Baby or Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When and What Can Babies See? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Best Activities for a 10-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window