Are Headaches a Sign of Pregnancy?

headaches a sign of pregnancy, woman in bed rubbing her forehead

Headaches are a common complaint in early pregnancy — but you don’t have to suffer. Here’s how to find fast relief from the nagging pain.

Early signs of pregnancy can show up all across the body, from breast soreness and mood swings to nausea and fatigue.

And to this (sort of long) list, you can also add headaches, which may develop for the first time during pregnancy or continue from your pre-conception life, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHeadaches and PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHeadaches and PregnancySee All Sources

But either way, a headache while expecting is no picnic since you can’t necessarily treat the pain with over-the-counter medications or a prescription the way you might have before pregnancy.

Fortunately, there are some drug-free ways to soothe your head with a baby on board. Here’s more about easing your pain, plus when to call the doctor about headaches during pregnancy.

Are headaches a common early sign of pregnancy?

Yes, headaches can be a common early sign of pregnancy, though the reason they occur isn’t certain. But it’s possible that stress , hunger , and fatigue may contribute to the pain, and that an increase in your body’s blood volume and fluctuating hormones are also part of the problem.

Pregnancy headaches can be sinus-related (a stuffy nose is more common now) and they might be due to less caffeine, especially if you’ve cut back on your coffee consumption, according to Johns Hopkins Medicine. Trusted SourceJohns Hopkins MedicineHeadaches in Early PregnancySee All Sources [2] And headaches could be migraines, which last longer and cause more pain.

Trusted SourceJohns Hopkins MedicineHeadaches in Early PregnancySee All Sources

How to relieve headaches in early pregnancy

Relief from a pounding head can’t come fast enough, but treating the ache should be handled carefully right now. Since some OTC meds you took before conception are off the table, it’s important to check with your doctor before taking any medication for a headache.

Here’s what you can take early in pregnancy and some natural ways to ease (and maybe stave off) the pain.

Try acetaminophen (Tylenol). Both ACOG and Mayo Clinic say it’s safe for most expectant women to take Tylenol occasionally. And some acetaminophen preparations come with caffeine, which can help with painful migraines in particular. But skip nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), like ibuprofen and naproxen in the first trimester.

Make it dark. Turning off the lights overhead and closing your eyes in a dark room may help with the pain. Or shift your focus with some meditation and deep breathing.

Use ice or heat. Applying a cold cloth to your nape or forehead feels good and alternating cool and warm packs on painful areas may relieve a sinus headache.

Drink up. Dehydration, along with low blood sugar, can trigger a headache. Eat regularly, keep healthy snacks handy, and drink plenty of water , according to Mayo Clinic .

Clear the air. Some foods and scents can bring on a headache (we’re looking at you, raw chicken). Create a list of these offenders and then work to avoid them.

Make sleep a priority. The first trimester is pretty taxing on the body. Strive to get the rest you need each night and put your feet up during the day from time to time.

Seek serenity. Noise, stress, work and other kids at home don’t help a sore head. When you can, go out for a short walk, take a prenatal yoga class, or curl up somewhere quiet with a good book.

When to call the doctor about headaches during pregnancy

There are some instances when you shouldn’t ignore a headache. While rare, after 20 weeks some severe headaches in pregnancy can be a sign of a serious condition like preeclampsia , which is related to high blood pressure .

Get in touch with your doctor if the pain lingers for more than two or three hours or it’s severe. And also report pain that occurs with other symptoms, such as dizziness , blurred vision , sudden weight gain , or puffiness in the hands and face.

Be patient with your pregnancy headaches as you work to nail down the causes and triggers. And don’t hesitate to speak with your doctor so that together you can find ways to manage the pain.