Are Squats Safe During Pregnancy? What to Know (Plus Easy Modifications)

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Pregnancy and Exercise

Learn how to effectively recruit your glutes and get the most out of your lower-body workouts.

When your growing belly makes the simple act of tying your shoes a challenge, the idea of doing squats while pregnant might seem a little intimidating, but don't forego this important prenatal exercise . Doing squats during pregnancy is great strength training during every trimester, and the many modifications out there can make it easier (and more fun!).

Key-Takeaways

Most pregnant women can safely do squats. Check in with your provider first, skip tricky balance moves, adjust your weights or range of motion as needed, and stop if anything hurts.

Squats build leg and core strength and help prep your pelvic floor for birth. They can also improve posture, spinal alignment, and hip mobility through every trimester (but they don’t reliably induce labor).

Variations can keep things interesting and challenging. Goblet, lateral band, split, or wall squats all offer big benefits.

Can pregnant women do squats?

Yes, squats are safe for most pregnant women, but expecting moms should take a few precautions. Check in with your doctor before beginning any new exercise routine during pregnancy. After getting the green light, watch for any signs that you're pushing yourself too hard.

As the belly grows and your center of gravity changes, some types of squats can become less comfortable. For example, you may have skip squats that require a lot of balance, such as single-leg variations, until after the baby arrives.

If you experience discomfort, ditch or reduce any weights you're using (such as dumbbells), or limit the range of motion. As with any movement, if you experience pain — in the knees or elsewhere — stop the exercise.

But the bottom line? Yes, most pregnant women can safely do squats.

Benefits of squats during pregnancy

Squats do wonders to prepare the body for labor, and they're a great prenatal exercise to target the pelvic floor muscles . The pelvic floor stretches and lengthens as you bend down into a squat, and you engage and lift your pelvic floor as you return back to standing.

“I started doing squats at week 32! I also walked 1-2 miles 5 times a week. And idk if it's the reason, but I had a short labor - 4.5 hours - with only 20 minutes of pushing!” says What to Expect Community mom ARSanchez2019.

Whether you're pregnant or not, squats — and the numerous variations — also build strength in the lower body and core. They can improve posture, spinal alignment, and, with practice, mobility in the hips.

Can squats induce labor?

You've probably heard many theories about ways you can induce labor — from sex to spicy foods and more — but what about squats? There's even one labor position referred to as the “birthing squat” that opens up the pelvic floor and encourages the baby to move down the birth canal.

The truth is while squats can certainly help prepare your body for the physical requirements of childbirth, there is little to no scientific evidence that doing squats of any kind can induce labor on their own.

In fact, simple activity such as walking as well as exercise in general is not thought to induce labor, pre-term or otherwise. So the short answer to the question "Can squats induce labor?" is a likely "no."

Get the What to Expect app for expert-backed prenatal workouts that’ll help you feel strong and energized throughout your pregnancy.

Squat variations during pregnancy

Ready to get started? Try working these pregnancy squat variations into your prenatal fitness routine:

Goblet squat

goblet squat

Stand with your feet a little wider than hip-distance apart with toes turned slightly out. Hold one heavy dumbbell or kettlebell in front of your chest with elbows bent and tucked into your sides.

Inhale to come down into a squat position as you bend your knees, slightly hinge at your waist, drawing your hips back and torso forward.

Exhale, bracing the core and lifting the pelvic floor as you press through your heels to return to standing.

Do 8 to 10 reps for 2 to 3 sets.

Lateral squat with loop resistance band

lateral squat

Place a mini loop resistance band around your thighs just above the knees. Begin by standing with feet hip-distance apart.

Take a step out to the side with your right foot and bend both knees, landing in a wider squat position, sending hips slightly back. Step right foot back in to return to starting position.

Repeat on the opposite side, taking a step out with your left foot coming into a wide squat. Continue alternating sides.

Do 10 reps on each side for 2 to 3 sets.

Supported split squat

supported split squat

Holding onto a stable surface, such as the back of a chair or a wall, step your right leg forward and elevate the back left heel. Keep your torso upright.

Slowly lower down into a split squat by bending both knees, keeping weight evenly distributed. The back heel should stay elevated at all times.

Push through feet to rise back up to standing, stretching both legs straight without locking the knees. Repeat, then switch to the opposite side with the left leg in front.

Do 8 to 10 reps on each side for 2 to 3 sets.

Squat with high to low reach

squat with high low reach

Stand with your feet a little wider than hip-distance apart with toes turned slightly out, holding a light-to-medium weight dumbbell in each hand.

As you squat down, press both dumbbells out and down in front of you, palms facing down. Your arms should be stretched out below shoulder height, as if placing something on a low shelf.

Exhale, and press through the heels to stand, lifting your heels at the top to balance.

From this position, press both dumbbells out and up in front of you, so your arms are stretched out above shoulder height, as if placing something on a high shelf.

Do 10 to 15 reps for 2 to 3 sets.

Wall squat

wall squat

Begin standing with your back pressed against a wall. Slowly inch your feet forward away from the wall and bend your knees as if sitting in a chair. Keep the back of your head, shoulders, ribs, and pelvis in contact with the wall at all times.

Bring your hands to your belly bump, and hold this position.

Focus on deep diaphragmatic breathing — inhaling to fully expand the ribs, exhaling to hug your baby in toward your spine. Actively press your lower back into the wall to help release pressure in the pelvic region.

Hold for 30 seconds to 1 minute. Slowly rise back up to standing, and rest for 15 seconds.

Repeat for 2 to 3 sets.