Are Pregnancy Stretch Marks Making an Appearance? Here's Why and What You Can Do

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

stretch marks

Find out what causes stretch marks during pregnancy, how you can deal with these classic souvenirs of maternity, and what you can do about them.

Some moms-to-be wear them proudly as a "red badge of motherhood." Others don't want to talk about them. They're pregnancy stretch marks, and though your baby's not even born yet, she's already leaving her mark on you!

Key Takeaways:

Nearly every mama gets them. Yep — pregnancy stretch marks are completely normal, appearing in 90 percent of expectant women on the belly, breasts, and thighs.

Prevention isn't really possible, but pampering is. As your skin stretches, try to gain weight steadily, stay hydrated, moisturize often, and follow a healthy eating plan.

Stretch marks tell a beautiful story. As these lines fade in the months after birth they'll remind you of the amazing work your body did to grow your little one.

What trimester do pregnant women develop stretch marks?

You'll most likely start to notice stretch marks on your stomach (and elsewhere) around the end of the second trimester into the beginning of the third trimester, when you're between 6 and 7 months pregnant. That said, they do sometimes appear sooner.

Up to 90% of all expecting women get these pink, red, brown, or sometimes purplish streaks. You'll probably notice them across your belly, butt, thighs, hips, or breasts. What to Expect Community parent JMSKY2023 says hers look like "vertical scars across my front, hips, and inner thighs. There's so many, it's almost comical."

What causes stretch marks during pregnancy?

Stretch marks are actually tiny tears in the supporting layers of tissue under your skin as it's pulled tight during pregnancy.

Whether or not you get stretch marks has a lot to do with the elasticity of your skin. You can mostly thank genetics: If your mother had stretch marks, chances are greater that you probably will too. Lifestyle habits, including eating well and exercising regularly, also promote skin health and elasticity.

One last important factor affecting the likelihood of stretch marks is how much weight you gain during pregnancy and how quickly. Rapid weight gain makes you more prone to this badge of pregnancy. The faster your skin stretches, the more likely it is to leave a mark.

What can I do about stretch marks when I'm pregnant?

Stretch marks are something to be proud of, but if you'd prefer to try to minimize their appearance, here's what you need to know:

Moisturize and massage

Massaging a stretch mark oil or cream on your belly, hips, and thighs certainly won't hurt. Some research suggests that formulations with the herb centella or hyaluronic acid (which is already present in the skin) may help prevent stretch marks, but the evidence is far from definitive.

No high-quality research proves that cocoa butter, olive oil, almond oil, vitamin E, or coconut oil are effective at preventing stretch marks. But some studies have shown that these and other anti-inflammatory and antioxidant plant oils keep skin hydrated and promote wound healing and skin barrier repair.

If nothing else, moisturizing daily will help with the dry, itchy skin associated with pregnancy.

Be sure to use moisturizer early on in your pregnancy, and massage it gently on the skin to maximize effectiveness. Some researchers think it's the massaging action and not the actual ingredients that may make stretch mark creams effective.

Keep using the cream or gel of your choice throughout your pregnancy, since any benefits from these products will likely take weeks to have an effect.

Nourish your skin from the inside

Keep taking your prenatal vitamin , which helps ensure you're getting enough of a variety of nutrients that support both your baby's development and your skin health.

Eating plenty of vitamin C-rich foods like peppers, citrus, and strawberries may also make your skin less subject to stretch marks. Vitamin C promotes collagen and tissue production, which helps keep skin strong and elastic.

While it's far from proven to work, getting enough vitamin D in your diet may also help with stretch marks, and it certainly can't hurt. Load up on fatty fish, fortified dairy or dairy substitutes, and eggs, all of which are chock full of vitamin D , plus other pregnancy-friendly vitamins and nutrients (like omega-3 fatty acids and choline).

Keep your weight gain slow and steady

Since rapid weight gain is one of the culprits behind stretch marks, slowly and steadily putting on pounds during pregnancy is one of the most effective ways to help prevent them.

It can be easy to overdo it if you're eating for two. As much as possible, try to follow the general recommendations for caloric intake during pregnancy , which also helps guarantee an overall healthier pregnancy for you and your baby.

Wait it out

Given enough time, stretch marks gradually lighten and fade on their own. But if you're still concerned once you deliver your baby, talk to your dermatologist about other treatments. While none of these options can eliminate stretch marks, they can make them less noticeable:

Prescription retinol or tretinoin creams. These types of retinoids have been shown to treat stretch marks effectively by helping to rebuild the collagen in skin. Ask your doctor whether it's safe to use them when breastfeeding.

Laser therapy

Chemical peels

Microdermabrasion

Ultrasound

Radiofrequency

Microneedling

You may have wanted a solution yesterday, but hold off on these methods while you're still expecting. None of them are considered safe during pregnancy. Plus, your skin will continue to change throughout these nine months.

Want more info about your changing body? Check out the What to Expect app for expert advice and week-by-week support during your pregnancy journey.

Can I prevent stretch marks?

There's no proven way to prevent stretch marks during pregnancy. Try to think of them as modern art for your baby bump, and save your hard-earned cash for a post-delivery treat instead of spending a ton of money on unproven therapies.

When can I expect my stretch marks to go away?

Any stretch marks that crop up while you're expecting will likely be around for a bit, and they might even look a little more noticeable post-delivery. Fortunately, they won't stay so vividly hued forever.

Pregnancy stretch marks usually lighten to a less noticeable (and more easily concealable) silvery gray or pale glistening color within about six months of birth. Meanwhile, try to wear them with pride.