Are Vaccines Safe for My Baby?

Updates to copy, information, sourcing, formatting, and headlines, and new medical review.

vaccine safety, little girl holding stuffed animal getting a vaccine

Not only are vaccines very safe, but they help protect your child from diseases like measles, polio, and whooping cough that could make her very sick. Here's more on the safety of vaccines for kids.

How many times have you read an article, heard a story, or seen an online post about vaccines? Chances are, a lot. And if you've spent any time scrolling through social media, talking to other parents at the playground, or posting on community message boards lately, you've likely come across some conflicting information about vaccines for kids.

Vaccine myths tend to spread far and wide, and it's understandable if what you’ve heard makes you feel overwhelmed and worried as a parent. The good news is you can rest easier knowing that research has shown that immunizations are safe and effective.

and it's understandable if what you’ve heard makes you feel overwhelmed and worried as a parent. The good news is you can rest easier knowing that research has shown that immunizations are safe and effective.

Vaccines like the measles vaccine , the flu shot , and the DTaP vaccine offer vital protection against illnesses that can make children seriously ill.

While reactions do sometimes occur with some vaccines (such as soreness or redness where the shot was given, fussiness, or a low-grade fever), the vast majority of these reactions are mild and short-lived. Serious reactions are extremely rare. And shielding your child from the illnesses that vaccines protect against is incredibly important, especially since many of them continue to circulate. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Vaccines for Your ChildrenSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Vaccines for Your ChildrenSee All Sources

"A little fever or fussiness for 24 hours is nothing compared to your child losing their life or being mentally or physically affected for life," says Gina Posner , M.D., a pediatrician at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

Can my child get the disease from the shot itself?

This is an understandable concern — but fortunately one you can easily cross off your parental worry list. Your child can't get the disease from the vaccine.

Many vaccines are made from bacteria or viruses that have been killed or weakened — which means it’s impossible for them to make anyone sick with the disease they're intended to prevent. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursCommon Questions About VaccinesSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursCommon Questions About VaccinesSee All Sources

Even those vaccines that are made from weakened live viruses (like the chickenpox or rotavirus vaccines) carry only a small risk of causing symptoms similar to the disease. And should that happen, these side effects would be mild and your little one wouldn't be contagious because she wouldn't get the illness itself from the immunizations.

There's also no need to worry about the mRNA technology used in COVID-19 vaccines made by Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna.

MRNA is unable to enter the nucleus of the cell, where our DNA lives, so there's no way those kinds of vaccines will change your child’s DNA or genes, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Plus, the mRNA is broken down by the body shortly after a person is vaccinated. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCOVID-19 Vaccine BasicsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCOVID-19 Vaccine BasicsSee All Sources

Do vaccines hurt?

The pain of a vaccine is only momentary (like a pinch) and, compared with the pain of the diseases the shot is protecting against, insignificant.

You can minimize your baby's discomfort and tears by holding her in your arms and by distracting her.

Bottle- or breastfeeding during or right after the vaccine can help too, as can giving lots of cuddles; talking to your child in a soothing voice; singing to your baby; and offering a favorite stuffed animal, toy, or book.

And remember: While it’s certainly never fun to see your little one sad or frightened, the brief discomfort of a shot far outweighs having the vaccine-preventable disease itself, many of which can make kids extremely ill and can even be life-threatening.

A little fever or fussiness for 24 hours is nothing compared to your child losing their life or being mentally or physically affected for life.

Dr. Gina Posner, Pediatrician in California and Member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

Can getting so many vaccines overwhelm my child's immune system?

Not only won't vaccines overwhelm your baby's immune system, but they'll actually help strengthen it. Whenever your child is given a vaccine, her body makes antibodies against that disease-causing germ that help fight off the same germ should she encounter it in real life.

The schedule of recommended shots may seem daunting and might even have you wondering how your little one's immune system will be able to handle it all — but actually, research shows that there's no need to worry.

Healthy babies safely respond to numerous challenges to their immune system every day, from germs on the floor (the ones she picks up with that dropped teething biscuit) and bacteria in foods to dust in the living room air and cold viruses floating around the supermarket.

Vaccines, say experts, are an insignificant drop in the immune system bucket compared to what babies successfully tackle on a daily basis. And, unlike other germs she might encounter, vaccines are specifically designed to protect her from future harm.

What does the government do to make sure vaccines are safe?

Vaccines don't just appear on the market — or on your child's immunization schedule. Pharmaceutical companies must thoroughly test vaccines in clinical trials before the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) and CDC will approve and recommend them. This testing and study process can take years. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionDeveloping Safe and Effective VaccinesSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionDeveloping Safe and Effective VaccinesSee All Sources

Once clinical trials show a vaccine is safe and effective, an advisory committee of medical and public health experts presents its findings, has open public meetings, and develops recommendations for vaccine use . It's a long and appropriately complex process.

"There have been endless studies on each vaccine both before it gets to market, and then continued after the vaccine is released," says Dr. Posner. "Vaccines get pulled even after they are released if any increase in problems is noted."

From time to time, adjustments are made to vaccines to make them even safer and more effective. For example, what used to be known as the DTP vaccine became the DTaP vaccine to reduce the risk of side effects associated with the original formulation. And the oral (live) polio vaccine is no longer used in the U.S. now that the inactivated polio vaccine , which carries no risk of causing polio-like side effects, is available.

How to protect your kids

Your priority as a parent is, understandably, safeguarding your child from harm in any way you can. When it comes to your baby's shots, one of the best ways to protect your child is to learn all you can about vaccines from reliable sources — and your pediatrician tops that list.

Before having your little one vaccinated, do your homework so you can feel good about the informed decision you're making and talk to the doctor about the potential risks of or side effects associated with that particular vaccine . You can find reliable information on the CDC , FDA , and American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) websites.

You should also make sure the doctor or nurse gives you a vaccine information statement from the CDC for each shot your child gets. Armed with accurate information, you'll be able to schedule those vaccines with confidence.

Key Takeaways

Vaccine myths are prevalent, and it’s possible you’ve heard misinformation about childhood immunizations on social media or at the playground, for example. As a parent, this can be confusing and overwhelming — we all want the best for our children. But it’s important to remember that vaccines are very safe and effective.

Childhood vaccines protect your little one against diseases that could make her extremely sick. Many of these diseases are especially dangerous for infants and young children, and can even be life-threatening. In fact, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that measles vaccination alone prevented more than 60 million deaths between 2000 and 2023.

Despit what you may have heard, vaccines can’t overwhelm your baby’s immune system (in fact, immunizations strengthen it!) and your child can’t get the disease from the shot.

Any side effects your child might develop after getting vaccinated pale in comparison to the disease itself. Most are mild and temporary, such as a rash or fever, and serious side effects are extremely rare. And any pain your child feels during her shots (like a small pinch) is insignificant compared with the pain of the diseases the shot is protecting against.

The bottom line on infant vaccine safety

What this all boils down to: Vaccines are far safer than the diseases they prevent. Millions of children are immunized every year in the United States. And that’s critical, since vaccine-preventable diseases can be very serious, may require hospitalization, and can even be deadly — especially in infants and young children.

Because of vaccines, many diseases have been almost wiped out in the U.S. But that’s no reason not to immunize your child against those germs: Just one unvaccinated person can reintroduce these diseases to a community. Still others continue to circulate in outbreaks from time to time, such as measles.

Plus, by vaccinating your child, you’re doing your part to maintain herd immunity , which keeps people and communities safe by significantly reducing the spread of infections. When more of us are vaccinated against a disease, everyone benefits — including those who can’t get vaccinated yet, like very young babies or people who are immunocompromised.

Without a doubt, vaccines are one of medical science's most amazing success stories. "They don't make vaccines against viruses that are benign," says Dr. Posner. "Every vaccine is made to prevent a disease that can kill."