Are Teething Gels Safe?

are teething gels safe, parent holding teething baby

When your baby is teething and is in a lot of pain, you'd do anything to relieve the pain. Here's how to soothe those sore gums safely.

It's a stage every parent goes through: Baby is teething something fierce and you want to help ease the pain, but don't quite know where to start. Many parents' natural inclination is to reach for a topical teething gel to rub on those tender, red gums.

But before you do, it's important to know the risks associated with them and the pros and cons of the various teething pain remedies. As always, check with your pediatrician first to find out the best way to bring your child relief.

There are several types of teething pain treatments available, but the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not recommend any of them for young children. They include:

Topical teething gels and liquids with benzocaine

Though deemed acceptable in the past, recent research has led the FDA to advise against using benzocaine — an anesthetic found in many over-the-counter teething gels — on children under 2. It can cause a rare but serious (and occasionally even deadly) condition called methemoglobinemia, in which the oxygen carried through the bloodstream is reduced to dangerous levels.

Symptoms can show up minutes or hours after using the product and include pale or gray- or blue-colored skin, lips and nail beds; shortness of breath; rapid heart rate; lightheadedness; and confusion.

Once your toddler passes his second birthday (at which point he may be cutting his first and second molars), benzocaine-based numbing gels are considered safer to use. But make sure to talk to your child's doctor first before treating teething pain with those products.

Prescription teething gels and liquids containing viscous lidocaine

Prescription local anesthetics containing viscous lidocaine are not recommended by the FDA for children at all. They can make swallowing difficult, increase the risk of choking or breathing in food, affect the heart and nervous system and lead to drug toxicity. Avoid those kinds of teething remedies completely.

Homeopathic-labeled teething gels, liquids and tablets

In the past, some of the treatments sold as "homeopathic" were deemed perfectly safe as long as you checked the ingredients on the label and asked your doctor about the kind and brand in question before giving them to your child. But as of September 2016, the FDA advises against using any homeopathic teething gels, liquids or tablets whatsoever, saying they can pose a risk to infants and other children.

The concern has generally been over those remedies made with an unregulated form of belladonna, a toxic plant that can be potentially dangerous and cause heart problems and drowsiness, and the fact that the amount contained in the products may exceed what's listed on the label.

The FDA now says all homeopathic-branded teething treatments are off-limits, and parents should call their pediatrician immediately if their children experience seizures, trouble breathing, excessive sleepiness and other unusual symptoms after being given those gels or tablets.

The strict definition of "homeopathic" refers to an alternative treatment or remedy containing a small, dilute amount of a natural substance believed to have medicinal benefits. But many products sold as homeopathic either are made with too small an amount of that ingredient to actually confirm it's there at all, or contain a substantial amount of the active ingredient that could possibly cause sometimes serious side effects and dangerous drug interactions. The FDA regulates homeopathic-labeled products but cannot confirm their safety or effectiveness.

Other unsafe numbing tactics and teethers to avoid

Though the FDA specifically warns against benzocaine-based and lidocaine-based teething gels as well as homeopathic teething gels, tablets and numbing agents, you should also never rub alcohol or rubbing alcohol into your baby’s gums — ingesting even a small amount can make baby sick.

Many pediatric health experts also advise against amber, wood, marble or silicone teething necklaces , bracelets and anklets, which can pose a strangulation risk for babies.

Teething gel alternatives

When your cutie is cranky (and she will be — teething makes for very sore gums), try one of these safe teething remedies to help her feel better as she starts to pop those pearly whites:

Give baby a cold teething toy or washcloth to chew. Store it in the refrigerator, not the freezer.

Provide soothing counterpressure by using a finger brush or wash cloth to rub baby’s gums.

When chewing, rubbing, cold and counterpressure don’t help, try an infant pain reliever like acetaminophen or ibuprofen as recommended by your pediatrician.

For babies over 6 months old, offer cold water.

For children older than 6 months, soak a washcloth in chamomile tea and apply it to the gums. Older kids with molars erupting can also scratch a teething brush steeped in chamomile tea around the area.