This month brings an eager child, whose strength will carry them through.

August is the last full month of summer, but if you have an August baby, the good times have just begun. According to your baby's birth flowers , this month will bring you a sincere, imaginative child whose bright ideas will change the world.

What are the August birth flowers?

The birth flowers for August babies are the bright poppy and the elegant gladiola. From the poppy's free-spirited dancing in the wind to gladiolus' robust blooms, these birth flowers are a gardener's delight. When it comes to predicting (or celebrating) your young one's personality, they offer an exciting vision: a creative child who knows exactly how to bring their wildest dreams to fruition.

Gladiolus: A symbol of strength and sincerity

Gladiolas are some of the most festive flowers of summer: donning gigantic green spears encrusted with colorful blossoms and a delightful aroma of cloves. Trusted SourceIowa State University Flowers and Their Meanings: The Language of FlowersSee All Sources [1] Native to tropical regions of Africa, the Mediterranean and the Middle East, these lush perennials are a florist favorite with a surprising history. Their unique, weapon-like shape caught the attention of the Romans (gladius means sword in Latin). The Romans would shower winning gladiators in gladiolus, which is why the flower has come to represent strength: whether physically, emotionally or in your convictions. Trusted SourcePennState University August Birth Month Flower: The GladiolusSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceIowa State University Flowers and Their Meanings: The Language of FlowersSee All Sources

Trusted SourcePennState University August Birth Month Flower: The GladiolusSee All Sources

Don't be surprised by your August baby's physical strength (he'll be pulling himself up on everything in sight in no time!) or some interesting toddler years — he knows what he wants, plus when and how he wants it! But the future is bright — your gladiola child will bloom into a sincere, moral and determined person who will always manage to pierce your heart with love.

Poppies: Could they foretell an easy sleeper?

Poppies may get a bit of a bad rap in the Wizard of Oz, but in reality, a field of these smoky-scented, fiery wildflowers is nothing but a joyous sight. Associated with imagination, pleasure, success and fine, a little bit of drowsiness, poppies are known for their medicinal value and beauty.

Poppy babies are creative, fun-loving and successful at just about anything they put their minds to. But whether their association with drowsiness means that your baby will quickly take to a full night of sleep or that he will leave you so sleep-deprived that you can fall asleep at the drop of a hat, we cannot say.

Incorporating the gladiolus and poppy into your family's life

Floral decor and little pops of color go a long way in brightening up anyone's day, so why not add your child's birth flowers around your own space? Doing so will not only add a personal touch, but will honor your little one's birth, their disposition and their spirit. Here's how:

Gear up for garden favorites. Both gladiolus' bright spears and poppies' ethereal blooms are garden favorites. Perennial gladiolus, grown from bulbs, come in nearly every color and make great cut flowers, too. You can sprinkle poppy seeds in well-drained soil in a sunny spot for a boho-style flower bed.

Add them to bouquets. Let's be honest, each gladiolus spear is already a bouquet unto itself. But throw a couple together in a vase and you've got a tall and luscious low-effort bouquet that works for any occasion.

Get crafty. Making origami gladiolus is a beautiful meditative practice — once you have time for that! Your own gladiola will be keeping you on your toes for quite a while yet.

Try wallflowers for wallpaper. Check out your favorite wallpaper company (traditional or peel and stick) to design a poppin' poppy accent wall in your child's nursery. Easy peasy.

Bust out a baking project! Poppy seeds are not just for bagels. As your little one reaches the preschool years , there are so many delicious recipes for you to make together (while you wear matching chef hats, of course). Some of our favorites include poppy seed hamentaschen , Croatian makovnjaca (poppyseed roll) and lemon poppy seed cake .

Looking for more fun insights about your baby? Discover the astrological traits of your baby with our free Birth Chart Calculator .

Sources

Flowers and Their Meanings: The Language of Flowers

Show in the article

August Birth Month Flower: The Gladiolus

Show in the article