Baby Photos on Facebook and Instagram

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Whether your baby just started smiling or he’s already a little laugh machine, you’re no doubt anxious to share your little stunner with friends and family, both near and far. And while the tech-savvy mom in you is thinking, “What better way than with Facebook or Instagram?” you might also be mulling over the wisdom of posting baby photos on social media.

Kudos for thinking twice before you plaster his adorable mug all over the internet. The good news is that you can put up photos of your child on Facebook, Instagram or Twitter. When you do, however, just be sure to:

Keep your info as private as possible.

Be sure your info is visible to just you and your personal friends and family, and keep your account private whenever possible. Remember: Even if you delete something later on, it’s not always completely gone. Screenshots, for example, may stick around even after you’ve changed the privacy settings.

Since Facebook uses your smartphone to geotag you automatically whenever you use it to post anything, it's a good idea to turn off its location services. That’ll help prevent strangers from seeing your family photos or knowing that you’re at the park with your baby.

Keep personal details to a minimum.

If you’re going to put photos of your child on Facebook, Instagram or Twitter, don’t list your home address in your profile, even if only your friends are privy to that info. Facebook friends and Instagram followers don’t need to know exactly which street you live on. Let your mommy friends and other close pals call or text for your address if they want to drop by (what new mom enjoys unannounced visitors, anyway?).

Double-check your friends list.

Sure, you want your old school buddies to see your sweetie (even if you haven’t seen them in years), but if you “friended” someone you’ve never met while playing an online game or accepted an out-of-the-blue request from someone you don’t know, discreetly take those folks off your friends list before you post baby photos on Facebook. Same with followers you don't know well on Instagram or Twitter.

On Facebook, you can do that by going to your profile page, clicking on the Friends tab, hovering over the "Friends" button on the right of the tab of each friend you’d like to delete, and selecting "Unfriend" from the drop-down menu. They may be wonderful people, but since you don’t know them, it’s not worth the risk.

Edit your photo selections.

Photos of your baby’s first bath are priceless, but those make better private family keepsakes than images to share with everyone you know. Remember: Your baby will one day no longer be a baby. Consider yourself as a 12-year-old. What would have embarrassed you? Pictures in the bath (and during diaper changes and other in-the-buff moments) are probably high on the list, so keep those off social media.

Resist the urge to start your baby’s own Facebook page or Instagram account.

Even if an adult creates the account, both platforms disallow pages for children younger than 13. In fact, a federal law called the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (COPPA) places restrictions on children under 13 having access to and being tracked on the internet.

Ultimately, it’s easier for your friends and family to keep track of you and your little guy on your own profile. And your child will probably want to create his own online presence one day (on whatever social media site is popular then!). He’ll have his own ideas of what information and photos he wants to put out there — as well as what he’ll want to keep to himself.

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Tips for Toddler Tech Success , March 2019. WhatToExpect.com, 14 Tips for Professional-Looking DIY Newborn Pictures , April 2019. American Academy of Pediatrics, Sharenting: 5 Questions to Ask Before You Post , November 2019. Common Sense Media, Is It Safe to Post Pictures of My Kid Online? . Facebook, I Would Like to Open a Facebook Account for My Newborn Son , 2016. Facebook, Selecting an Audience for Stuff You Share , 2021. Facebook, How Can I Adjust My Facebook Privacy Settings? , 2021 Facebook, Facebook and Location , 2021. Facebook, How Do I Report a Child Under the Age of 13 on Facebook? , 2021. Federal Trade Commission, Children’s Online Privacy Protection Rule (“COPPA”) , 2021. Instagram, Privacy Settings & Information , 2021. Twitter, How to Protect and Unprotect Your Tweets , 2021.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

How to Choose the Best Child Care for Your Baby Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

What to Pack When Traveling With Baby Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Is Your Baby's Car Seat Safe and Up-to-Date? Check These Infant Car Seat Safety Tips Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Day Care 101: How to Choose the Best Day Care Facility for Your Family Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Easy-to-Take Holiday Photos You’ll Cherish for Years to Come By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Promote a Baby’s Social and Emotional Development Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Children's Medication Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Yes, It's Worth Having a "Newborn Bubble" — Here's How to Do It Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Babyproof Every Room in the House Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Write in a Baby Birth Announcement Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

7 Photos Every Pregnant Mom Needs — Because You'll Regret Not Taking Them Later Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window