What to Do if Your Baby Rejects Rice Cereal

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

baby rejecting rice cereal

If you're introducing solids and your baby seem to hate rice cereal, you may be wondering if she's eating enough.

"My 6-month-old just isn't into the rice cereal I'm trying to introduce. I'm afraid she's not getting enough to eat without it. Should I keep trying to feed her baby cereal or give up?"

Mild-tasting, easily digested and packed with iron, rice cereal is definitely a go-to first food for babies when you're introducing solids . That is, unless your perfect baby rejects it.

Fortunately, even if your baby continues to turn up her little nose and clench her tiny lips each and every time a spoonful of rice cereal comes her way, she won't go hungry. It's not the cereal your baby needs — it's the iron in the cereal. And while rice cereal is certainly an excellent source of that essential mineral, it doesn't hold a monopoly on it. In fact, because some studies have found high levels of inorganic arsenic in rice cereal, the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) recommends infants (as well as children and pregnant women) eat a variety of foods to offset any potential exposure to arsenic.

If your baby is bottle-fed, she's getting all the iron she needs from enriched formula. If she's breastfed, you can easily meet her requirement by giving her a supplement (ask your pediatrician for a recommendation). Besides, at this point in her dining career, solids are largely for the experience, not for nutrition. She's still getting most of what her growing body needs in liquid form.

But there are good reasons not to surrender when your baby rejects cereal. An older baby may become even more resistant to learning how to chew and swallow, preferring the tried-and-true method of sucking. Habits (and tastes) are tougher to change at 10 months than at 6 or 7 months.

So instead of giving up, be sure to prepare baby cereal with a familiar flavor, using either breast milk or her formula. If she still refuses, consider adding some variety to the mix. Stir a little of a good first fruit, such as pureed applesauce or pears, into the cereal. The added flavor and texture may induce her to open wide.

Or try another type of baby cereal — some adventurous palates prefer the more pronounced taste of barley or oats to the milky mildness of rice. You might even skip baby cereal altogether (again, as long as your baby's meeting her iron quota) and move on to more substantial solids (sweet potatoes or peas, for example). Just remember to go slow — introduce only one solid at a time, with three to four days in between to screen out potential allergic reactions. (Also important: You should never put any cereal in her bottle .)

No solid interest at all? Give the spoon a rest for a few days, and then try feeding her baby cereal again. It's possible that she's off for another reason — teething , feeling overtired or under the weather — and new eating experiences are always more palatable when you're in the mood. And you never know: Today's cereal snubber can turn into tomorrow's cereal lover, so don't give up your campaign yet.

Good luck,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Breastfeeding Your Newborn , August 2020. U.S. Food & Drug Administration, FDA Statement on Testing and Analysis of Arsenic in Rice and Rice Products , April 2016. American Academy of Pediatric’s HealthyChildren.org, Tips to Reduce Arsenic in Your Baby’s Diet , September 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics’ HealthyChildren.org, Transitional Milk and Mature Milk , November 2009. American Academy of Pediatric’s HealthyChildren.org, Vitamin D & Iron Supplements for Babies: AAP Recommendations , May 2016. American Academy of Pediatrics’ HealthyChildren.org, Food & Feeding , 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Important Milestones: Your Baby by Six Months , August 2021.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Introducing Solid Foods to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Nutritional Needs of Babies: the First 12 Months Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Common Baby Feeding Problems After You Introduce Solids Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Feeding Schedules & Baby Food Chart for the First Year Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Homemade Baby Food Recipes Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Self-Feeding Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Introducing Bread to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Best Finger Foods for Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Introducing Bananas to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby-Led Weaning Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Feeding a Sick Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

How Much Should My Baby Eat? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Picky Eater Problems: What to Feed a Picky Toddler Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window