You're Going to Need to Track Your Baby’s Feedings, Diaper Changes, Sleep, and More. Here's How

Updated to reflect new app features.

woman looking at her phone while holding her young baby

Logging key details about your baby's feedings, diaper changes, sleep, and tummy time — along with other details of her routine and yours — will make life much simpler. What to Expect is here to help.

There's plenty of love to go around with a new baby: cozy snuggle sessions, adorable pictures filling your camera roll, the chance to watch your little bundle grow before your very eyes.

But there are also plenty of things to keep track of: how much your baby is eating, how many diapers you're changing , how often you're pumping , how long your little one is sleeping , and other aspects of your new "normal." You (and the pediatrician ) will likely want to know this info to make sure your little one is growing and thriving in those early days.

It's also a lot to remember, especially when you're running on (very) little sleep and balancing everything else that comes with new parenthood. Fortunately, a baby tracker like the one in the What to Expect app can help.

What is a baby tracker?

A baby tracker does exactly what you'd expect — it helps you document all the details of your little one's eating habits, diaper changes, sleep, tummy time sessions, and even your pumping sessions if you have them, plus other details of your little one's daily routine.

A typical baby tracker includes:

A way to track breastfeeding sessions, bottle-feedings and pumping breaks, including a timer to record how long they take.

Feeding and sleep history over time, so you can look back at patterns and see how they change as your baby gets older.

A way to track diaper changes, including when each one happens, what's in the diaper, and the total number of diapers changed in a day.

A place to record details related to your baby's feedings, diaper changes, sleep patterns, tummy time, and any other facets of her daily routine you want to keep track of.

How to use the What to Expect Baby Tracker

Searching for a baby tracker tool but have no idea which one is the best? The What to Expect Baby Tracker has all the features you're looking for.

All you need to do is download the free What to Expect app from the App Store or Google Play (if you don't have it already). Then tap "tools," and then "Baby Tracker."

Once you're in the tracker, you can use all the tool's features, including:

A customizable homefeed so you'll see only what you want to track — whether it's feedings, diaper changes, pumping sessions, sleep, or something else — right from the homescreen of the baby app and parenting feed.

what to expect baby tracker homefeed

A timer to clock how long your feedings last. If you're nursing, you can record how much time you spend feeding from the left and right breasts. Plus, the timer keeps going while you check out articles or Community posts, so you can keep using the app while you're feeding your baby or pumping.

Feeding, pumping, diaper, and sleep information for the last day, week, and month so you can look for recent eating, sleeping, and diapering patterns.

what to expect baby tracker summary

Details of each of your baby's diaper changes, including the color and consistency of your baby's poop and what it might mean.

A way to track tummy time sessions, solid food diet when you get to that stage, and other details of your baby's routine and development you want to remember, which will then appear in your timeline.

You can also easily access the What to Expect tracker via a widget that appears right on your phone's home screen.

what to expect baby tracker widget on phone homescreen

Benefits of using a baby tracker

There are a lot of upsides to using a baby tracker. It can help you answer common questions like:

What time did my baby's most recent feed start?

How many times has she eaten today?

What breast should I offer next?

When did my baby last nap?

How many ounces was that last bottle?

How much milk did I pump yesterday?

How long has it been since the last change?

How many diapers have we gone through today?

How many minutes of tummy time did my baby do?

When does my baby typically go to bed?

Recording your baby's feedings, diapers, sleep, tummy time, and other details in a tracker like this means you also have all the important info in one place. That way, you can identify patterns in how your little one is growing and developing, and adjust if necessary with your pediatrician's guidance.

Panicked thoughts like "Wait, how long has it been since she last ate?!" can quickly go away thanks to this tool. A well-baby visit also becomes instantly easier when all you need to do is open an app to tell the doctor how much your baby is eating, how many diapers you're changing, how long she's sleeping, and how tummy time is going, rather than trying to rack your brain for all the minute details.

Ultimately, a baby tracker like What to Expect's makes your life as a new parent a whole lot simpler.

Give What to Expect's new baby tracker a try, and let us help you organize your little one's feedings, diaper changes, sleep, and more, along with your pumping sessions, so that you don't have to. You'll be able to enjoy that special bonding time with your baby with less worry! You can download the free What to Expect app (and use its baby tracker) for iPhone , iPad , and Android .

Updates history

November 24, 2025

Editor: Caroline Picard

Updated to reflect new app features.

Fact-checked to ensure accuracy.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Diaper Size Chart: Your Weight-Based Diapering Guide Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Change a Baby’s Diaper Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Pack When Traveling With Baby Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Your Guide to Well-Baby Visits Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Will My Baby Sleep Through the Night? Here's the Scoop Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Feeding Schedules & Baby Food Chart for the First Year Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

How to Create a Night Shift System When You Have a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Baby Dropping a Nap? Here’s a Guide to Losing the Morning Snooze Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

From Fussiness to Full Nights: Understanding Baby Sleep Patterns Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Reasons Your Baby Won't Sleep and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The Ultimate Third Trimester Checklist: Everything to Do Before Your Baby’s Birthday Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Baby Registry Checklist: Exactly What to Put on a Baby Registry Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

This Printable Potty Training Chart Can Help Your Toddler Lose the Diapers for Good Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window