Help Me, Heidi! Is My 8-Month-Old Sick, Teething, or Going Through Sleep Regression?

Is my baby teething, going through sleep regression, or sick?

"How do you tell the difference between an 8-month-old's sleep regression and whether or not she's actually in teething pain or has a cold? Our baby suddenly wakes up every 40 minutes or so all night long, and it's so hard to tell if she needs Tylenol and comfort, or if we should let her cry it out and learn to get herself back to sleep. Help!"

Babies often start waking up during the night when they start becoming more active and mastering new skills ...it’s kind of like when you have something super exciting or new going on in your life, and you keep waking up during the night because you’re too hyped up to settle down. Just scheduling in more unwinding time at bedtime — tacking on an extra 15 minutes or so to her bedtime routine — can help her apply the brakes more gradually, so she can relax her busy little body more completely. Set the bedtime vibe on “chill”...no TV on (TV in the hours before bed can disrupt sleep hours later), soft music, low lights. Warm bath, quiet stories, gentle cuddles (tickle monsters need not apply).

Keep in mind, the more active a baby becomes by day, the more unwinding she’ll need at night—not just to help her fall asleep, but stay asleep. And this pre-bed protocol can help her sleep better no matter what’s been waking her at night...even if it’s teething pain or a stuffy nose that’s messing with her zzz’s.

Speaking of which, teething can be a pain , and that pain may be waking her up. You can try a dose of Tylenol or Motrin if it’s cleared by her pediatrician, and see if that makes a difference. Just keep in mind that night waking may start with teething pain, but may become a habit long after the pain has left the building...depending on how you respond in the meantime. Clearly, it’s hard to let your sweet pea fuss even for a moment, and there’s no reason why you shouldn’t offer comfort if not offering it makes you feel...well, uncomfortable (this is about your comfort level, too, Mom!)

But if you’d prefer that her night-waking days be over sooner rather than later, you might want to consider comfort offered at gradually increasing intervals, preferably without picking her up. A consistent response to waking will more likely result in consistently less waking, and consistently shorter fussing times when she does wake (pick her up and rock her back to sleep on Saturday and she’ll expect the same service on Sunday, even if you didn’t pick her up at all on Friday). That’s just how older (in other words, wiser) babies roll.

Same goes for stuffy noses ...though in that case you can also try a cool-mist humidifier in her room and a little cuddle time in a steamy bathroom before bed, as well as saline drops to loosen up snot, followed by snot sucking to help her breathe better, and hopefully rest better, at night.

Remember that ultimately the choice of whether to jump to her side to comfort her whenever she wakes (and what form to offer that comfort in) is yours to make, not mine and not anyone else’s. But usually a consistent approach, no matter what that approach that is, will soon have you all sleeping better at night — and help her learn how to fall back asleep when she does wake (which, by the way, all babies, kids and adults do during the night — not even the best sleeper actually, truly “sleeps through the night”).

Hugs,

Heidi

Help Me, Heidi! is a weekly advice column in which What to Expect creator Heidi Murkoff answers your most pressing pregnancy and parenting questions. She’s tackling the stuff you are desperate to know right now — so if you have a question, ask Heidi here or on Facebook and she might answer in an upcoming column. (Not sure if Heidi's answered one of your questions? Check out the rest of the columns here .)

creator Heidi Murkoff answers your most pressing pregnancy and parenting questions. She’s tackling the stuff you are desperate to know right now — so if you have a question, ask Heidi here

or on Facebook and she might answer in an upcoming column. (Not sure if Heidi's answered one of your questions? Check out the rest of the columns here .)

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

11 Reasons Your Baby Won't Sleep and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

7 Reasons Your Baby May Be Waking Up in the Middle of the Night Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Do Babies Start Teething? Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Why Is My 7-Month Old Going Through a Sleep Regression? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Is Sleep Regression? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is There a 9-Month Sleep Regression? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is the 8‑Month Sleep Regression in Full Swing? Here’s What You Can Expect Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Toddler Teething? Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Is Your Baby Going Through the 4-Month Sleep Regression? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Get Your Baby to Stop Fighting Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 12-Month Sleep Regression: Why It Happens — And How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Here's What to Do if Your Baby Is Crying in Her Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Deal With the 18-Month Sleep Regression Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

The 15-Month Sleep Regression: Could Your Toddler Be Going Through It? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

What Is Sleep Regression in Toddlers? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window