Baby Sprinkle Ideas: Low-Stress Ways to Celebrate Your Next Addition

Light copy updates, updates to sources, fact-checked for accuracy.

Colorful candy sprinkles in small paper cups on a yellow background

If this isn’t your first child but you still want to celebrate your upcoming arrival, a baby sprinkle might be for you.

A baby sprinkle is a relaxed, low-key way to celebrate your family’s upcoming addition without all of the hustle and bustle that comes with a traditional baby shower. These celebrations tend to be more focused on support and connection rather than lots of gifts. Guest lists for baby sprinkles are usually smaller, décor is simple, and registries focus on basic essentials.

When you were pregnant with your first child, a loved one may have thrown you a big baby shower to celebrate your bundle on the way. If you're expecting again, you'll undoubtedly be just as excited for your second (or third, or fourth …) arrival — but you may be looking for a more low-key gathering. A baby sprinkle can be the perfect solution.

Here's everything expectant parents and their hosts need to know about these events.

Key Takeaways

A baby sprinkle is a casual, intimate alternative to a traditional baby shower. These celebrations are typically smaller, less formal, and focused on support rather than big gifts, since parents likely already have most essentials.

Registry items for a baby sprinkle tend to be smaller necessities like diapers and onesies, though bigger items may be appropriate if there's a large age gap or gear needs refreshing.

Baby sprinkle activities can be simple and personal — from advice cards and DIY onesies to games that involve older siblings — making the event feel warm without requiring elaborate planning.

What is a baby sprinkle?

The name says it all: Instead of a bigger party where first-time parents are showered with gifts, a baby sprinkle is a more casual, relaxed gathering where the guests of honor are "sprinkled" with support and potentially smaller gifts.

The concept of baby sprinkles is relatively new, so the host may need to clarify what the event entails on the invitation . Baby sprinkles are quickly growing in popularity, though, with more seasoned parents participating in the fun trend.

Although there are no official rules about what should happen at a baby shower versus a sprinkle, the two events might look something like this:

A baby shower is often more formal, features a variety of games and decorations, and has a bigger guest list. Because first-time parents need so much new gear, a traditional shower usually includes a full baby registry .

A baby sprinkle is usually more casual than a traditional shower and focuses on surrounding the seasoned parents with warmth and love. Since the guests of honor likely already own most big-ticket items , the registry might include smaller essentials such as diapers, wipes, and onesies.

"My mom and sister are hosting [a baby sprinkle], but it's just in a park, with like donuts and coffee, super quiet, super chill. We did do a registry but just for the necessities (double stroller, second camera for monitor, diapers)," says What to Expect Community mom cmgskj625.

"This is my second child and we are doing a 'baby and brunch' theme this go around," says Community mom MKCMRJC2124. "This one will be more relaxed with yard games instead of the traditional baby shower games."

How should you throw a baby sprinkle shower?

There's no right or wrong way to have a baby sprinkle, but there are a few things hosts should keep in mind when planning this event:

Think about the timing

Many expectant parents prefer to have baby showers or sprinkles in the second or early- to mid-third trimester , since that leaves plenty of time to create a baby registry but isn't too close to the due date. Ultimately, though, it's up to the host and expectant parents to decide on timing.

Don't forget to give guests plenty of time to plan for the sprinkle, too. A good rule of thumb is to send invitations at least four weeks in advance.

Plan the guest list

Sprinkle showers are often more about support and advice than big gifts, and these events tend to have a more casual, intimate tone. For that reason, many parents like to keep their sprinkle guest list on the smaller side, inviting close friends and family. If you'd like to make your baby sprinkle a coed event , that's an increasingly popular (and fun!) choice too.

Send the invitations

When it comes to baby sprinkle invites, don't worry too much about formality. If the host wants to mail traditional invitations, that’s totally fine, but know that a email invite works well, too. Baby sprinkle etiquette usually recommends that you not include registry information on the invite, but have it handy for those who ask (no doubt a few will!).

Choose a theme

Since baby sprinkles are usually informal, the host doesn't need to go all-out with elaborate decorations, fancy invites, and gift bags. While it's not necessary to choose a specific theme , many parents and hosts find that it does help make decorating easy.

A popular idea is to capitalize on "sprinkles" and have a sundae or cupcake bar with all different colors and types of — you guessed it! — sprinkles. You can print "Sprinkle a lot of love!" on colorful invitations.

Select decorations

Because a baby sprinkle shower is usually more casual, you don't need lots of elaborate decorations (unless you want them!). Many hosts opt for simple decor, such as a few flowers, balloons, and sweet photos.

And if the baby sprinkle is a virtual event , consider sending guests a fun Zoom background to make it feel extra-special.

Plan the baby sprinkle menu

For this simpler party, you might keep the menu light, with bite-size hors d'oeuvres, snacks, sweets, and punch . Think: pregnancy-safe cheese with crackers, a yogurt bar with fruit and candies, veggies and dips, nuts and olives, or brownies and cake .

Not only will this make party prep relatively effortless, it will give guests an opportunity to mix and mingle while they load their plates.

Consider activities and games

While traditional baby shower games still work at a sprinkle, you can plan on simpler activities, too, like making a DIY shower gift as a group. Put the emphasis on those nearest and dearest to the parent-to-be. A few ideas to add a personal touch to the party:

Ask guests to write their best advice for the sibling on slips of paper, which can be turned into a keepsake book. This is also a great way to make the big brother or sister feel included.

Make a no-sew quilt with outgrown clothing or blankets belonging to the older siblings or cousins.

Decorate a plain baby book, and ask guests to write a note to the baby inside.

Use fabric markers, stamp pads, and stencils to create personalized onesies.

Make adorable homemade headbands for your little one using lace and ribbons.

Distribute printable games listing celebrity parents and the names of their babies for guests to match up.

Print letters of the alphabet on sheets of paper and have guests decorate them for your little one (for example, "K is for Kitty"; "C is for Caterpillar"). Be sure to remind them to sign their names on the back so it doubles as a guest book!

Ask guests to write a funny saying or message on the front waistband of a diaper. Then, stash the diapers away in a cute bin to be reserved only for middle-of-the-night changes. That way, you'll have a little comic relief and positivity during those wee-hour-changes.

Involve older siblings

A new baby is exciting, but it can also be anxiety-provoking for older kids. You can help ease the transition by involving them in this event, such as by assigning them a special job during the planning process or giving them a small gift "from" their new sibling.

And if you’re planning a sip-and-see party after baby is born, invite the older sibling to help introduce the new baby to everyone.

What should you put on your baby sprinkle registry?

Although you may not think a baby registry is necessary this time around, it can still be helpful for guests, since a registry takes the guesswork out of buying gifts. Unlike a traditional baby shower, seasoned parents likely have most baby essentials, and many second- or third-time parents opt to add smaller gifts to their baby sprinkle registries .

However, other families may need to register for bigger items (for example, if there's a big age gap between siblings and the parents need to stock up on newborn gear all over again).

A few ideas to consider adding to your baby sprinkle registry, depending on your situation:

Diapering products: Request basics that you'll need right away and will go through quickly, such as diapers , diaper cream , and wipes . Making a diaper cake or hosting a diaper raffle can make this gifting staple seem more fun.

Baby clothes: They might be especially useful if the new baby is a different sex than the older child or due at a different time of year. Even if you have plenty of hand-me-downs, consider registering for clothes in sizes 12 months and larger: While they may not be in use for a while, that's the age when clothes start to get more wear and tear, and previously worn styles may be less useful.

Products for multiple children: For example, if the older child still likes riding in her stroller, you may need to upgrade to a double or convertible stroller , or invest in accessories like a second seat or toddler stroller board to extend the life of your current model.

Refreshed gear: This might include car seats ( they expire , and you shouldn't reuse even a relatively new one if it has been in a crash, is missing parts or has been recalled), cribs (especially if the older sibling is still using the one you have), or small breast pump and bottle parts that might no longer be in the best condition.

Support for parents: Think food delivery gift cards for those nights when cooking feels impossible.