Baby Kicking You All Night Long? Here’s Why It’s Totally Normal

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Close-up of woman touching her pregnancy bump at night

"My baby does not move in utero until it gets dark. Why is that? Does she already have her days and nights confused and is this how she'll be after she's born too?"

Here's the funny thing about babies in the womb: They like to move when their moms are lying down.

That's because when you're up and around all day, your baby-to-be is likely lulled to sleep by the movement. You're also less likely to notice her kicks and jabs when you're busy and preoccupied.

But at night, when you slow down, your baby wakes up and is ready to roll (and punch, and kick, and squirm) — not great for a good night's sleep for you, but completely normal.

Key Takeaways:

Night time = party time. Your daytime movement rocks your baby-on-board to sleep, but when you’re in bed, your little one is ready to roll, flip, and turn.

Clocks don’t matter. Since it’s always dark in the womb, infants can’t tell whether it’s day or night, which means movement at any time is very normal.

Kicks are a good thing. Keep track of the pokes you feel to be better connected with your babe, even those in the wee hours of the morning.

You can log every wiggle and swish in the What to Expect app (hey — you’ve got to do something when your little one keeps you up at night!).

What to Expect Community parent babyjb2025 has an extremely active baby-to-be. "If I'm laying down, he's doing acrobatics. He's NEVER chill," she says.

As far as mixing up day and night, it's always pretty dark in your uterus (or at least varying degrees of darkness), so it's too soon to worry about that.

If it turns out to be the scenario after your baby is born — which is also, unfortunately, completely normal! — you can figure out how to remedy the situation when the time comes. And you'll find plenty of help in What to Expect the First Year!

Here's to cherishing all those adorable baby kicks, whenever they happen,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th Edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, When Can You Feel Your Baby Move and Kick? , December 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Changes or Decreases in Fetal Movement , July 2025. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, How Your Fetus Grows During Pregnancy , January 2024. University of Rochester Medical Center, Fetal movement counting . 2025. Early Human Development, The case for a chronobiological approach to neonatal care , September 2018.

Updates history

October 2, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

When Can You Feel Your Baby Move and Kick? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Changes or Decreases in Fetal Movement Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

How Can I Get My Baby to Move in Utero? Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

How to Do Kick Counts Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

When Do You Feel Baby Kicks During a Twin Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Is Your Baby Twitching in Their Sleep? Don't Worry. Here's Why It Happens Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

7 Reasons Your Baby May Be Waking Up in the Middle of the Night Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

From Fussiness to Full Nights: Understanding Baby Sleep Patterns Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

10 Things to Know About Your Baby Bump Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Here's What to Do if Your Baby Is Crying in Her Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Is My Toddler Waking Up at Night? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Teach Your Baby the Difference Between Day and Night So Everyone Gets More Sleep Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Newborn Sleep Basics Every Parent Should Know Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Is Your Baby Refusing to Sleep in the Crib? Here's What to Do Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Is My Toddler Waking Up So Early? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window