Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas

Minor copy and formatting changes.

brown envelope on purple background surrounded by flowers

Not sure what to write in a baby shower invitation? These sweet examples are sure to spark inspiration.

The tradition of gathering with friends and family to celebrate the arrival of a sweet new baby begins with an invitation. A baby shower invitation isn't just a formal way to convey to guests that their presence is requested at the upcoming fête; it can also set the tone for the baby shower's theme or make an impression on its own.

Whether you're celebrating in person or virtually , invitation designs can focus on a simple color scheme or incorporate photos, drawings and elements tied to the shower's theme. The design can also spark ideas for creative baby shower invitation wording. (Think "Come celebrate our little pumpkin!" for a fall baby shower invitation, or "Ahoy, it's a boy!" for a nautical theme.)

Here's what you should include on a baby shower invitation, plus design ideas for a sweet keepsake your guests will love.

What should you include in a baby shower invitation?

As with any party invitation, your baby shower invite should include the most important information that guests need to know in order to RSVP to the event, such as:

Honoree: Who is the baby shower for?

Date: When is the party happening?

Time: What are the start and end times?

Location: Where is the party? (Be sure to include the full address!)

Host: Who is hosting the event?

RSVP details : Add information on how to RSVP (such as by phone or email), as well as the date you'd like RSVPs by.

Registry information: Let guests know where they can find the registry. (If there isn't one, let them know that, too.)

You might also want to include information about the party's theme, the baby's sex (if the parents know it and are comfortable sharing), dress code (if there is one) and what kind of refreshments will be served .

When should you send a baby shower invitation?

You want to give guests enough time not only to plan for this fun event, but also to order gifts so that they arrive in time. Common baby shower etiquette dictates sending invitations at least four weeks in advance or more (like two months ahead) if guests will have to travel in order to attend.

As for when to schedule a baby shower ? There's certainly no "right" time to celebrate a new baby, but many parents-to-be prefer to have their baby shower in the early- to mid-third trimester. At this point, the mom-to-be is far enough along to be showing and her baby registry is set up, but she's not so close to her due date that she's feeling overly tired. Ultimately, though, baby shower timing should come down to what works best for the parents-to-be and the event host.

How should you send a baby shower invitation?

Both traditional snail mail and e-invitations are great options for sending baby shower invitations. However, e-invitations may elicit faster responses.

Baby shower invitation wording ideas

Need a little inspiration for your baby shower invitation wording? Here are some invitation ideas below based on popular party themes.

Dinosaur baby shower invitation : Along with a photo of a dinosaur , let guests know, "Roar — [parent-to-be's name] is having a baby!"

Fall baby shower invitation: Embrace the season with cute phrases like "A little pumpkin is on the way" or — if your shower has a Halloween theme — "A baby is brewing" or "A little boo is almost due!"

Winter baby shower invitation: A December, January or February due date lends itself well to a winter wonderland-themed shower and phrases like "A merry little baby shower" or "Baby, it's cold outside!"

Nautical baby shower invitation : Sailboats, lighthouses, whales, anchors — oh my! The possible language to use here is almost endless. You can "have a whale of a time," help the parent-to-be "set sail" on this next phase of her life or announce, "Ahoy! [Parent-to-be's name] is having a boy!"

Arrow baby shower invitation : Images of arrows or maps beg for an "Adventure awaits [parent-to-be's name] and her new baby!" language.

Bear baby shower invitation : Whether you go with teddy bears or a wild bear theme, invites featuring the majestic animal can incorporate cute wording about how you can "bearly" wait for the arrival of a "little bear."

Where the Wild Things Are baby shower invitation : The Maurie Sendak classic offers plenty of fanciful details for a shower invitation or overall party theme, and you can also draw wording inspiration from the book itself. For example, "Let the wild rumpus start! [Parent-to-be's name] is having a baby!"

World travel baby shower invitation : If the little one is being born into a family who loves to travel, giving the shower invitations an adventurous vibe — think maps, planes or hot air balloons — could be an eye-catching option. You can use language such as "Join [parent-to-be's name] for her best journey yet!" or "Let the adventure begin! [Parent-to-be's name] is having a baby!"

Rock 'n; roll baby shower invitation : Spruce up your baby shower invitation by incorporating rockin' language like, "Let's rock 'n' roll at [parent-to-be’s name]'s baby shower!" or "Come celebrate [parent-to-be’s name]'s little rockstar!"

Elephant baby shower invitation: An elephant theme — with language that nods to a "little peanut" on the way — could be lovely for a simple shower.

Unicorn baby shower invitation : The vibrant, whimsical creature is on-trend among kids and adults these days and inspires language like, "Can you feel the magic? A baby is on the way!" or "Life is all rainbows and unicorns for [parent-to-be's name]."

Mountain baby shower invitation : Invites can feature illustrations of mountains or forests in peaceful sunset hues, and language can note that "adventure awaits [parent-to-be's name]" or that "[parent-to-be's name] is starting her next adventure."

Outer space baby shower invitation : From fun spaceships to cute planets to constellations, there are plenty of ways to embrace a space party theme — and just as many phrases. Consider language like, "When you wish upon a star ..." "We're over the moon with excitement for [parent-to-be's name]!" or "A little star is on the way."

Rose gold baby shower invitation : The popular gilded hue offers a simple but on-trend aesthetic for a baby girl shower invite. Why not say, "Everything's coming up roses for [parent-to-be's name] and her baby girl!" or "We're tickled pink! [Parent-to-be's name] is having a girl!"

Butterfly baby shower invitation : Whether the invitations are actually shaped like the winged insect or simply incorporate them throughout the design, you can offer "butterfly kisses and happy wishes" to the coming baby or say, "That's not butterflies in [parent-to-be's name]'s stomach — it's a baby!"

Mermaid baby shower invitation : For beach-loving expectant parents, announce that "A little mermaid is on its way," or that "[Parent-to-be's name] is causing a splash — a baby girl is coming!"

Bee baby shower invitation : A bumblebee or honey begs for language like, "We're sweet on [parent-to-be's name] coming baby!" or "Have you heard the buzz? [parent-to-be's name] is having a baby!" or "Come celebrate the parent-to- bee ."

Coed baby shower invitation: Let your guests know that everyone's invited to a coed baby shower by using language such as "Shower the parents-to-be," "Join us for a couples' shower in honor of baby [last name]," or "All are invited to honor baby [last name]."

Sprinkle baby shower invitation : Whether you're having a sprinkle shower or a regular baby shower, the invitation might say, "Come sprinkle [parent-to-be's name] with love," or "Sprinkle on the love for [parent-to-be's name] and her [first/second/third] baby."

"Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star" baby shower invitation : Borrow from the classic lullaby with wording like, "How we wonder what you are — boy or girl?" for a gender reveal or create your own rhyme: "Do you know how loved you are?"

Woodland baby shower invitation : Baby versions of woodland creatures (think an owl, raccoon or deer) offer a charming theme and creative language ideas for a shower invite: "Have a hoot celebrating [parent-to-be's name]," "Guess whooo's having a baby," or "Oh deer! [Parent-to-be's name] is having a baby!"

Rainbow baby shower invitation : For this colorful baby shower invitation, consider language like, "The sky's the limit for baby [last name of the parent-to-be]." Or if the parent-to-be is welcoming a rainbow baby , "After every storm there is a rainbow" might be perfect.

Pizza baby shower invitation : Have fun with this favorite food and say something like, "There's a pie in the oven!" or "Baby [last name of the parent-to-be] already has a pizza our hearts."

Citrus baby shower invitation: Bright fruit makes for a pretty visual on invites with wording such as, "[Parent-to-be's name] has a new main squeeze!" or, if you feature clementines, "Help us welcome [parent-to-be's name]'s new cutie."

Baby bottle baby shower invitation: Have fun with a classic design by using fun language like, "Bottles will poppin'!" or a simple "Cheers!" with baby bottles clinking.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. Renee Redman, Owner and Founder, TheStationeryStudio.com . Aviva Samuels, Event Planner, Kiss the Planner , Palm Beach, FL. Jodi RR Smith, President, Mannersmith Etiquette Consulting , Marblehead, MA. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a Baby Shower , August 2021. WhatToExpect.com, A Complete Guide to Baby Shower Etiquette , November 2023.

Updates history

December 7, 2023

Editor: Caroline Picard

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Fact-checked to ensure accuracy.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

What to Write in a Baby Shower Card Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Coed Baby Shower? Why They’re the New Thing — Plus Party Themes Guests Will Love Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Baby Shower? Smart Etiquette Tips to Make The Day Run Smoother Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a Virtual Baby Shower Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan the Ultimate Gender Reveal Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Sprinkle Ideas: Low-Stress Ways to Celebrate Your Next Addition Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

What to Write in a Baby Birth Announcement Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Pregnancy Announcement Templates to Personalize Your Big News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

When Is the Best Time to Have Your Baby Shower? Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window