The Best Baby Shower Food and Drink Ideas

Minor copy and formatting changes.

baby shower food, assorted crostini on blue background

Serve up these easy nibbles and mocktails for the mama-to-be — and her closest friends and family.

Throwing a baby shower can feel a bit overwhelming. And that's especially true when it comes to the menu-planning portion — you'll need to not only ensure that there are plenty of great things to eat, but also take into account what the mom-to-be can (and can't) eat.

Instead of having a sit-down meal, consider making food available throughout the party space. Since baby showers are very social events, people typically graze during baby showers and eat tiny finger foods while playing games and opening gifts .

How to plan a baby shower menu

While there are no set rules for what to serve at a shower, there are a few guidelines that will make your life easier and the food a big hit. Here, get the secrets to executing a great baby shower menu:

Offer lots of options. Make sure to consider a wide range of dietary needs, including the mom-to-be's diet. You want enough options so she can avoid foods that are not safe to eat during pregnancy and still find plenty that do work for her. There may also be vegans and vegetarians coming, as well as people with food allergies or conditions such as celiac disease that prevent them from eating gluten. Cover your bases: Ask guests on your baby shower invitations to share dietary restrictions with their RSVPs.

Make ahead. The goal is to have as much food prepared ahead of time as possible. That way, the actual day of the event will involve less running around. Make a list of everything you want to make. When preparing food, divide the recipes between what can be made ahead and what can be made the day of — and make sure to limit the number of dishes that require intense day-of assembly and cooking.

Think twice about themes. Yes, having a baby shower theme can create cohesive effect. But a theme isn't always the best course when it comes to food. Sometimes it makes it more difficult to get the menu to flow or include enough variety.

Opt for mess-free desserts. Make it easy for guests to circulate by sticking with baby shower cupcakes , cookies, brownies and other finger foods. Filled pastries and warm desserts are more challenging to eat while standing, and guests are likely to avoid them.

Looking for specifics on what to serve? Take a look at delicious — and doable! — finger foods, beverages and desserts that you can serve at a baby shower.

Baby shower finger foods

Set out a few easy-to-pick-up party foods on a table so that people can graze and mingle.

Vegan sushi

Sushi is typically on the no-go list during pregnancy. Not so with this version, which is free from uncooked fish. Just add the vegetables of your choice — such as marinated beets, cucumber and avocado — for color, flavor and crunch.

Charcuterie board

Why stick with a plate for cheese and crackers when you could have a show-stopping platter? Use a variety of ingredients so everyone is able to nosh on something — even if they have dietary restrictions. (FYI: Pregnant moms should avoid unpasteurized soft cheeses.) It's not as hard as it looks to create a striking spread, either: Start with the cheeses, then fill in the gaps and create the color and texture on the board from there.

Quiche

You can make your own pie crust to use in a quiche — or save time and energy and go with a store-bought crust. Prep time takes just 15 minutes, and you can mix up the egg mixture the night before so that all you have to do day-of is bake. Serve the quiche warm or at room temperature. Go with the classic quiche combo of bacon and cheese, or play around with the fillings and swap in steamed or sauteed broccoli to make a vegetarian option.

Pastries

Pastries are always a welcome addition to the spread whether you're serving breakfast or lunch. It's easy to put together an assortment, like with scones, doughnuts and quick breads. For an extra-special touch, you can even whip up a compound butter. (Strawberry or maple flavors are great options!)

Mini grilled cheese and tomato sandwiches

You can't go wrong with comfort food, and what fits into that category more than ooey-gooey grilled cheese sandwiches? Mini versions are great since they're easy for guests to grab and snack on while they mingle. And if you're really ambitious, you can even serve them alongside little shooters of tomato soup.

Baby shower drinks

For mamas-to-be, mocktails are the beverage of the hour. These booze-free options are fun and festive (and for guests who are imbibing, it's always an option to have some bottles of champagne or vodka on hand). Get more ideas for what to drink during pregnancy .

Sherbet party punch

baby shower punch

Punch is a classic at baby showers for a reason: it comes in a fun color, takes just minutes to prepare and doesn't require hosts to double as bartenders. You can even customize this punch recipe to make it blue or pink, depending on your preference.

Get the recipe for baby shower punch .

Pina mocklada

pina colada mocktail

Short on time (or funds)? This recipe calls for frozen fruit chunks instead of prepped fresh produce. The tropical flavor profile would fit right in at a summer party — or liven up a winter baby shower !

Get the recipe for pina mockladas .

Slow cooker hot cocoa

baby shower hot chocolate bar

For fall and winter events, swap the iced sips for a big batch of hot chocolate. Keep it warm throughout the party by serving it in a slow cooker. You could even offer guests some fun garnishes — like graham crackers or cinnamon sticks — on an adjacent tray.

Grapefruit lime mockgarita

grapefruit mocktail

This citrus-packed refresher is perfect for a spring or summer shower. Just imagine how cute each glass would look topped with edible flowers or a drink umbrella?

Get the recipe for grapefruit lime mockgaritas .

Baby shower desserts

When it comes to desserts, cuteness is a real factor! You can purchase or bake a baby shower cake (bonus points for coordinating it with the decor), but it's also nice to have some small nibbles of sweetness on hand. Unlike a cake, none of these options require a fork or even a plate to enjoy.

Sugar cookies

baby shower cookies

Cookies can do double duty at a baby shower. Not only are they an easy-to-eat dessert, but you can also decorate them to fit your party's theme. Try using cookie cutters in the shape of baby feet, rattles or other baby-focused gear. Alternatively, you can tailor the cookies to the season — like flowers for spring or pumpkins for a fall baby shower .

Gender reveal cupcakes

gender reveal cupcakes

Even beginner bakers can handle whipping up these cupcakes, which hinge on just a handful of pantry staples. Want to do a gender reveal? Add food coloring to a batch of frosting, so guests can see the surprise when they unwrap the treat.

Get the recipe for gender reveal cupcakes .

Chocolate-covered strawberries

It's nice to end a meal with some healthy fruit — but lovelier still if that fruit comes covered in chocolate! While chocolate-dipped strawberries taste best served the same day they're prepared, the good news is that making them is both simple and speedy.

Chocolate-dipped pretzels

chocolate dipped pretzels

If you're going to the trouble of melting chocolate, you might as well coat a few other treats for the desert table. Chocolate-dipped pretzels make for a delicious sweet-salty combo. (Add a few drops of food color to melted white chocolate to get a more colorful result.) They're also wonderful low-cost baby shower favors !

More easy-to-make baby shower snacks

Still looking for some simple recipes to round out your baby shower menu? The below ideas come together in a flash and are sure crowd-pleasers.

Veggie platter

Arrange a variety of sliced raw vegetables — carrots, bell peppers, celery, broccoli or sugar snap peas — on a large platter. In the center, make sure to include a dip — ranch dressing or hummus, for example.

Cocktail meatballs

These sweet-and-sour meatballs are easy to make — and even easier to eat. Simply make them in the slow cooker the day before, then insert a toothpick into each one and place on a platter.

Crostini

The sky's the limit when it comes to this easy-to-assemble finger food, so feel free to customize it to your liking. Think bruschetta, pesto or another favorite spread on top of sliced baguette.

Bacon-wrapped dates

Wrap dates with bacon, then broil until crispy. Add a toothpick to each one before serving. As a bonus: They say dates are great for pregnant women.

Tea sandwiches

Thus is another easy-to-customize option fit for a crowd — especially since you can make a few different types and serve them together. Opt for fillings like like cucumber or homemade chicken salad.

Spinach artichoke dip

Who doesn't love this creamy classic? Make it special by serving it in a nice, big bread bowl. And while chips make nice dippers, so do fresh veggie sticks (like carrots, celery and red bell pepper).

Kebabs

Assemble an assortment of skewers ahead of time — chicken, beef and veggie — then grill them up right before the party starts. Serve alongside a fresh salad, and you've got yourself a complete meal.

Mac and cheese bites

Whip up a batch of macaroni and cheese, then scoop spoonfuls into a mini muffin tin. Sprinkle each with some breadcrumbs, then spritz with cooking spray and bake.

What to Expect When You're Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a Baby Shower , August 2021. WhatToExpect.com, A Complete Guide to Baby Shower Etiquette , November 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy , November 2022.

Updates history

December 8, 2023

Editor: Caroline Picard

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Fact-checked to ensure accuracy.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

What Are Some Fun Food Ideas for a Gender Reveal Party? Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

20 Fun Baby Shower Games Your Guests Will Love to Play Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Make Baby Shower Punch That Gets the Party Started Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Baby Shower? Smart Etiquette Tips to Make The Day Run Smoother Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

5 Delicious DIY Pregnancy Mocktails (With Bump-Friendly Benefits!) Fact Checked by Marcy Lovitch

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

What to Have for Lunch When You're Pregnant: Healthy, Simple Ideas for You and Baby Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

11 Holiday Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy and Safe Alternatives to Enjoy Instead Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

What to Eat for Dessert When You’re Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

What to Eat for Dinner When You’re Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Best Foods to Snack on When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Best Finger Foods for Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window