35 Creative Baby Shower Themes

Minor copy and formatting changes.

colorful heart treats

From a nautical fête to a minimalist-inspired celebration, these baby shower theme ideas will help you create an unforgettable event.

Opening presents, sharing cake , playing games — most baby showers feature certain classic elements. But one of the best opportunities to unleash your creativity and add personality to the celebration is with a baby shower theme.

While a baby shower theme certainly isn't mandatory, many hosts find that having a theme helps guide party decisions into place. Whether you go with a specific color scheme, a nod to a popular television show or a favorite vacation destination of the parents-to-be, a theme can serve as an anchor for the party's decor, food and activities.

How to pick a baby shower theme

Picking a baby shower theme can be tough — there are so many fun options! Think about what the parents-to-be are passionate about, and let that come through in the theme.

For example, if they love to travel, their favorite locale could inspire the shower. If they have a beloved show, movie or band, consider it for the party's focus. Or, if the baby-to-be's nursery already has a theme, you might center the shower around the same idea.

Need help organizing your baby shower or tracking pregnancy milestones? The free What to Expect app has expert advice, checklists, and personalized updates for every step of your pregnancy journey.

Need a little inspiration? We rounded up 35 creative baby shower theme ideas for a day the parents-to-be will remember forever.

Baby shower theme ideas

Elephant-themed baby shower

elephant baby shower cookies

Embrace this sweet animal for a theme that everyone's sure to love. This classic idea allows for extra-cute invitations and decorations.

"Oh boy"-themed baby shower

baby shower backdrop with

Turn a classic expression into a baby boy shower theme. Add "oh boy" to the baby shower invite, and other elements like a photo backdrop or custom sweet treats.

Nautical-themed baby shower

Incorporating sailboats, anchors, whales and various shades of blue, white and gray can make for a classic theme.

Dinosaur-themed baby shower

dinosaur themed baby shower with gold and green place settings and a backdrop that has balloons spelling out

A prehistoric dinosaur theme is a perfect fit for Jurassic Park-loving parents who are psyched to start their baby's fascination with paleontology early.

The Office-themed baby shower

If the parents love watching The Office reruns, go for this hilarious theme inspired by the show. You can recreate the birthday party that Dwight and Jim threw for Kelly by hanging up brown and gray balloons and a hilarious "It is your baby shower" sign, in addition to recreating other iconic moments from the show. (How about putting Kevin's chili on the menu?)

Balloon-themed baby shower

Sign that says

If this sounds far too basic to be a baby shower theme, think again. Plenty of showers revolve around balloons, especially if they incorporate extravagant balloon decor. (Think archways made from tons of balloons.) Balloons are also a simple and sweet element to feature on invitations.

Minimalist baby shower

minimalist baby shower table with big white and clear balloons surrounding a dessert and refreshments table

For the expectant parents who are into clean lines, all-white everything and simple details, a modern minimalist theme can be on-point and seriously elegant. Touches of nature and subtle pops of color add charm to a baby shower or baby sprinkle .

Fall-themed baby shower

fall-themed baby shower with a table of treats surrounded by orange and brown balloons, hay and pumpkins with a wooden backdrop that says

Celebrate the little pumpkin with a beautiful fall-themed baby shower . Serve hot chocolate and pasteurized apple cider, or go all out with a s'more bar to embrace the autumn season.

Cowboy-themed baby shower

cowboy themed baby shower with

Whether the parents dig Western movies or are big country music fans, there is no shortage of cute cowboy-themed decor for a baby shower. Hay, hats, boots and a country soundtrack can set the stage.

Paris-themed baby shower

Paris baby shower table with pink, gold and white balloons, Eiffel Tower accessories and sweet treats

For the Francophile mom, the City of Lights offers plenty of inspiration — from the Eiffel Tower to Chanel. French cuisine could make up the baby shower menu , too. Croissants, macarons, éclairs are just some of the sweet treats you could serve.

Harry Potter-themed baby shower

image of a sign that says

Parents who are big fans of The Boy Who Lived might love a shower that pulls inspiration from the iconic books and movies. Your venue can become Hogwarts as you serve up non-alcoholic butterbeer and Bertie Bott's Every Flavour Beans.

Woodland-themed baby shower

lumberjack- or woodland-themed baby shower with red and black balloons and table cloth with a backdrop that says

Welcome your baby with lots of plaid, forest animals and woodsy details.

Bee-themed baby shower

bee-themed baby shower with yellow, blue and white balloons and accessories with a balloon that says

From yellow and black decor to honey-flavored foods, a bee theme offers timeless appeal — not to mention ample opportunities for cute puns, like "parent-to-bee" or "ba-bee."

Space-themed baby shower

space-themed baby shower table with stickers and accessories

Incorporating astronauts, the solar system and starry details into a space-themed party can make for a colorful, fun and ethereal fête.

Vintage-themed baby shower

vintage-themed baby shower with sparkly pink table that has candles, big bouquets of flowers, cake and other desserts

Pearls, lace and other elements that speak to a parent's love of thrifting, antiquing or crafting can create a sweet, elegant throwback theme.

Rubber ducky-themed baby shower

rubber ducky baby shower with clear balloons and large rubber ducks

Photo via @prettybonitodesign and @the_pops_party

This childhood bathtime staple lends itself to a cute baby shower theme. Parents in the What to Expect Community who have had rubber ducky showers share that they had rubber ducks floating in punch bowls and cupcakes with little duckies on top.

Superhero-themed baby shower

Wonder Woman-themed baby shower desserts with the name

If the parents-to-be have a comic book favorite — or love the entire Justice League — let their fandom inspire a colorful, empowering motif. (This is an especially great choice for a coed baby shower .)

Butterfly-themed baby shower

butterfly-themed baby shower with pink and purple balloons surrounding a dessert table and green backdrop that says

This adorable theme makes decorations easy (fill the room with paper butterflies!) and allows for cute expressions like "You give me butterflies."

Bunny-themed baby shower

bunny-themed baby shower table with sweet treats and bunny-themed accessories

Who doesn't love adorable bunnies? This timeless baby shower theme is sure to be a crowd pleaser and pairs well with everything from invitations to balloons.

Garden-themed baby shower

garden baby shower with elegant pink and white table settings and a special chair in the corner next to a dessert table

Flowers are an especially popular motif for celebrating baby girls, but you can also use floral decor to welcome a baby boy — especially if the parents-to-be are big Bridgerton fans!

Mermaid-themed baby shower

mermaid baby shower with sparkly purple, white and blue balloons surrounding a table with the name

This magical theme lets you incorporate shimmery, oceanic hues and various other under-the-sea details.

Ladybug-themed baby shower

ladybug baby shower cookies with the name

Many baby shower hosts draw inspiration from the sweet little insect and create a two-toned, charming theme to welcome a little ladybug.

High tea-themed baby shower

high-tea themed baby shower with pink and gold balloons and a table full of sweet treats

Photo via @robynkaurz and @rupzz

Pay tribute to the English tradition of high tea with pastel decor and treats like crumpets, scones and tiny sandwiches. You could even invite guests to don fascinators or other fancy hats.

Mustache-themed baby shower

mustache themed baby shower dessert bar with

Who doesn't get a kick out of mustaches on everyone? This simple but giggle-worthy baby boy shower theme can make for a bevy of funny photo ops.

Safari-themed baby shower

safari baby shower cookies with cute animals like elephants, zebras and lions

Animals like giraffes, elephants, monkeys and tigers, as well as jungle-esque plants and lots of green or gold decor, set the stage for a memorably wild party .

Sunflower-themed baby shower

sunflower baby shower with a wooden backdrop adorned by sunflowers

Is there a happier flower than a sunflower? Opt for a yellow and black color scheme, and fill the space with sunflowers (real or fake) to set the stage for this cute baby shower theme.

Halloween-themed baby shower

Halloween baby shower cookies. Cookies have cute images of cauldrons, spider webs, pumpkins, witch hats, the name

For expectant parents due in October, throw a Halloween-themed baby shower. Even more fun? Your host can encourage guests to arrive in costume to make it extra joyful.

Disney-themed baby shower

Disney-themed baby shower with cookies from the movie

Whether you want to highlight one specific movie or the entire cinematic universe, this theme is perfect for Disney- and Pixar-loving parents, whether you're looking for baby girl or baby boy shower ideas.

Friends-themed baby shower

Could this baby shower theme be any cuter? For parents who are passionate fans of the classic TV show, this theme offers tons of opportunities for desserts (Central Perk and couch-inspired cookies) and punny taglines ("The One Where [parent-to-be's name] Has a Baby" on the invites).

Winter-themed baby shower

winter-themed baby shower tables with wintry cookies and accessories

If the baby-to-be is due in the colder months, embrace the season with this beautiful theme. A winter wonderland shower is elegant and gender-neutral, making it a perfect choice for baby boys and girls.

"Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star"-themed baby shower

This timeless lullaby lends itself to simple, heartwarming and adorable details — often done in soft whites, blues, silver and gold.

Unicorn-themed baby shower

unicorn baby shower with a pink food table that has unicorn accessories and colorful flowers

A baby shower is sure to feel downright magical if it's peppered with all things unicorn-themed — from a rainbow-hued cake to glittery decor. This theme is especially popular for baby girl showers, but works equally well to celebrate a baby boy on the way.

Winnie-the-Pooh-themed baby shower

Winnie the Pooh baby shower with a map from the book surrounded by pink, white and orange pastel balloons and a dessert table

Parents love incorporating elements from classic children's books into their baby showers. Winnie-the-Pooh is particularly cute, with plenty of adorable illustrations to embrace.

Princess-themed baby shower

princess baby shower table with sweet treats, flowers, crown accessories and a pink backdrop

A classic princess-themed party is a great way to celebrate a new royal family member on the way. Adorn the room with tiny crowns and sparkly elements for extra glam.

Teddy bear-themed baby shower

An outdoor wooden backdrop that says

Just like rubber duckies and balloons, teddy bears are simple and sweet childhood classics — and make for a timeless baby shower theme.

What to Expect When You're Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a Baby Shower , August 2021. WhatToExpect.com, A Complete Guide to Baby Shower Etiquette , November 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas , December 2023.

Updates history

December 7, 2023

Editor: Caroline Picard

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Fact-checked to ensure accuracy.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

10 Gender Reveal Themes to Inspire Your Special Celebration Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Coed Baby Shower? Why They’re the New Thing — Plus Party Themes Guests Will Love Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

20 Fun Baby Shower Games Your Guests Will Love to Play Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw a Fall-Themed Baby Shower for Your Little Pumpkin Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

30 Gender Reveal Ideas for Celebrating Your Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 DIY Baby Shower Gifts Moms-to-Be Will Actually Use Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a Virtual Baby Shower Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

What to Write in a Baby Shower Card Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Pregnancy Announcement Templates to Personalize Your Big News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window