Heat Rash (Miliaria) in Babies

Updates to text and sourcing, and FAQs added.

heat rash on baby

Heat rash can keep a baby up all night, scratching those itchy bumps. Here’s how you both can cope to prevent, identify and treat heat rash.

Heat rash can be itchy and uncomfortable for your baby and make him pretty fussy if he gets it. Although people of all ages can get a heat rash, babies are especially susceptible because their sweat glands are less developed than those of older children and adults.

Fortunately in most instances, heat rash doesn’t require medical care and clears up on its own, with a little help from you.

What causes heat rash?

Also known as prickly heat or miliaria, heat rash in babies occurs when excessive sweating clogs sweat glands, trapping perspiration beneath the skin and resulting in telltale red bumps or blisters.

Heat rash is most common in the summer, when weather is hot and humid. Tight or too-warm clothing can make it worse.

Heat rash symptoms in babies

Here are the symptoms of baby heat rash: Trusted SourceAmerican Osteopathic College of DermatologyMilariaSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Osteopathic College of DermatologyMilariaSee All Sources

Appears as clusters of tiny, often moist red bumps similar to pimples or blisters

Tends to erupt on the face and in the skin folds of the neck, arms, legs, upper chest and diaper area

Is itchy and comes with a tingling, “prickly” pain — though since your baby can’t tell you his skin’s bothering him, you’ll likely just notice he’s acting extra cranky and restless, and sometimes has more trouble sleeping than usual

baby heat rash

How to treat baby's heat rash

A baby with miliaria needs to chill out — literally. Although heat rash doesn't require specific treatment, you can help cool off those pricklies with these strategies: Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHeat RashSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHeat RashSee All Sources

Use a mild soap and tepid water during bathtime to help soothe baby's skin. Gently pat dry.

Keep affected skin dry. If it’s extra hot, use a fan to help wick away sweat.

Skip powders, oils and lotions, which will only make the rash worse by further blocking the pores.

Give your baby a break from clothes on the playmat or let him take a naked stroll or crawl around the house.

If your little one is noticably itchy, ask your pediatrician if you can apply an anti-tich cream that contains calamine or 1 percent hydrocortisone for a few days until the symptoms resolve.

How to prevent heat rash in babies

Here are a few tips for preventing heat rash in your baby:

Avoid heavy clothing and too much time in a carrier or sling, where the combination of your body heat and poor ventilation can make your baby too hot.

Avoid spending a lot of time outside in hot weather.

Opt for loose-fitting, lightweight clothes, especially in warm weather.

Never leave baby in a car by himself (which is incredibly important for reasons more serious than heat rash prevention!), and use air conditioning when you’re driving on those sweltering days.

Stay in air-conditioned spots whenever possible. If you're inside with no AC, try to use a fan to keep air circulating, and if you're outside, opt to spend most of your time in shady areas.

Keep baby’s sleeping area cool and well-ventilated, which also reduces the risk of SIDS .

When to call the doctor about heat rash in babies

If your baby’s rash lasts for three or more days or seems to be getting worse, call the pediatrician. Also keep an eye out for pustules and swelling, which could be symptoms of a yeast or bacterial infection due to baby’s scratching and would require a visit to the doc for a prescription medication.

One more thing to keep in mind: A fever can trigger a heat rash but is never caused by one — so if your baby has a fever , you still need to figure out why and contact your child’s doctor.

Baby Heat Rash FAQs

What does heat rash look like on a baby?

Heat rash appears as tiny, red or clear bumps on your baby's skin. It's common in hot or humid weather.

How do I treat my baby's heat rash?

Heat rash generally disappears on its own, but you can help treat it and bring your baby relief by giving your little one a cool or tepid bath, using only mild soaps, patting dry the skin thoroughly, and making sure you keep baby in an air-conditioned, well-ventilated, cool room. Dress baby in light clothing and avoid powders, lotions and oils, which can make heat rash flare up.

How long does heat rash last in babies?

Heat rash in babies (and adults) usually goes away on its own in a matter of a few days. If your baby has heat rash for longer than three days, and it doesn't seem to be fading, be sure to check in with the pediatrician or pediatric dermatologist.

Should I moisturize my baby's heat rash?

No. You should avoid putting any lotions or oils on your baby's heat rash, as they can make the condition worse. Instead, wash the area gently with tepid or cool water and a very mild soap, and pat the skin dry.