How Do I Stop My Baby From Pulling Hair?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

If your baby loves to pull your hair — hard! — try these strategies to teach him to stop.

"My 11-month-old baby likes to pull my hair hard. How can I teach him to stop doing this?"

Your baby's hair-pulling high jinks probably started innocently enough. He yanked your hair by accident, you let out a yelp, he giggled, you couldn't help but laugh back (it was so cute the first time!), and, voilà, a game of cause and effect was born.

Keep these tips in mind if you want to end baby hair pulling:

Stay calm. Any kind of reaction from you yields the effect he's looking for; aim for a no-nonsense "no."

Show and tell. Back up your words by prying your hair out of your son's fist. Words, as valuable a teaching tool as they are, can still be lost on a young child.

Offer a positive with the negative. Teaching your son what is acceptable behavior is as important as teaching him what isn't. Take his hand and stroke your hair or cheek gently, saying, "Mommy likes this."

Distract and conquer. Divert his attention with a song or toy — eventually he'll get bored with the hair-pulling game.

Be consistent. Say no each time he pulls your hair, since mixed messages are confusing to little ones.

Say it again. You can't expect him to learn a lesson the first time it's taught — or the tenth. Repeat the message "No pulling Mom's hair" every time until it finally sinks in.

Sooner or later your son's fascination with hair pulling will end, likely only to be replaced by another unpleasant habit (hitting or biting or pinching, for instance). These tips can help nip these newfound behaviors in the bud too.

Welcome to the toddler years!

Heidi Murkoff

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Why Does My Toddler Keep Pulling Her Own Hair? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Do Babies Grow and Lose Their Hair? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Why Toddler Hair Twirling Happens — and When to Gently Intervene Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Brushing Your Toddler's Hair Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Soothe a Crying Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do if Your Baby Hates the Bath Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Get Your Baby to Stop Fighting Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Toddler Haircuts Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

11 Reasons Your Baby Won't Sleep and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Cut Your Baby's Nails Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When and How Babies Lift Their Heads Up Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

What to Do When Your Toddler Suddenly Hates Baths Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Your Toddler Stop Biting His Nails Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Your Toddler from Getting Out of Bed Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window