Baby Product Reviews

From the stores with top-notch maternity sections to the best cribs for small spaces, here are the products you'll need for your journey from pregnancy to parenting.

Baby Products Landing

Products Tools & Resources

checklist

Baby Registry Checklist for First-Time Moms

checklist

Tips and Product Recommendations For The Perfect Baby Registry

baby products community

Join the Discussion: Best Detergent For Newborn Baby Clothes

Baby Product Topics

For Moms-to-Be

All the products you’ll want nearby to make you feel and look great throughout your pregnancy.

Baby Registry

Everything you need to know about the big ticket items you’ll want the day you bring baby home.

For Baby

The day-to-day essentials you can’t live without as baby grows and develops through that first year.

New in Baby Products

Why WTE Moms Are Trading the Grocery Aisle for Thrive Market

Amazon Who? These Prime Day Alternative Sales Give You More Chances to Save

Last-Call Prime Day Baby Deals I'm Snagging As a Mom of Two

11 Prime Day Baby Deals on Gear I'd Buy Again and Again

Most-Bought Prime Day Baby Deals: Sunscreen, Stroller Fans, and More Summer Essentials

The FDA Just Issued a Warning About Certain SNOO Sleep Sacks

Nara Organics Recalls All Formula After Link to Botulism Outbreak

9 Fantastic Books to Help You Observe Juneteenth With Your Kids

Summer House’s Lindsay Hubbard on Keeping Baby Gemma Safe From the Sun — and the Spotlight

Memorial Day Weekend Sales Are a Dime a Dozen — But These 14 Baby Deals Are Worth Shopping

Amazon Just Moved Up Prime Day 2026. Here's What We Know

When It Comes to Diapers, What's on The Inside Matters

I Wish Someone Had Told Me to Pack This $14 Item in My Hospital Bag

The 8 Best Breastfeeding Products for New Moms

The One Disney World Splurge That Was Worth Every Penny

Is Baby Gear Getting Less Safe? The Truth Behind the Recent Surge in Recalls

Yes, Target Wants Your Expired, Crumb-Filled Car Seat—and They’ll Even Give You 20% Off A New One

The $7 Nursery Hack That Actually Shortened My Baby's Night Wakes and Saved My Sleep

My Whole Family Slept in the Same Room Without Fighting: This Viral "Blackout Pod" Saved Our Vacation

Can’t Stomach Your Prenatal? Try This Powder Instead

I Regret Buying That $90 Travel High Chair. Here's What I Should Have Bought Instead

My Baby Had 250 Blowouts Before I Found the $15 Tool That Actually Saved Our Outings

The 10-Second Habit That Finally Ended My Summer Pregnancy Itch

Sofia Richie Grainge’s $9,000 ‘Invisible’ Crib Is the Wildest Thing We’ve Ever Seen, but the Rest of Her Nursery Is Surprisingly Normal

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window