What's the Right Temperature for Baby?

baby bundled up, what's the right temperature for baby

How do you know how warm your baby’s bedroom should be and how to dress him for the weather? We have the answers.

When the weather gets really chilly or super toasty outside, it’s difficult to know where to set the thermostat. When it’s snowing or below freezing, how warm does it need to be in baby’s nursery? How cool should it be when it's the middle of summer and sweltering? And how can you tell if your little one is too cold or too hot?

Babies can’t tell us when they’re uncomfortable — at least not with words — but luckily, this guide can help answer all your questions when it comes to keeping your baby and his bedroom at the right temperature.

What should my baby's temperature be?

A normal temperature for your baby is considered a rectal reading — which is the most accurate means of taking baby's temperature — of between 98 and 100.3 degrees Fahrenheit; a temp of 100.4 degrees F or higher is considered a fever .

When baby’s temperature is out of the normal range, it may be a sign of illness, so it’s best to talk to your pediatrician, especially if other symptoms like a stuffy nose , sore throat or cough persist.

If your baby is under 3 months old, a fever of 100.4 degrees F or higher on a rectal thermometer requires urgent care, and you need to call your pediatrician immediately.

What's the right room temperature for baby?

When it comes to your baby’s nursery, think Goldilocks: You don’t want the room to be too hot or too cold. Generally speaking, if you feel as though the room is too cold, your baby will too, and if you think the room is too hot, so will your baby.

That said, keeping the temperature between 68 and 72 degrees F is a good range in the summer and winter. When the room is too hot, research has shown that it can increase your baby's risk of SIDS; when it’s too cold, baby can easily become uncomfortably chilly and wake up unnecessarily.

It’s best not to put extra heaters or AC units in your little one’s room. Fans, on the other hand, can actually be helpful for circulating air and have even been shown to reduce the risk of SIDS.

If your baby is preterm, you may want to turn up the thermostat to around 72 degrees F in the first few weeks after you bring him home from the hospital since preterm babies are slower to regulate their own temperature.

Additionally, if preterm babies are too cold, they may expend too many calories trying to warm up, which isn’t a good thing when weight gain is so important to their overall health.

How should I dress my baby for the weather?

When it comes to dressing your baby for the weather , think layers. Adding or eliminating layers is the best way to warm baby up or cool him down. As a general rule of thumb, your baby should wear one more layer than you do.

Hats are a great accessory because they trap heat when it’s cold and protect baby from too much sunlight when it’s warm.

Babies may need an extra layer or two when it’s cold outside; just make sure you’re quick to remove extra layers when you come back in so that baby doesn’t overheat.

What is TOG?

TOG is a unit of measurement that's used to determine how warm a piece of clothing or blanket is. The higher the TOG, the warmer the garment will keep you. (A light summer outfit, for example, has about 1 TOG.)

The term is commonly used in other countries — it originated in Britain in the 1940s — but is now starting to make its way across the pond, where it can be found on labels for swaddles, duvets and more.

Currently, there are no recommendations for the ideal TOG for baby clothing and blankets in the United States from the American Academy of Pediatrics, but lightweight garments can range from .3 to .5 TOG, whereas heavier ones can reach 2.5 TOG.

How should I dress my baby for bedtime?

Dress baby in one extra layer compared to older children — a one-piece sleeper plus a sleep sack, for example, should do the trick.

If it’s really cold outside, you could add another layer, like a long-sleeved onesie under his sleeper. When it’s ultra warm outside, choose clothing made of lighter fabrics.

Swaddling your baby with either a swaddle blanket or a sleep sack has been shown to help him sleep longer. Just follow a few safety tips:

Make sure that baby’s sleep sack isn’t too large with additional fabric that could cause entanglement.

Stop swaddling your baby once he can roll over because it can increase the risk of suffocation. To keep baby warm, you can still choose sleep sacks designed for older babies, which allow their arms to remain free.

Don’t swaddle your little one too tightly around the hips because it can cause problems with hip development.

Always put babies to bed on their backs to reduce the risk of SIDS.

Are blankets, sleep sacks, socks and hats necessary for nap or bedtime?

Sleep sacks are useful for swaddling babies and can go on over sleepers. You can also use a swaddle blanket to wrap your baby, though for many parents, sleep sacks are easier to manage.

Socks and hats are not recommended for bedtime because they can make your little one too hot. When putting your baby down for a nap or bedtime, don't add any blankets, toys or pillows to his crib because they can increase the risk of SIDS.

What's the right room temperature for a sick baby?

If your baby has a cold , it’s best to keep the nursery at a consistent temperature even though colder temperatures can be more comfortable when baby has a stuffy nose and is having trouble breathing.

If your little one is burning up because of a fever, you can dress him in lighter, more airy fabrics.

How can I tell if baby is too hot or too cold?

The easiest way to tell if your baby is too hot or too cold is by feeling the nape of the neck to see if it’s sweaty or cold to the touch.

When babies are too warm, they may have flushed cheeks and look like they're sweating. An overheated baby may also breathe rapidly. If baby is too cold, he may seem less active and have overly cold hands and feet.

What are the risks of baby becoming either overheated or too cold?

Babies who are overheated can be irritable and restless, and they can even develop a fever. In extreme cases, overheating can also cause heat stroke.

If your baby feels overheated, start to remove layers gradually and dab some cool water on the skin. (If your baby is older than 6 months, then you can also offer sips of water .) If his condition does not improve rapidly, call your pediatrician.

When babies are too cold, they can become less responsive. If your baby seems cool to the touch as well as lethargic or unresponsive, you should talk to your pediatrician immediately.

Does my newborn need more layers than I do?

Yes, newborn babies usually need one extra layer for bedtime and multiple layers for going outside, depending on how cold it is. Layers are key because you can easily remove them. Again, be cognizant of your newborn overheating and take off additional layers once you get inside.

Remember, if you feel warm, it’s no surprise that your baby does too, and if you need a jacket, suit your baby up in one too. While your little one can’t yet tell you he's too hot or too cold, he'll probably get fussy if he's uncomfortable.

Best to avoid that altogether by following these tips to make sure your baby is dressed right — no matter what the weather is like outside.