Baby showers are so special: They’re a wonderful way to welcome future moms and dads into parenthood. They’re also a great opportunity to shower the parents-to-be with love and gifts to make their lives brighter and easier.

As a caring host, there are a few things you should remember to make it a party they won’t forget. You want your guests to have delicious food and something to keep everyone entertained, but you may also want to consider a thank-you gift that will make them feel special long after the shower is over.

Do you need to give guests baby shower favors?

While baby shower favors can be a great add-on to make your guests feel special, plenty of parents don’t opt for favors and that’s totally fine. For instance, while some moms in the What to Expect community say they’ve always taken home a small goodie after a baby shower, plenty of others have never. There are no hard-and-fast rules when it comes to baby shower favors, so feel free to do what you’re most comfortable with, whether that’s giving guests a gift to remember the occasion by or just focusing on the event itself without any favors.

Baby shower favor ideas

If you do choose to give loved ones a parting gift, there are plenty of creative and reasonable baby shower favor ideas out there to send your guests home smiling.

Whether you’re looking to DIY, add a personalized touch or keep things budget-friendly, there are so many options — and all are special. Here are a few baby shower favor ideas to consider:

Food is always a hit. Cookies, cupcakes, bags of popcorn, chocolates or candy are all great, but keep in mind the dietary restrictions of your guests and consider options that everyone can enjoy.

DIY options keep it cost effective. Think body scrubs, handmade soap, bouquets of flowers from the garden or mason jar candles.

Personalized options work great for a smaller crowd. Costs can skyrocket quickly with personalized options, which is why custom gifts are generally better for more intimate events.

Self-care items are always nice. Things like candles, face masks, lip balms or body butter are great ideas, for instance. Include a mix of scent options so everyone can go home with something they love.

No matter which idea you go with, your baby shower favors are sure to make a great addition to the celebration.

How we chose the best baby shower favor ideas

It can be hard to narrow down your baby shower favor selection, which is why we did the digging for you. We searched through the What to Expect community of millions of moms to hear what several other parents and parents-to-be had at their baby showers and what their guests loved. We analyzed dozens of discussion threads to narrow down which favor ideas were clear winners for tons of different families.

Read on for the best baby shower favor ideas.

Succulent Planters

T4U Succulent Planter Pots

Easy to maintain

double as event decor

Somewhat small

Why We Love It

Succulents are super trendy right now, and for good reason: These hardy plants are gorgeous and easy to care for, even for someone without a green thumb. They also double as decor for the event, so it’s like a two-for-one deal! You can arrange them on tables or create a cute display near the door for guests to grab on their way out.

Visit your local nursery for the succulents and soil, and add these small white hexagon succulent planter pots to your cart for an adorable baby shower favor. Want even more charm? Add these “Watch me grow” wood markers for an extra touch.

Community Reviews

We did succulents! I wanted to give something that people can actually keep and have and not just throw away. Everyone loved them!

We did succulents too and since it was a tea party, the ladies got to plant them in a teacup of their choice (collected from thrift stores). It was a cute gift but also a fun activity.

I went to one where there was an activity to put a little succulent in a cute pot. They had an assortment of pots, succulents, some soil, rocks, etc. I kept it for years.

Hair Ties

Colebrook Designs “Oh Baby” Hair Ties

Cute but not kitschy

three designs available

Not as valuable for those with shorter hair

Why We Love It

Elastic hair ties come in all sorts of prints, but we love this set of 24 hair ties with gold and silver accents. They already come mounted on cardstock with a thank you message printed on the bottom, saving you time and energy. It’s a practical gift option that’s more affordable than many other favors, which is a huge win in our book. There are also pink and blue designs with baby feet if you want to keep the favors extra on-theme, but the neutral prints are a good way to go if you’d like your guests to use them again and again.

Flower Vases

Hosley Glass Gold-Dipped Bottles

Great size for small bouquets

easy for guests to take home

Paint can scratch with time or washes

Why We Love It

Grab an array of flowers and these vases from Amazon to create a DIY flower bar where guests can make their own floral arrangements to take home. It works as decor and a fun activity, plus each guest gets to take home something uniquely beautiful! We love these vases because of their size — at just over 5 inches in height, they’re perfect for a small bouquet. Not to mention, the gold-dip detail feels a bit more cheerful than a plain glass vase.

Seed Gift Tags

Seed Bloom Wildflower Seed Gift Tags

Great for larger parties

more affordable than other favor ideas

Not great for those who don’t like gardening

Why We Love It

These Seed Bloom Wildflower Seed Gift Tags are the quintessential spring shower favor. Write a thank you note on the tags and tell loved ones to plant them and watch their flowers grow. It’s environmentally friendly and spreads a little joy, all in one gift. (Win-win!) They also come with planting instruction slips and perfectly sized envelopes, making them easy for guests to grab at the end of the shower. Your guests should eventually see flowers like daisies, foxgloves, petunias, poppies and snapdragons, making this a gift that lasts. One What to Expect community parent pointed out this favor works particularly well for virtual baby showers since they’re so easy to mail.

Community Reviews

Jeebs I had my 1st in November of 2020 and it was all by mail because Covid was gnarly. My favor to everyone was some seed paper they could plant since it was easy to mail.

Candles

Mini Mason Jar Candles

Crowd pleaser

lots of ways to customize

Scent could be stronger

more expensive than other favors

Why We Love It

Just about everybody appreciates a good candle. These 4-ounce mason jar candles are sweet and simple, and would fit neatly in with any guest’s home decor. This set of 24 candles in particular offer a mild lavender scent and come with a 10 hour burn time. Customize it with a tag that says “Thanks for lighting up our lives!” or a simple “Thank you!” using round label stickers .

Community Reviews

jess_s0616 I’ve been to a shower where a small candle was given and wrapped in blue paper.

Hand Cream

Qungco Travel-Sized Hand Cream

Variety of scents for guests to choose from

portable container

Not everyone loves botanical scents

Why We Love It

A travel-sized tube of lotion is a useful yet thoughtful baby shower favor idea. This set of 15 has a variety of scents, meaning guests can choose which scent sounds most appealing to them, from cherry blossom to green tea. They’re perfect for tossing into your bag, and guests will think of you and your baby every time they use it. Who wouldn’t appreciate a gift that’ll leave your mitts silky-soft and rejuvenated?

Lip Balm

Burt’s Bees Lip Balm

Useful present

four flavors per pack

Smaller favor

Why We Love It

Another practical baby shower favor idea? Chapstick. You can never have too much lip balm — stick one in your purse, another in your car, one at your office desk, another tube in your bathroom — the list could go on. Burt’s Bees is one of the best, most universally loved picks on the market with its natural, refreshing scents. This value pack comes with four flavors, which is great for a shower since your guests can choose which one they’d like most. For bonus points, grab a custom label from Etsy to personalize the favor so your loved ones think of you and your sweet little one when they use it.

Community Reviews

Furmomplus I did chapstick! Etsy has tons of labels, and then I bought chapstick on Amazon! Super cute, cheap and practical.

Popcorn Boxes

Big Dot of Happiness Baby Shower Popcorn Treat Boxes

Cute packaging

showcases a widely loved snack food

No lid means risk of popcorn spills

Why We Love It

How sweet are these theater-esque popcorn boxes ? Stop by your local farmers market or grocery store to pick up some kennel corn and hand these out to your guests on their way out. Add a sticker or tag that says “ready to pop” or “thanks for popping by” and they’re guaranteed to be a huge hit. What’s more, popcorn is a widely loved snack food that can transform for any shower theme. You could add pink or blue melting chocolate and edible glitter for that extra punch of pizzaz, or go for classic butter, caramel or white cheddar flavors. Better yet, allow your guests to pick and choose their own popcorn flavors to ensure they’ll love it!

Community Reviews

Lizzysloan I made bags of popcorn kernels and added a tag that said thanks for popping by and included some caramels!

MsCareyBaby We are doing a Babyque and I’m doing gourmet popcorn bags.

Bottle Openers

Poppin’ Bottles Bottle Opener

Durable

comes pre-wrapped

A little small

Why We Love It

If you and your guests like to celebrate with a little bubbly, this baby-bottle-shaped opener is the perfect favor to send loved ones home with. “Poppin’ bottles” is a double entendre and sure to be a hit. On top of their clever design, these beautiful gold bottle openers come packed in a gift box already, making it a set-it-and-forget-it type of shower favor. (Yes, please!)

Community Reviews

Brianne007 We did bottle openers for our favors. They were shaped like baby bottles that said ‘poppin bottles’ on them. We went with something practical we thought people might get use out of and they were a hit.

Nail Polish

OPI Nail Lacquer

Lasts a long time

guests can use it over and over

Gets very expensive if you have a large group

Why We Love It

If you’re a self care fan, nail polish is the perfect favor to celebrate your upcoming bundle of joy. You can pick a color — literally any color under the rainbow — to match your baby shower theme , or a beautiful neutral that everyone will enjoy. The OPI brand is a solid choice thanks to its high-quality polish and sizable color selection. Add on a cute note that says “mani thanks” with a complementing ribbon and you’ve got yourself an adorable and practical favor idea.

Community Reviews

KmR28 For our shower we made custom cookies with pink hued nail polishes saying ‘Mani thanks!’ As a play on words with manicures.

Fun Soaps

Kate Aspen Sweet Honey & Fresh Flower Honeycomb Soap

Comes in baby-shower-themed wrapping

nice self-care angle

Small size

Why We Love It

A fancy soap is a great way to elevate your self-care routine, making it a great baby shower favor idea. These soaps will be the buzz of the party with their cute honeycomb features and delightful honey scent. It comes pre-packaged with a cute sticker that says “Mommy to Bee!” but you can take it to the next level by pairing it with a card that says, “From our shower to yours.” If you want to make your favor even bigger, let guests pick a little loofah or lotion for a whole set.

Community Reviews

brandinickel We did soaps! Everybody seemed to actually want 1, or multiple, we had brought extra.

Honey Jars

DnayDkiy Mini Glass Honey Jars

All-inclusive set

jar and dipper made with food-grade materials

dishwasher-safe jars

Glass jars are prone to breakage

Why We Love It

Loved ones will never forget your little honey is arriving soon when you send them home with a mini jar of honey! This set of 20 comes with everything you need for an adorable favor, including a 1.5 ounce glass jar, golden lid, wooden dipper, thank you tag, jute rope and a tiny bee charm. (Read: All you need is honey!)

They’ll look beautiful sitting on the table with a sign that says “A little honey is on the way.” These are extra-perfect for a bee-themed shower, a travel themed shower (tea and honey, anyone?) or a tea party shower.

Community Reviews

Countrymommy123 We had a tea party theme for my last and did vintage tea cups with little metal spoons flavored tea bags and lil jar of honey with a note that said baby Bartlett is brewing thank you for sharing in this amazing adventure take time to relax and enjoy as time always slips away

Candy Bar Wrappers

Baby Shower Candy Wrappers

Doubles as cute party decor

more affordable favor idea than others

Adds job of wrapping candy

only gender-neutral design is dinosaur-themed

Why We Love It

A candy buffet is an awesome idea for a baby shower, especially if you have guests of many ages present. It also undergoes double (or rather, quadruple) duty as a baby shower activity, decor, food and favors. Throw in these candy wrappers for extra customization and you've got yourself a party! All you need to do is pick up a bag of mini candy bars from the grocery store (or add them to your Amazon order) and fold them up in the adorable wrappers. Add them to a tray or clear glass bowl for guests to enjoy during the party or take home when the celebration ends.

Community Reviews

LeslieKate2281 We’re doing a candy bar with mesh bags. We have almost 75 people going so I figured I’d make it easy.

Garden Starters

Growneer Peat Pots

Doubles as party activity

great for warm-weather baby showers

Not everyone is into gardening

not great for city dwellers

Why We Love It

Gift your friends the gifts of green thumbs and their own vegetable gardens with these 4-inch peat pots . Just add soil and seeds, and they’ll have everything they need for a successful garden at home. Note what seeds are planted in each using one of the included labels, and add a sticker that says “watch me grow” for the perfect springtime baby shower favor. Even better? Save yourself some time and turn it into a fun shower activity where you and your guests plant the seeds together!

Community Reviews

BahDure I called my baby ‘little seed’ before I knew if I had a boy or girl, so I put together favors with a flower pot and veggie/flower seeds.

A Donation in Your Guests’ Names

Donation to the Loveland Foundation

Helps others

may inspire others to donate as well

Guests don’t receive an actual gift

Why We Love It

Giving back always feels good. Donating to a charity you love in lieu of favors will help you make a difference and even inspire your loved ones to donate. For instance, one What to Expect community parent-to-be made donations to &Mother and the Loveland Foundation on behalf of their baby shower guests. &Mother is dedicated to overcoming roadblocks that limit a woman’s choice to pursue and thrive in both her career and motherhood, while the Loveland Foundation is committed to showing up for and bringing opportunity and healing to communities of color, especially for Black women and girls.

You can put out a sign letting your guests know where you donated to and encourage them to give back as well.

Community Reviews

kmgulish We’re skipping the favors and games and opting to donate instead. We’re making a donation to AndMother and Loveland Foundation.

Kelly Bailey is a busy momma to #3under3 girls, including a set of twins. She lives in Ontario, Canada, with her husband of five years and can often be found trying to find the balance between career woman, wife and mother. She's a fierce body positive advocate and a lover of all things beautiful.