What to Do When Your Baby Hates the Car Seat, Bouncer or Stroller

baby hates car seat, stroller or bouncer, baby in sling with father

Why do some babies fuss so much in the car seat, stroller or bouncy seat? Here's what's behind it, plus tips on how you can calm your little one down when you're strapping him in.

So your sister/friend/neighbor/hairstylist (or more likely, all of the above) raved about the bouncy seat: Her baby just loved it and sat happily gazing at toys or his own fingers while Mom's arms (and back) took a break.

But every time you try putting your baby in the bouncer , he screams bloody murder. Not to mention the fact that your baby also seems to hate the car seat, swing and stroller — and fusses any time you strap him in. What's the deal?

Why do some babies hate car seats, bouncers or strollers?

There are several reasons why some babies fuss so much in the car seat, bouncy seat, swing and/or stroller:

Baby is overstimulated. After spending nine-plus month shielded from the world in your cozy womb, the hustle and bustle of real life can be hard for some babies to handle. Too much noise, movement or visual stimulation — which they might get when hopping around in a jumper or strapped into the backseat of a moving car — might be too intense for sensitive babies , making them upset and cry.

Baby is uncomfortable. Your little one might not like the straps that keep him in place in a car seat or stroller, for example, or he might not like being constrained. In some cases, there’s not much you can do about that — car seats are specifically designed to keep babies safe, not cater to their mercurial whims — but make sure that you’re following the manufacturer directions for usage, and that all straps and fasteners are snug and secure without cutting into baby’s skin to make your little one as comfortable as possible.

Baby is lonely. He’s used to someone holding him most of his waking hours, so moving to a car seat, bouncer or stroller — where he can no longer feel the constant contact of your body — might be upsetting.

Baby is fussier by nature. Another potential factor: personality. Some babies are simply fussier than others, and it’s just a part of their unique temperament. Your baby may just not like car seats or strollers, or might be disturbed by the sudden routine changes that often come with them. Consider it the genetic luck of the draw.

Baby has motion sickness. Your baby may be fussy because he's feeling car sick. While motion sickness is generally more common in toddlers and older children than in infants, some babies do still experience it.

Baby is premature or colicky. Premature babies and some colicky babies tend to be more sensitive to light, noise and movement, which potentially might make them hate car seats, strollers or bouncers.

When will my baby stop fussing in the car seat, stroller or bouncer?

As your baby gets older, he’ll likely outgrow the worst of his crying, including the fussiness he feels in a stroller, bouncer or car seat. Babies tend to cry the most during the first three months of life; colicky babies tend to outgrow it once they’re 3 to 4 months old.

Some kids may never warm up to being strapped in, however, so try not to be too disheartened if yours is one of them. It's not a huge deal in the case of bouncers and swings — if your baby doesn’t like them, you don’t have to use them. But car seats are non-negotiable whenever you’re in a moving vehicle, and strollers are essential for most parents when they take their baby out of the house. So no matter how much your baby may hate them, you have no choice but to strap him in when the situation calls for it.

Tips for soothing a baby who hates the car seat, stroller or bouncer

Thankfully, there are some things you can do to help soothe your baby and acclimate him to car seats, strollers and bouncers so that you can safely (and peacefully) take him on the go — or just give your arms and back a break.

Settle him first

Whenever possible, avoid putting your baby into a bouncer, car seat or stroller when he's already fussing or crying. He'll only become angrier (and louder!) when you plop him in, so try to wait until he's calm and happy before trying again.

Calm him down and distract him

Before trying to strap your baby into a car seat, bouncy seat or stroller, put him on his back on a play mat, a blanket on the floor, or in his crib (you should always put your baby down to sleep on his back to reduce the risk of sudden infant death syndrome, or SIDS). Then offer some distracting sights and sounds — a mobile or some toys to swat at and music or white noise to listen to. Once he's nice and calm, try putting him into his seat or stroller.

Music often helps when you're driving with baby too — since no matter how hard your baby fusses, he definitely doesn't have a choice about being restrained there.

Try a change of scenery

Your baby might calm down if he has a better view. For example, try placing your bouncer in front of a mirror (your little one loves looking at his reflection) or attach safe toys to his car seat for him to admire and play with.

If your baby really hates his car seat, you could also bring it inside — strap him in at home and play with him while he’s in the seat, so he starts to feel a little more comfortable (and happier) when he’s buckled in.

Sling him up

If it's closeness to you that he craves, carry him in a sling or other carrier that keeps him as near to you as possible. While you'll still be toting a little sidekick wherever you go, at least your hands will be free to take care of some other stuff while you're wearing your baby. (Don't be tempted to wear your baby in the car, however. No matter how fussy he gets, he has to be in the car seat when you're driving or riding around.)

Stay in sight

If you think your baby is struggling because he can't see you, try to stay visible as much as possible, touching him and talking to him to see if that helps soothe him. If you’re in a car and not driving, sit next to him in the backseat and talk, sing or play with him. It could provide just the comfort he needs to settle down.