Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

buying baby gear

These tips will help make sure all the baby gear you buy hits the sweet spot between adorable and practical.

With all the itty-bitty furniture and newfangled baby gear there is to buy, it’s tempting to grab a shopping cart and go wild. But first, pause to take your baby’s safety — and your wallet — into consideration. The one thing you don’t need when you have a newborn, after all, is a case of baby-related buyer’s remorse.

Here’s what to know about each baby-gear essential before you buy.

Key Takeaways

Always prioritize safety when buying baby gear — avoid secondhand car seats or recalled items, and look for current CPSC and JPMA certifications for cribs and other essentials.

Shop smart for longevity and practicality. It's a good idea to invest in gear that fits your space, lifestyle, and long-term needs — such as convertible car seats, adjustable strollers, or a crib that can convert to a toddler bed.

Test and tailor purchases. If you can, shop for products in person, wait on certain buys (like carriers) until your baby arrives, and always avoid any items that are unsafe, such as crib bumpers or inclined sleepers.

Car seat

Some parents purchase a convertible car seat from day one, which can hold a baby as tiny as 3 pounds and last well into toddlerhood. While these can be an excellent long-term investment (and you'll need one eventually, whether you purchase it now or later on), convertible car seats do have some downsides during the newborn stage: A bulky convertible seat will be tricky to maneuver in and out of the car while the baby is sleeping. Plus, most convertible seats don’t have wheeled frames, so you can't clip them into a stroller as part of a travel system. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCar Seats: Information for FamiliesSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCar Seats: Information for FamiliesSee All Sources

An infant car seat , on the other hand, simply pops in and out of a car base with the click of a button. (Infant seats can also be installed quickly and safely with a seat belt, if you often travel by cab.) Look for one with an easy-to-grip handle and a substantial sunshade, and test-drive it with a stroller frame if you plan on using one. Steer clear of used car seats, which can be compromised if they’re installed in a car that’s been in an accident.

doona car seat stroller

The Doona Car Seat Stroller is a popular choice because you get the best of both worlds. Within seconds, you can convert the stoller to a car seat and back again. It attaches to a car seat base and even works on airplanes.

"I love our Doona and would recommend it to anyone who regularly gets in and out of the car (or wants to!) with baby or lives in a city," says What to Expect Community user krb-7-320. "It is not a replacement for a full-size stroller for long walks, but it is fantastic for travel and running errands or going into small spaces like a coffee shop for short amounts of time."

Shop now: Doona Infant Car Seat Stroller ($550; amazon.com ).

Stroller

Strollers see a lot of wear and tear, so unless you’re certain you’re getting a barely used model, spring for a new one. You may prefer to shop for a stroller in person and have everyone who’ll be spending a lot of time behind it take it for a spin. If the handles don’t adjust, make sure they’re at a comfortable height for whoever will be using it most. Consider the amount of storage space it contains (bigger is better) and whether it will be easy to access once the stroller has a tiny occupant.

Also worth thinking about: Might you have more children in the future? If so, you may want to invest in a single-to-double model that can convert to carry additional little ones later. Or, do you have limited storage in your home? A stroller with a compact fold may help you save space.

If you’ll be spending a lot of time on bumpy sidewalks, look for a model with air tires, which offer a smoother ride than plastic wheels. Apartment dwellers should try collapsing and carrying a few strollers; lightweight umbrella strollers with carrying straps are the easiest to carry up and down stairs. A substantial sunshade is a good perk, but if you fall in love with a stroller that has a wimpy shade, there are several tie-on shades available.

Mockingbird Single-to-Double Stroller

This stoller is one of our top picks for everyday use because it's sturdy, can lie flat for infants, has tons of storage, and can convert from a single to a double if needed.

"I have it and love it," says What to Expect Community user LW-85. "I use the car seat adapters if we are going for a quick trip, and they are great, too!"

Shop now : Mockingbird Single-to-Double Stroller ($549; amazon.com )

Crib

Vintage cribs might be charming, but the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) strongly cautions against using any crib that’s more than 10 years old. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionSafe Sleep %u2013 Cribs and Infant ProductsSee All Sources [2] (Check the CPSC website before you buy or borrow from a friend.) Cribs should have fixed sides (drop-side cribs are no longer sold in the U.S.) with slats that are no farther than 2 3/8 inches apart. Look for a brand that carries a seal from the Juvenile Products Manufacturing Association (JPMA) so you know it has been tested for quality and safety.

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionSafe Sleep %u2013 Cribs and Infant ProductsSee All Sources

Because cribs come in different heights, you’ll want to shop for one in person to make sure both parents can reach baby when the mattress is dropped to its lowest point. A money-saving tip: A model that converts to a toddler bed offers a gentle transition from the crib, and it will last through several birthdays. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursChoosing Safe Baby Products: CribsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursChoosing Safe Baby Products: CribsSee All Sources

dream on me white crib

The Dream On Me Synergy crib is loved by parents because it converts to a toddler bed, daybed, and full-size bed. It meets JPMA safety standards and comes in several different colors.

Shop now: Dream On Me Synergy 5-in-1 Convertible Crib ($120; amazon.com )

Mattress and bedding

The most important factor to consider when shopping for a crib mattress is how firm it is, as soft sleeping surfaces can raise the risk for sudden infant death syndrome ( SIDS ). To test firmness, press your hand in the center of a mattress, then pull it away and check for a handprint — if you can see the outline of your hand, pick a different model.

Once you have your mattress, you’ll need something to cover it with: All-in-one bedding sets are virtually useless, since the only bedding your baby needs is a fitted sheet. Crib bumpers, a staple in many sets, are discouraged by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), which considers them a SIDS risk. And blankets are also a no-no in cribs. Stock up on fitted sheets and buy a crib skirt separately, if you’d like one. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsMake Baby's Room Safe: Parent ChecklistSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsMake Baby's Room Safe: Parent ChecklistSee All Sources

graco crib mattress

This crib mattress has thousands of five-star reviews from parents on Amazon thanks to its washable outer cover and firm texture. It's also water-resistant to keep baby clean and dry all night.

Shop now: Graco Premium Foam Crib Mattress ($100; amazon.com ).

Carrier

You might wait on this purchase until after your baby is born so you can determine which style your little one prefers — plus your baby’s size might affect your decision. If possible, borrow a few different baby carriers from friends before you buy to see which one works best for you. Take each for at least a walk around the block with your sweetie inside, so you’ll know how the carrier feels when you’re on the go.

Keep in mind that a carrier that straps around your waist, like the Ergo Baby Sport, will be easier on your back than a model with straps that crisscross your back or a sling, which puts most of your wee one’s weight on one of your shoulders. If you opt for a sling, review the CPSC’s guidelines for wearing them to make sure your baby bundle stays safe. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionNew Federal Standard to Improve Safety of Infant Slings Takes EffectSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionNew Federal Standard to Improve Safety of Infant Slings Takes EffectSee All Sources

ergo baby carrier gray

The Ergobaby Carrier allows in to carry your baby facing in or out or wear the carrier on your hip or back. It fits babies up to 45 pounds and has a UPF 50+ hood for sun protection.

"I had an Ergobaby carrier with my first and second a long time ago and loved it," says What to Expect Community user beautiful4321. "I bought a new one for this baby and love it just as much."

Shop now: Ergobaby Carrier Omni 360 All Carry Positions ($179; amazon.com )

Swing, seat, bouncer, or activity center

These aren't essential purchases, but many parents find them helpful. Yes, the swing worked like a charm on your best friend’s babe, but for every little one who finds swinging soothing, there’s another who starts sobbing. The same is true for bouncers and activity centers. To find out what your wee one prefers, let her give it a whirl first.

If you can, bring your baby to visit a friend who has a little one who’s a few months older. You can catch up with a fellow mama — and your tot can test-drive some gear. If you do end up opting for one of these products, be mindful about shopping secondhand (always check the CPSC's website to see if a product has been recalled); supervise your baby closely the entire time she's sitting in a swing, activity center, or bouncer; and move her to a crib or bassinet right away if she falls asleep. The AAP advises against using inclined products like these for sleep because they can lead to suffocation. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsInclined Sleepers, Soft Nursing Pillows, & Other Baby Products to AvoidSee All Sources [6]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsInclined Sleepers, Soft Nursing Pillows, & Other Baby Products to AvoidSee All Sources

Babybjorn bouncer

With four reclining positions, the ability to lie flat for easy storage, and a sleek, easy-to-clean design, the BabyBjörn Bouncer is a popular choice for its longevity: It can be turned into a toddler seat once your little one is older.

Shop now: BabyBjörn Bouncer Balance Soft ($220; amazon.com )

Remember: Before making a purchase — new or secondhand — don’t forget to check the CPSC website to make sure the product hasn’t been recalled. And open the What to Expect app for detailed guides on more essential baby gear, what to register for (and what you can skip), and much more.