"Baby Brain" Isn't Just Forgetfulness — It’s Your Mind Rewiring Itself to Bond With Your Baby

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnancy brain

Can't find your phone (or your keys, or your wallet)? Go easy on yourself — pregnancy brain is a normal part of the process, and it's actually a sign of some pretty magical behind-the-scenes changes as your body gets ready to bond with your baby.

Morning sickness, heartburn, swollen ankles — and now pregnancy brain?! Indeed, having a baby on board can lead to spacey behavior, according to science. But it's not all bad: Your brain is working hard to boost your emotional skills so you can bond with your baby. In the meantime, set reminders for yourself, try to rest more, and focus on a healthy diet.

Pregnancy-induced brain fog is a true (and truly frustrating) hallmark of pregnancy. If you suffer from so-called "pregnancy brain," you may forget appointments, what you just walked into the store for, where you left your purse, whether you turned off the stove — and, maybe, your phone number.

This forgetfulness isn't just a lack of sleep playing tricks on you: Research suggests that pregnancy really does alter a woman's brain.

Key Takeaways

Thanks, hormones! Yup, pregnancy fog can be blamed on these chemicals, along with lack of sleep and all the mental work of prepping for a baby.

This brain shift is real, but temporary. Your brain actually changes in pregnancy, resulting in more power for emotions but fewer brain cells (!).

Hack your way out of it. Manage your forgetfulness with handy reminders, to-do lists, getting more shut-eye, and eating brain-boosting foods with choline.

What causes pregnancy brain?

As usual, pregnancy brain is caused by your hormones having a bit of fun — this time at the expense of your memory. A lack of quality shut-eye due to a number of sleep-busting conditions during pregnancy (especially common in your first and third trimesters) can also play a role, as can the fact that you're constantly zapped of energy (which your brain needs to stay focused).

What’s more, all of those big and exciting changes going on in your life could have an impact on your ability to focus, too.

In fact, research has actually shown that your brain really does function differently during pregnancy, increasing activity in the side associated with emotional skills (in theory to ensure you’re neurologically attuned to your baby’s facial emotions at birth, so you bond more easily).

And believe it or not your brain-cell volume actually decreases during the third trimester of pregnancy (which could explain why you can't remember what you just read about in that last paragraph). Trusted SourceNature NeurosciencePregnancy Leads to Long-lasting Changes in Human Brain StructureSee All Sources [1] Not to worry, though — your brain will plump back up a few months after delivery.

Trusted SourceNature NeurosciencePregnancy Leads to Long-lasting Changes in Human Brain StructureSee All Sources

Curious about other pregnancy symptoms? Download the What to Expect app for expert info, week-by-week changes, and tips from other moms who’ve felt foggy too.

Is pregnancy brain normal?

Yes! Forgetfulness is both completely normal and extremely common during pregnancy. Even if you pride yourself on your master multitasking skills or your ability to stay organized, you still may find yourself having trouble concentrating or remembering your car keys.

What to Expect Community parent KaitNapped has all the foggy feels right now. “I am leaving things on top of my car, I can't remember the names of basic words, I am mixing up dates, etc. It was never like this with my first lol!”

The good news is it’s also temporary — you'll have total recall again long before you start to have your "senior moments."

What can you do about pregnancy brain?

Take a deep breath. Try not to be too hard on yourself. Stress can cloud your pregnancy brain more.

Write it down. If you need to remember something — to buy certain groceries, make a phone call, ask your practitioner a question, take your prenatal vitamins — leave a big note in an obvious place. You might also stash a notepad and pen in easy-to-remember spots like your purse, your car, and your bathroom.

Use an app. Rely on calendar reminders on your phone to help keep you organized and less forgetful.

Have a backup system. Reduce the number of things you need to remember by delegating some jobs to others. When possible, enlist the aid of those around you who are not pregnant to serve as your backup system (Honey … have you seen my earbuds?). Easier said than done, but worth a go. (You'll forget about the less important stuff, anyway.)

Have a sense of humor. Let yourself have a good laugh about this hazy stage, and encourage your partner to do the same. Who cares if you left your earbuds with your underwear in the dresser?

Chow down on choline . This mineral is the building block for a memory-forming brain chemical called acetylcholine. Researchers believe that eating plenty of choline-rich foods during pregnancy may help boost the function of your brain and your baby's. Trusted SourceThe FASEB JournalMaternal Choline Supplementation During the Third Trimester of Pregnancy Improves Infant Information Processing Speed: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Controlled Feeding StudySee All Sources [2]

Load up on omega-3s. DHA-rich foods (including pregnancy-safe fish like salmon) also support healthy brain function and development for both you and your baby.

Skip the gingko. Forget about taking the herbal supplement gingko biloba. This "memory-booster" hasn't been proven safe for use during pregnancy.

Prepare yourself. Expect the haze to hang in during the first weeks to months after you give birth. Postpartum fatigue may take the place of hormones as the primary culprit, but that too shall pass.

Get more sleep. This may be easier said than done, but going to bed early or getting comfy with a pregnancy pillow may help with the fogginess.