Baby First-Aid Essentials Every Parent Should Have on Hand

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Baby's first-aid kit buying guide

From fevers to first bumps, here's exactly what to stock so you're ready for whatever comes your way.

Before you realize it, you'll be able to predict (as much as you can with a little one) when your baby needs to be fed, have his diaper changed, or go to bed at night. But there's often no way of knowing when your child is going to get sick or get a cut.

Enter your trusty, well-stocked first-aid kit. Gathering everything you need before you need it will put your mind at ease — especially once baby's on the move! Here's what you need to stock in the medicine cabinet to prepare for everything from a scratch to a fever.

Key Takeaways

A well-stocked first-aid kit gives you peace of mind. Gathering essentials ahead of time means you'll be ready for everything from fevers and stuffy noses, to gas and the inevitable bumps and scrapes.

Check and refresh your supplies regularly. Toss anything expired and make sure items like infant acetaminophen, bandages, and clean tools are always on hand.

Keep first-aid basics accessible — but safely stored. A kit at home and a mini version in your diaper bag or car ensures you're prepared wherever you go. Just make sure that they're out of young kids' reach.

Quick tips

Prepackaged kits are convenient, but they won't have everything you need and can be pricier than a DIY version. Either put together a kit from scratch or buy a premade option that you can customize with additional items.

Take inventory of your kit every few months to throw out anything that has expired — like that infant acetaminophen — and make sure you're all stocked up with the necessary supplies.

Stash a portable kit in your diaper bag or car so that you have what you need at all times.

Baby's first-aid kit essentials

It's easy to worry — a lot — when your baby gets a fever or cut, especially if you're a first-time mom or dad. By preparing a first-aid kit ahead of time, you'll feel more confident that you can take care of any concerns your little one has.

Here are the basic items you'll want to stock in the kit.

Rectal thermometer: While there are many types of thermometers you can use to take your baby's temperature , a rectal thermometer is the most accurate. Find one with a flexible tip to provide extra comfort.