When Baby Growth Spurts Happen and the Signs to Look For

Updates to copy, information, and sources, and new med review.

baby walking growth spurts

Does your baby seem hungrier than usual? He may be going through a growth spurt. Here’s when babies have growth spurts, plus how to tell if your little one is in the midst of one.

Just when you’re getting the hang of a somewhat reasonable feeding schedule for your baby , your little one can sometimes suddenly change course. He may start eating more frequently and still acts like he’s ravenous when he's done.

If you’re wondering whether your baby is getting enough milk , relax. Your voracious eater isn't starving. He’s likely just hit a baby growth spurt — one of about five he’ll have during the first year.

Key Takeaways

Babies go through several growth spurts in their first year — usually around 1 to 3 weeks, 6 to 8 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 9 months. During those times, they might seem hungrier and fussier, and wake up more often at night.

Growth spurts typically only last a few days, but they can feel intense while they're happening. Your little one will probably want to eat nonstop, and her sleep routine may be thrown off.

If your baby is gaining weight and soaking plenty of diapers, it's a good sign that everything is on track — so try to stay hydrated, lean on your support system, and remember that this phase will pass soon!

What are baby growth spurts?

Babies grow most rapidly during their first year — and much of that happens in the form of growth spurts: i.e., short, intense bursts of growth. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicGrowth Spurts and Baby Growth SpurtsSee All Sources [1] During the first 12 months, babies tend to triple their body weight and gain an average of 10 inches in length.

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicGrowth Spurts and Baby Growth SpurtsSee All Sources

Before a growth spurt, your baby’s weight may slowly increase. After a growth spurt, you may notice it shoot up. So it’s not your imagination — your baby really did outgrow all his newborn outfits overnight!

When do babies have growth spurts?

Baby growth spurts can happen any time during the first year. While every child is different, babies typically have growth spurts at the following times:

Keep in mind that these are just general ranges, and your baby may have a growth spurt outside of these timeframes.

“A combination of factors determine growth, including genetics, environment, nutrition, sleep and moon phases,” says Micah Resnick , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician at Cincinnati Children's Hospital in Ohio and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . “Timing of growth spurts doesn't really have to do with better or worse nutrition.”

To monitor your baby’s progress, the pediatrician will use an infant growth chart at each well visit. These charts from the World Health Organization (WHO) Trusted SourceWorld Health OrganizationChild Growth StandardsSee All Sources [2] and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionClinical Growth ChartsSee All Sources [3] track your baby’s weight, length and head circumference in relation to those of other children the same age.

Trusted SourceWorld Health OrganizationChild Growth StandardsSee All Sources

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionClinical Growth ChartsSee All Sources

Baby growth spurt chart

Wondering when to expect a growth spurt? This helpful chart lists when your baby will likely shoot up, plus how to spot the signs.

baby growth spurts chart

Baby growth spurt signs

Not sure whether your baby is going through a growth spurt or just has a big appetite? Here’s how to recognize your little sprout’s spurt:

Increased hunger. Your baby wants to eat nonstop — as in every hour or two (or sometimes even every 30 minutes). If you’re breastfeeding, know that the more often your baby feeds, the more he stimulates milk production to keep up with his growing appetite. Older babies will also want to nurse more and ramp up their intake of solid foods , if they're eating them.

Frequent night wakings . Even if your baby was sleeping for a blissful five- or six-hour stretch, during a growth spurt he may howl for a midnight snack, then one at 2 a.m., 4 a.m., and so on. You may find your older baby waking up earlier from his naps too.

Increased fussiness. At the breast, he’ll be extra fussy, latching and unlatching because he wants more milk right now, and your production might not be up to speed yet. Plus, all those late nights don’t help his mood (or yours!) either.

How long do growth spurts last?

Right now, it seems like your baby will never stop eating, but hang in there. Most baby growth spurts only last a few days. After that, life will go back to normal — at least, as normal as possible with a newborn!

“There is no clear timing for how long a growth spurt can last,” says Dr. Resnick. “Just feed them when they're hungry and don't worry too much.”

Do babies sleep more during growth spurts?

It depends. Some research shows that infants tend to sleep more during the days when they’re going through a growth spurt.

But it’s also common for babies to wake up more often to demand a feeding, and some babies can go through a sleep regression because of a growth spurt.

How to deal with baby growth spurts

Since you’re already struggling to get enough rest, it’s extra exhausting to have a newborn who suddenly expects a 24-7 all-you-can-eat buffet. So make sure you’re drinking plenty of water to stay hydrated, ask your partner or a friend to tackle household chores, and settle in for some extra feedings. Your favorite show or a good book can help pass the time.

If you're breastfeeding, try to stick it out. When your baby seems hungrier and crankier than normal, you may worry that he’s not getting enough to eat and think about abandoning breastfeeding altogether. But those temporary round-the-clock feedings are actually your baby’s way of boosting your milk supply to keep pace with his oh-so-healthy appetite.

If you’re concerned, keep an eye on two things: diapers and weight gain. If he’s packing on ounces (that adorable little onesie seems tighter today than it did two days ago, for example) and soaking five or six diapers a day, he’s doing just fine. If you have any questions or are still worried, talk to your pediatrician.

Soon enough, your baby’s hunger pangs will have settled down a bit, the growth spurt will end, and things will go back to normal. Until the next baby growth spurt hits, that is!

Frequently Asked Questions

How often do baby growth spurts occur?

Growth spurts can happen several times during baby's first year of life. During the early months, growth spurts are common for newborns around 1 to 3 weeks old and at 6 to 8 weeks. Then growth spurts usually occur every few months, at about 3 months, 6 months, and 9 months.

Can a baby's growth spurt affect his behavior?

A baby's growth spurt can definitely change his behavior for a few days. You may find that your baby is fussier, takes longer naps, or wakes up more often at night to eat.

Is it normal for babies to experience growth spurts at different times?

Yes. Every baby is different, and babies may experience growth spurts at different times.

Is it normal for babies to have growth spurts after starting solid food?

Yes, it's normal for your baby to experience growth spurts throughout the first year of life, including after he starts solid foods . During a growth spurt, your baby may be hungrier than usual.