Baby Acne: What to Do if Your Infant Has It

baby acne on infant

If you thought adolescent skin was exclusively for teens, think again! Here's what causes baby acne and what you can do about it.

Does your infant have more pimples than an eighth grader? Just when she seems ready for her close-up — head rounding out nicely, eyes less puffy and squinty — baby acne might be next. This pimply preview of puberty is incredibly common, usually beginning at 2 to 3 weeks of age and affecting about 20 percent of all newborns. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of DermatologyIs That Acne on My Baby's Face?See All Sources [1] Fortunately it's temporary, and it doesn't bother your baby a bit. Here's what to do in the meantime.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of DermatologyIs That Acne on My Baby's Face?See All Sources

What causes baby acne?

Believe it or not, as with adolescent acne, hormones are believed to be to blame. In the case of newborns, however, it's not their own hormones that are probably prompting the pimple problems, but their moms' — which are still circulating in the bloodstream as a holdover from pregnancy. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicBaby AcneSee All Sources [2] These maternal hormones stimulate a baby's oil-producing glands, causing pimples to pop up on the chin, forehead, eyelids and cheeks, and, sometimes, the head, neck, back and upper chest.

Baby Acne

What's more, the pores in a baby's skin are not yet fully developed, making them easy targets for infiltration by dirt and subsequent blemishes. And babies typically have very sensitive skin — some more than others — which can also play a part.

How to get rid of baby acne

Unfortunately, there's not much you can do about infant acne, besides being patient. A few baby acne treatment tips:

Don’t squeeze, pick or scrub acne.

Cleanse the area with warm water two times a day. Pat skin dry gently.

Don't use soap or lotion on affected areas.

Avoid acne or other skin care products meant for adults.

Try natural baby acne home remedies to treat it. Some moms suggest that dabbing the affected area with breast milk can help speed the healing process.

Ask your doctor about prescription or over-the-counter medication that might help and be safe for your baby. If the acne doesn't go away after several months, then your doctor might suggest using a mild (2.5 percent) benzoyl peroxide cream to the affected areas.

Is it baby acne or a rash?

While it's possible to confuse infant acne with that other common newborn skin condition, milia, the two aren't the same. Baby acne looks like red pimples, while milia are tiny white bumps or whiteheads. But you need to treat both conditions the same: with washing, watching and waiting.

There are also a number of skin rashes and other skin conditions in newborn babies — which, unlike newborn acne, are often itchy and uncomfortable for your little one and tend to spread beyond the face. A few of the most common:

Baby heat rash : These clusters of tiny, moist, red bumps look similar to acne and often appear on baby's arms, legs, upper chest and diaper area in addition to her face when it's hot outside.

Diaper rash : This rash — caused by moisture, irritants and too little air — appears as red, irritated skin in (you guessed it!) baby's diaper area.

Cradle cap : Also called seborrheic dermatitis, these tiny red bumps are smaller than acne and may be accompanied by yellow, flaky skin that looks like scales. While it usually appears on the head, it may spread to the eyebrows and upper body too.

Infant eczema : Skin appears dry, flaky and red, usually in patches around the cheeks and on the scalp. The rash then spreads, often to elbow creases and behind the knees, and progresses to fluid-filled pimples that pop. If eczema is not treated, it can lead to scabbing and oozing.

How long does baby acne last?

Baby acne usually clears anywhere from a few weeks after she's born to the time she's about 3 to 4 months old — which happens to be a terrific time to schedule those professional pics — leaving that beautiful baby skin you've been waiting for in its place.

And just in case you're already worrying about your little one being teased in middle school, know that baby acne doesn't leave permanent scars like the grown-up version can, and it doesn't predict future teen acne problems.

When to call the doctor

Baby acne almost always goes away on its own with no intervention. But bring it to your pediatrician's attention if the bumps look like they might be infected; for example, her skin appears extra red, you notice swelling or discharge, your child spikes a fever or has other symptoms. Also check in with the doctor if you suspect an allergic reaction or eczema, which may require a cream to keep the rash from spreading.