Infant Eczema (Atopic Dermatitis and Contact Dermatitis)

baby eczema picture

An itchy rash could be a case of infant eczema.

Does your baby have patches of dry, flaky, rashy skin ? There's a good chance it's infant eczema.

While this common skin condition is not contagious, it can cause a lot of parenting stress, not to mention discomfort for your baby. Here's everything parents need to know about infant eczema, including strategies to ease your little one's itchy rash.

What is baby eczema?

Doctors use “infant eczema” as an umbrella term to describe two conditions that usually appear between 2 to 4 months of age:

Atopic dermatitis: A typically inherited chronic condition more common among babies with a family history of allergies, eczema and asthma. This type of eczema affects 13 percent of all children under the age of 18 in the United States.

Contact dermatitis: A rash that develops when skin comes into contact with an irritating substance; once the irritant is removed, the rash usually clears.

Eczema rashes can appear all over the body or in just a few spots. They can get worse at certain times (called flare-ups) and be so uncomfortable and itchy that they interfere with sleep — making your baby (and you!) miserable.

In babies, the rashes usually start out on the scalp and face. (Eczema usually doesn’t develop in the diaper area; diaper rashes require a different kind of treatment.)

Eczema is more common in girls, Black children and children with a family history of hay fever and allergies.

What does baby eczema look like?

baby eczema

Eczema can look different from baby to baby, and much of that has to do with melanin, the pigment that gives your skin its color.

In children with lighter pigmented skin: Eczema is typically pink or red.

In children with darker pigmented skin: Eczema often appears red-brown, purplish or grayish. Without redness and inflammation, eczema can be harder to detect. But it's important to seek treatment, since children of color have an increased risk of developing hypo- (lightened) or hyperpigmentation (darkened) areas on their skin where the eczema was.

Regardless of skin tone, the location and appearance of eczema tends to change with age:

Birth to 6 months: Patches of flaky skin may appear in very visible places, including baby's chubby cheeks, chin, forehead and scalp.

6 to 12 months: You may see eczema on your baby’s elbows and knees. The rash may be irritated or flare up if your child is crawling on a scratchy surface.

Around age 2: Eczema may appear in the little creases of your toddler’s elbows and knees, or on her wrists, hands and ankles. You may also still see it on her face and eyelids. The skin may start to look thicker with deeper lines — called “lichenification.”

How does baby eczema differ from dry skin?

Dry skin is a symptom of eczema. Your pediatrician can diagnose eczema by examining your baby's skin. He or she may send you to a pediatric dermatologist for confirmation and treatment if the condition is severe.

In general, dry skin can be handled at home with some moisturizer and isn’t as bothersome as eczema. However, babies with darker skin tend to have drier skin than those with lighter skin — making moisturization even more crucial.

What are the best treatments for baby eczema?

The type of eczema treatment your baby needs depends on the severity of her symptoms.

A few home remedies you can try to ease baby eczema include:

Keep baby's nails short to prevent scratching. Newborn mittens (they come in bigger sizes, too) are great for securing your baby’s hands while she sleeps. Many babies with eczema will wake up bleeding from scratching their little skin so hard. You can also look for long-sleeve sleepers with built-in mittens.

Bathe your baby daily. Baths are one of the best ways to soothe your baby’s eczema. Keep the water lukewarm (not hot) and make baths short — no longer than 10 minutes. Use a small amount of gentle, fragrance-free soap. No bubble baths!

Apply a moisturizer designed for children with eczema. The National Eczema Association maintains a directory of over-the-counter products designed for people with eczema that meet their standards. You’ll want to wait a few minutes to let the moisturizer absorb into your baby’s skin before getting her dressed. Using one of these products when baby's skin is still damp from the bath is best. Reapply (at least once) later. Know, however, that finding a topical product that works for your baby can be a challenge. What works for one child may not work for another. As your baby’s condition and skin change, so can the effectiveness of a moisturizer.

Consider asking your pediatrician about stronger options. If over-the-counter creams don't help, your child's doctor may recommend a topical steroid cream or a non-steroid eczema cream. New drugs and medicines to help eczema sufferers are developed all the time, so if your baby continues to struggle, talk with your pediatrician or pediatric dermatologist about the latest remedies and what they recommend. Just remember that not all treatments approved for adults are safe for babies.

Natural remedies for baby eczema

If you need some extra help soothing baby’s skin, these natural eczema treatments may make things better.

Wet a washcloth. Drape cool, wet washcloths or gauze over your baby’s irritated skin for five to ten minutes at a time — or however long you can get your squirmy worm to cooperate.

Try an oatmeal bath . Sprinkle a bit of uncooked oatmeal, colloidal oatmeal (made specifically for baths) or even baking soda into the tub when you wash your baby. All can naturally relieve eczema and irritation.

Combat dry air. Running a cool-mist humidifier in your baby's bedroom can help keep her skin super-hydrated. Clean it frequently to prevent bacteria and mold buildup.

Dress your little one in layers. Sweating can reboot the eczema cycle, and that’s the last thing you want. Layers let you customize baby’s outfit for toasty temps.

Ask your pediatrician about probiotics. Studies are underway to see whether probiotics (friendly, live bacteria that come in powder form) may ease eczema when added to dry baby formula or served as a dietary supplement. Get your doctor to weigh in before giving it a go.

How can you prevent baby eczema?

If your baby has contact dermatitis, you can try your best to prevent a flare-up by identifying and avoiding common triggers, which might include:

Moisture (from milk, saliva or sweat). Dress your baby in lightweight cotton clothing. Gently pat drool away when you see it.

Scratchy fabrics. In addition to clothes and rugs, even your baby’s stuffed animals can trigger eczema.

Allergens. Think pet dander, pollen or dust.

Harsh detergents and soaps. Consider using a sensitive detergent when washing baby’s clothes and crib sheets .

Does breastfeeding prevent baby eczema?

There is some evidence that breastfed babies may be less likely to develop eczema. Although unproven, the antimicrobial properties in breast milk have also been studied as a type of treatment when directly applied to an eczema rash. To try this, rub a few drops of your liquid gold onto the rash regularly for a few days and watch for any reduction in symptoms. (If you're nursing, it’s free, so worth a shot!)

When to talk to your doctor about baby eczema

Always talk with your pediatrician if you have any questions or concerns about your baby’s skin. Thanks to telemedicine, a video visit or quick photo is often all that's needed to check for eczema.

Occasionally, infections develop on top of an eczema rash. If you see any yellow-colored crusting and scabbing, oozy skin, blisters or pus bumps, be sure to call your doctor right away. Always call if your baby has a fever. Your baby may need an antibiotic and to be evaluated in person.

Will my baby have eczema all her life?

In some babies with atopic dermatitis, the condition stays put. But, fortunately, eczema clears up in many babies by the time they turn 4 years old.

Remember, eczema is very common among infants and the general population. Mention eczema to your friends, your extended family members or another mom you meet at the park. You are bound to find someone else who has walked this road and can be another voice of support.