Common Baby Feeding Problems After You Introduce Solids

baby feeding problems, solved

It’s normal for new eaters to hit a few bumps as they learn to nosh on solids. Luckily, there’s a fast fix for whatever challenge your cutie’s dishing up.

Some lucky parents have a little one who’s happy to wolf down whatever comes her way. More often, however, babies stumble over one or two (or three) feeding hurdles as they start eating solids.

Whether your baby is easily distracted in her high chair or refuses to lift a spoon for herself, here are some strategies for tackling even the toughest baby feeding problems.

Most common baby feeding problems

From food allergies to funny noises (and faces), here are some of the most common feeding problems you might encounter in your baby's first year of eating solid foods.

The problem: Your baby sticks out her tongue while you feed her

If your little one thrusts out her little tongue at the first spoonful of solids — and is pushing the food back out with every subsequent bite — then she probably hasn’t outgrown her tongue-thrust reflex yet. This reflex, which all babies are born with, causes infants to push things out of their mouths to avoid choking.

Thin out the consistency of whatever you’re serving with breast milk, formula or plain water (though babies might open wider for familiar-tasting foods). Then try offering her a bit of food on a spoon or your fingertip. If her tiny tongue continues to push out the mush, even after several tries, don’t take it personally. Your sweetie’s simply letting you know that she’s not quite ready to start solids.

The good news is that this reflex tends to fade as they get older, so wait another week or so and try again.

The problem: Your baby spits out food

If your baby’s tongue reflex has largely disappeared, there’s a chance that she’s either already full, or just not a fan of what’s on the menu (yes, even if she loved sweet potatoes yesterday).

You can try serving up something else, but if an alternate item doesn’t tempt her, give this meal a rest and try again later. Odds are good that your baby will eat once she’s had a break.

The problem: Your baby turns away while you try to feed her

If baby is turning away or fussing every time the spoon comes near her mouth, she’s probably not in an eating mood, and is letting you know the only way she can — by turning away from your attempts to spoon-feed her.

What’s behind the food strike? There’s a good chance that she’s full (or maybe she’s tired, or distracted, or coming down with a cold…) Whatever her reasons are, respect them. This will also give her the chance to develop her hunger and fullness instincts — skills that can last a lifetime.

The problem: Your baby makes a funny face when you're feeding her

Your little one takes a bite and grimaces — almost as if she’s saying, “Ew, yuk!” But don’t read too much into her expressions. After all, babies make all sorts of funny faces (even when they aren’t eating).

Plus, babies’ taste buds need time and practice to get used to new textures and flavors, so it could be that she’s just surprised by the sensation. Once she’s more of a pro, she’ll probably smile when the spoon hits her lips — or at least keep a straight face.

If your sweetie shudders every time you spoon up spinach or green beans, keep trying — it can take up to 15 times before a baby accepts a new food.

The problem: Your baby is constipated after you start solids

If your baby is pooping less often than before — or grunting and tensing up every time she passes stool — her new diet may be to blame. Check in with the doctor, then try cutting back on the more binding foods, like bananas, potatoes and rice cereal.

Add more fiber-rich foods such as fruits and veggies to the menu, especially prunes.

The problem: Your baby has gas after you start solids

Your darling’s developing digestive system is working overtime as it learns to absorb food, so sometimes she gets constipated and other times she gets gassy— all perfectly normal, especially if she’s her usual happy self. But sometimes a food will make her really uncomfortable — and you’ll catch wind of it (lucky you!).

You can try giving her smaller meals more often, since usually it’s not the food that’s producing the gas, but the quantity. Your baby’s tummy is the size of her fist, so feeding her large amounts could strain her system.

The problem: Your baby gets rashes after eating certain foods

If you’ve noticed a rash around your baby’s bottom or mouth not long after you fed her, say, a scrambled egg, she may have a food allergy . Other allergic symptoms include vomiting, wheezing, watery eyes and a runny nose.

An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

If you notice any of these symptoms after introducing a new food (milk, eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat and tree nuts are the most common culprits), call the pediatrician. If the symptoms are mild, your doctor may tell you to serve up the food again to confirm your baby’s actually allergic to it.

If your little one has the same reaction, take that food out of rotation and reintroduce it only when the doctor gives the all-clear. The good news? Many babies eventually outgrow food allergies.

The problem: Your baby won’t self-feed

Ready to let your baby do more of the heavy lifting at mealtimes, but she won’t take the hint? While some babies are more cautious about changes than others, every novice eater eventually learns to feed herself.

To speed the self-feeding process along, serve up brightly colored bite-sized pieces of foods that are easy for your baby to pick up, like super-ripe cubes of cantaloupe or blueberries sliced in half, small bits of steamed broccoli or carrots, or pieces of cheese. You can also give her a spoon with a short, curved handle that’s easy for those little hands to grasp, and offer coarsely textured foods like oatmeal, which won’t slide off and frustrate her.

Try chatting about the foods you dish up — if she recognizes it, she may be more inclined to reach for it. And take note: Once your baby gets the hang of feeding herself, she won’t stop, so be sure she’s got a sturdy bib, and you’re stocked up on wipes.

The problem: Your baby makes funny noises while you feed her

Some funny noises are par for the baby course (“Is she angry? Is she pooping?”). As hard as it might be, the best action might be no action at all. If she gets your attention by grunting and gurgling, she might be tempted to keep doing it — instead of opening up for a spoonful of bananas.

When to call your doctor about baby feeding problems

As long as your baby is gaining weight — and your pediatrician is happy with her growth — there’s a good chance that she’s getting all the nutrition she needs. Just keep in mind, too, that after the age of 1, your little one’s growth will slow down a bit — especially compared to the rapid gains that she made in the first few months of her life.

Still, if you suspect that your child’s diet is falling short, don’t hesitate to call your pediatrician, who can help ensure that she’s getting the nutrients she needs.