What to Pack When Traveling With Baby

what to pack when traveling with baby, open, yellow child-size suitcase on purple background

Wondering what to pack for a baby's (and your own) comfort when traveling? Here is a checklist of all the essential items you’ll need for an easy-going trip.

Traveling with babies can be tricky, but it doesn't have to be a major struggle. The key to an easy-going vacation is to make sure you have everything your baby may need.

When can you travel with your baby?

How you're traveling with your little one will certainly influence when you can make the trip, as well as what to pack. Most doctors recommend avoiding unnecessary travel (particularly by air) with very young infants since their immune systems are still developing. (And honestly, who feels like jetting off to Cancun a few weeks after giving birth, anyway?)

So if you’re traveling by plane with your baby , talk to your pediatrician first before booking tickets. Though there's no official approved age for flying, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) strongly discourages air travel with very young babies, since it can increase a newborn's risk of getting sick.

It's especially risky to fly with a baby or a toddler during the COVID-19 pandemic, as children younger than 5 are not eligible yet for the vaccine, making them particularly vulnerable to the virus and specifically the Delta variant.

Some airlines might not accept passengers younger than a certain age either, so check with yours about any age restrictions before buying your tickets.

Most major airlines allow you to travel on domestic flights with your little one in your lap until she’s 2 years old for free. But the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the AAP do not recommend doing this, instead advising that your baby travels in her own seat strapped into a compatible car seat or safety restraint designed for air travel.

This will better protect her in the case of turbulence or other issues. (Worth noting: Not all car seats are approved for use on airplanes, so look for one with an FAA-approved label.)

If you do wind up deciding to travel with baby in her own seat, you'll have to either buy a plane ticket for your little one or ask the airline whether they would allow you to use a free empty seat next to yours if there's one available. If your airline lets you do that, your best bet is to travel during less busy days and times to up your chances that you'll have an empty seat next to you.

What to pack for your baby in a carry-on bag

When you're traveling by plane, you'll have to follow TSA and airline guidelines for what can be brought in your carry-on and checked bag, so factor that into your baby packing list. Many airlines allow you to bring diaper bags , breast pumps and car seats on board in addition to your allowed carry-on bags — but check with your carrier before flying to be sure. (You might have to check your stroller at the gate, but can still use it in the airport.)

Formula and breast milk that you take on board are exempt from the TSA’s 3.4 ounces rule for liquids (they can be brought in carry-on bags in "reasonable amounts," along with juice), but you’ll still have to screen them separately from the rest of your stuff and potentially go through additional security checks.

Remember that all of your kiddo’s accessories — like strollers and car seats — will also have to be screened via X-ray, so be sure to factor in extra time to go through security. Expect to carry your baby through security too.

Traveling by car is a bit more flexible (and likely safer in the COVID-19 era), and thus might make figuring out your baby packing list a bit easier. The most important thing is having a properly-installed car seat to keep your baby safe. Ideally, someone should ride in the backseat with your little one to keep an eye on her and keep her occupied while she’s awake. The AAP advises taking breaks every two to three hours to change diapers, feed your baby and stretch your legs.

Wondering what to stash in your carry-on bag for baby? Here's a list so you don't have to make one for every new trip you take together:

Diapers: two days' and nights' worth (in case you get stuck en route)

Wipes, lots of them

A changing pad

Diaper cream (no more than 3.4 ounces if you’re flying by plane)

Two bibs

Three baby blankets that you can use as burp cloths or to cover yourself up with while breastfeeding

Two bottles (if you use them)

Change of clothes for your baby

Change of clothes for you (in case your baby spits up — or worse)

Large resealable bags to store soiled clothes in

Several pacifiers (if your baby uses one)

Food: two small jars of baby food per meal, plus snacks if your baby is eating solids; easy-to-eat snacks for you; formula if you're not breastfeeding

Activities: a couple of favorite soft toys and books plus a few brand new ones

Infant acetaminophen or ibuprofen, depending on baby's age

Antibacterial wipes and hand sanitizer

Cellphone and cellphone charger

Passports (if you’re traveling internationally )

What to pack in your baby's suitcase

Babies require a lot of stuff, even when traveling. (Sorry, light packers!) Consider this packing list an overview of what you’d need once you arrive at your destination:

Diapers and wipes

Diaper cream

Baby wash

Body lotion

Sunscreen

Infant nail clippers or a nail file (if you'll be away more than a week)

A first-aid kit : Pack any medications your baby might need, bandages, an antibiotic ointment, your pediatrician's number, and outlet covers for babyproofing .

Breast pump plus storage for milk, or formula if you use it

An extra bottle or two if you need it

Baby food: enough to last the whole trip if your baby is eating solids (or you can buy more when you get there for longer trips)

Portable cooler and ice packs

A bottle brush

Infant utensils and a sippy cup if your baby uses one

Resealable bags in different sizes to store snacks and soiled baby clothes

Clothes, socks, booties or shoes; pack two outfits for each day you'll be away, plus two extra ones

Lightweight stroller or baby carrier

Car seat (even if you're not traveling by car!)

Portable feeding seat (if your baby is sitting up and eating solids)

Baby monitor (if your baby will be sleeping in another room)

Playmat

Weather-specific clothes like bathing suits, sun hats, winter coats, gloves, winter hats, etc.

Extra baby toys, teethers and books

Remember that if you’re traveling by car, you'll need your car seat properly installed the backseat to strap baby into while you're driving rather than packed away somewhere. You might also want your stroller or baby carrier more easily accessible for when you have to make stops on your car trip.

If you’re flying, check your airline’s policy on bringing strollers, car seats and other baby gear on board versus in checked baggage. You might be able to check a stroller for free at the gate, for example, so you can use it at the airport.

Happy travels!