Baby Medicine Cabinet Essentials

Minor updates to reflect latest guidelines.

Baby Health and Safety

Don’t get caught without these must-have baby medicines when your little one needs them.

If you're lucky, there's a 24-hour drugstore within a short drive or walk from your home. But even with that modern convenience, the last thing you want is to make a late-night trip for fever reducer or other supplies when your baby is sick or hurt.

A better bet: a well-stocked baby medicine cabinet. Having those essentials in the house, such as an infant thermometer , pain reliever and first aid supplies , can also give you peace of mind at a potentially stressful moment.

Not sure what you need to keep on hand? We’ve got you covered with the ultimate baby medicine cabinet checklist, below, but you can also consult your pediatrician about what's recommended for an at-home kit.

Your baby medicine cabinet checklist

Here’s what you’ll likely need in the case of illness, a cut or scrape, or a skin rash :

Baby fever medicine and pain reliever

Never give any child under 24 months old acetaminophen (Tylenol) or any other OTC medication without first getting your pediatrician's okay. Babies 3 months and older may be given the green light for acetaminophen to bring down a fever, but be sure to ask your doctor before giving it to any infant under 12 weeks.

Older babies who are at least 6 months of age may be given ibuprofen — but again, only with your practitioner's approval. And never give a child of any age aspirin, as it’s been linked to stomach bleeding and a liver illness called Reye’s syndrome. You should always ask your doctor if you’re unsure how to dose any medication.

Baby skin care

Your baby’s oh-so-velvety skin may become dry or chapped, so a supply of hypoallergenic baby lotion (like Cetaphil) is smart. Next up, you’ll need diaper rash cream , either a petroleum-based pick like A&D Ointment or one with zinc oxide (such as Desitin), plus baby oil or mineral oil for a case of cradle cap.

Unscented petroleum jelly is also good for dry chins and cheeks, as well as using a rectal thermometer. Calamine lotion or hydrocortisone cream (generally considered safe when followed with directions or under your doctor’s care) can treat insect bites and other rashes.

Baby first aid supplies

Add in a pair of tweezers in case of splinters and a digital thermometer (though your baby may protest, taking her temperature rectally is most accurate). Also, rubbing alcohol or alcohol wipes are good for cleaning the thermometer.

While adhesive tape and gauze can fix up a scrape, don’t use adhesive bandages since your baby can choke on them if they come loose. Cotton balls are for cleaning baby’s eyes at bath time and nail clippers keep nails short and prevent your baby from scratching herself.

Other medications

Antibiotic cream, like Bacitracin, is useful for small cuts and scratches (those tiny fingernails are sharp!), as is a rehydration fluid, such as Pedialyte, for diarrhea. But always talk to your doctor before using it.

And when it comes to syrup of ipecac, skip keeping it in your baby’s medicine cabinet. Once used to induce vomiting in case of poisoning, it’s no longer considered safe or helpful. If you're concerned that your baby has swallowed something dangerous, call the Poison Control Center at 800-222-1222, or call 911.

Other medical supplies

A medicine dropper or syringe is very important for dispensing medication accurately — don’t use a teaspoon from your kitchen drawer. You’ll also want saline nose drops or spray and a bulb syringe (also known as a nasal aspirator) for clearing your baby's stuffy nose.

A cold-mist vaporizer or humidifier can relieve cold symptoms, but don’t stock up on over-the-counter cough and cold medicines , as they aren't safe for babies and toddlers and can cause dangerous side effects.

For a gassy tummy , gas drops or gripe water are nice to have on hand too.

Childproofing your baby’s medicine cabinet

While babies probably can’t reach the medicine cabinet over the sink, she’ll soon be a toddler who can climb pretty quickly. Plus, you may have curious older kids in the house too, which means it’s a good idea to childproof the medicine cabinet with a safety lock. Always store medications, soap, mouthwash and shampoo in a locked spot out of reach of babies and toddlers.

With a full baby medicine cabinet, you’ll be able to treat your infant’s skin, colds and fever, and tiny boo-boos quickly and efficiently. But before you give out any kind of medication, make sure you read the label carefully to be certain it’s both age-appropriate and you have the correct dosage. Got questions? If you’re ever in doubt, ask your pediatrician or pharmacist for help.