Whether you're a total beginner or experienced yogi, all moms-to-be can benefit from this relaxing prenatal yoga flow.

There's a reason why prenatal yoga is considered one of the all-time best exercises for pregnant women. When you take a doctor-approved prenatal yoga class, not only do you benefit from all the usual perks of exercising during pregnancy (think less bloat, more energy and a serious mood boost), but prenatal yoga is also designed to help you master strengthening moves and breath exercises that can help during labor. Not to mention, prenatal yoga is totally relaxing and a great way to connect with your body — and your baby.

If you don't have a prenatal yoga studio near you, have been intimidated to attend or simply are too tired to schedule a class (no judgment), the good news is that it's easy to practice prenatal yoga from the comfort of your home.

In this video, Obé Fitness certified yoga instructor Francesca Valarezo demonstrates a basic prenatal yoga flow that will leave you feeling blissful.

Total beginners and experienced yogis alike can benefit from this workout, which helps you stretch and strengthen from head to toe. In the 10-minute video, you'll complete a series of yoga poses in a row (this is known as a flow). Here are a few of the positions you can expect:

Cat-Cow: Valarezo demonstrates a pregnancy-friendly version of this classic move. The movements gently stretch your spine and sacrum, the bones at the back of the pelvis.

Hip and Wrist Circles: By moving back and forth with your hands turned in, you'll lubricate and open up your joints and stretch the muscles in your wrists.

Child's Pose: Keeping your knees wide will ensure there's plenty of room for your bump as you stretch your spine, hips and arms.

Downward-Facing Dog: This move works the backs of your legs and tones your arms. Keeping your feet wide makes the position more comfortable for moms-to-be.

Forward Fold: If you're in the second or third trimester, you may want to use blocks or place your hands on your knees in this pose, Valarezo says.

Low Lunge: Once again, you may want to place your hands on a block when entering this pose, which helps open up your hips.

Pyramid Fold: By keeping your legs straight and bending over, you'll open up your chest and gently stretch your hamstrings and thighs.

Modified Plank: With your knees on the ground, you'll do a few sets of push-ups to strengthen your arms. (After all, you're going to need that upper body strength to carry baby around soon!)

Want more prenatal fitness videos? Head to obefitness.com , an online library of more than 2,500 workout videos and 14 live classes daily. Use the code WTE30 for 30 percent off your first month.