Bathing Baby in the Big Tub

Your little fish is ready to take the plunge into that big pond as soon as she’s sitting well on her own. Just keep these big-tub tips in mind, and the transition to deeper waters should be smooth sailing.

Put safety first. It only takes a second for a baby to slip under the water — and it can happen even if you’re using a tub seat or ring. So watch your little minnow every minute of every bath — and always stay within arm’s reach. Have your supplies at hand before you put your baby in the tub, and if you absolutely have to fetch something you forgot, wrap her in a towel and take her with you. And since wet baby bottoms are slippery bottoms, the tub bottom shouldn’t be. Place a skid-free bath mat or a towel under her bum to prevent slips and slides. Test the temperature. Test the waters. Set your hot-water heater at 120 degrees Fahrenheit or below, and always test the water with your elbow or wrist before you plunk your porpoise in for a scrub a dub dub in the tub. Make the move gradually. Wade in. One way to ease your baby — and yourself — into the big-tub is to make the move gradually. Give a couple of baths with her familiar little tub placed inside the empty big tub. You’ll get used to washing her inside the big-tub — she’ll get used to being inside of it. Add a few toys. Add a fleet of fun. You don’t need pricy water toys to make a splash in the big tub. Your little dipper will have a boat-load of fun with a couple of plastic cups and containers she can float, sink, fill, and pour with. And of course, don’t forget the rubber ducky!

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

What to Do if Your Baby Hates the Bath Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Bathing With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Making Bathtime Fun for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Bathe Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

What to Do When Your Toddler Suddenly Hates Baths Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

Benefits of Water Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Care for Newborn Skin Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

How to Transition Your Baby From a Bassinet to a Crib Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Swim Lessons for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Protect Babies and Toddlers in the Heat Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's How to Establish a Bedtime Routine for Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The Benefits of Water Birth (and When to Get Out of the Tub) Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

Is It Safe to Take Baths While You're Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window