Bathing With Your Baby

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

Is it safe to take a bath with your baby? And if so, what do you need to know before you climb into the tub with your little one?

It can be more than okay to bathe with your baby! For starters, what better way to shower your little one with love and boost bonding than to cuddle skin-to-skin? Bathing your baby in a tub of warm water can also soothe a crying jag: Your baby will probably calm down as she feels your body against hers, along with the warm water and change of scenery.

Another plus to bathing with your baby? You’re bound to get a sense of well-being, and that’s sure to wash over her. Some moms enjoy breastfeeding in the bath since the warm water can help with the letdown of milk. And taking a bath with your baby can even be a time-saver: After you’ve washed her (and snuck in a snuggle or two), hand her off to your partner and finish up with a little private tub-time.

Of course, bathing with a baby is a whole different ball game from sudsing up solo. Some things to keep in mind:

Wait until she’s old enough. Don’t submerge your baby in water until her umbilical cord drops off and her navel has healed. Stick to sponge baths and turn to other bonding tactics, such as kangaroo care (holding your baby’s bare body against your bare chest) until then.

Make sure the water is just right . It should be body temperature or a tiny bit warmer (use a thermometer if you’re not sure) and no deeper than two or three inches. It's also a good idea to set the water heater thermostat in your house to 120 F or lower to avoid accidental burns (sometimes parents add more water during the bath if it's getting cold). This is especially important when bathing with older babies and children who "want to do it themselves" and can turn on the faucet.

Gather everything you’ll need before you get into the tub, including any items you’ll use to bathe your baby (body wash, shampoo , washcloths, towels). If you forget something, skip it or take your baby with you if you must have it now. Never, never leave your child alone in the tub, not even for a second.

Step into the water sans baby. Do not try to climb into the (slippery) tub while holding your (slippery) little one. Place her in her bouncy seat or car seat beside the bath, get in yourself, and then reach over for her. Better yet, have your partner hand her to you.

Get a grip. If your tub doesn’t have a nonslip mat, lay one down now so that you don’t slide around: Even if you’re sitting, your baby could easily take a nosedive if you slip. And when you’re taking a bath with your baby, keep both hands on her at all times. Try bending your knees and letting your little one recline against your thighs facing you.

Keep her wet and warm. Use a plastic cup to pour water over your baby’s body from time to time — that’ll keep her from getting chilly.

Make a safe exit. When baby bathtime is over, reverse the steps you followed to get into the tub: Place your baby into her bouncy or car seat and tuck a towel around her, or hand her to someone else before you get out.

The real beauty of bathing with your baby is that it’s an experience you can share for months to come. Of course, by then, taking a bath with your little one will be more about water play than snuggling, but that’s okay.

Have a splash!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Baby’s First Bath , March 2019 KidsHealth from Nemours, HealthyChildren.org, Breastfeeding FAQs: Pain and Discomfort , February 2015. KidsHealth from Nemours, HealthyChildren.org, Taking Your Preemie Home , March 2015.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

What to Do if Your Baby Hates the Bath Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Bathe Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Care for Newborn Skin Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Should You Try an Infant Massage on Your Baby? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Making Bathtime Fun for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's When Babies Can Start Sleeping With a Blanket Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

What to Do When Your Toddler Suddenly Hates Baths Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Benefits of a Sitz Bath After Birth Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

How to Swaddle Your Baby Safely — A Step-by-Step Guide Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Here's How to Establish a Bedtime Routine for Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Benefits of Water Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Is It Safe to Take Baths While You're Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

How to Safely Support a Newborn's Head and Neck Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

The Benefits of Water Birth (and When to Get Out of the Tub) Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window