Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

italian girls names

If you’re thinking of giving your baby girl a name that harkens to your family’s Italian roots, or you just want to choose a baby name that’s a little uncommon, consider these Italian baby names for girls.

Italian is a romance language, so it's no surprise that its feminine names often have flair. Even the Italian versions of common English names, like Alessandra (for Alexandra), sound romantic and dramatic.

Our list of Italian baby girl names includes some of the currently popular monikers in Italy, plus a few lesser used yet equally beautiful options. Oh, and here's a pronunciation clue: In Italian, there are no silent letters — so as with Italian baby boy names , you hear and pronounce every letter in the word.

Still searching for the perfect baby name? Check out the thousands of adorable choices in the What to Expect app .

Alessandra. The Italian version of Alexandra, without the sharp "X" sound, has some pretty lofty origins — it means "she who protects mankind." That's a pretty cool name!

Alessia. Like Alessandra, the name Alessia is associated with one who protects. It's the Italian equivalent of Alexis.

Aurora. We like this one because it's pretty and unusual. Long before Aurora was the name of Sleeping Beauty, she was the Roman goddess of the sunrise. The name is associated with light and dawn.

Celeste. Another Italian baby girl name with ancient origins, Celeste is associated with the Latin word for "celestial." It also means "sky blue" in Italian.

Chiara. Pronounced kee-ar-ah, this lovely girl's name means "clear," or "clarity." In English, it might be Clare or Clarissa.

Francesca. This eternally popular Italian name (whose male equivalent, Francesco, is equally popular) derives from medieval Latin and means "free." The ce is soft, pronounced che .

Ginevra. Odds are low that they'll be another baby named Ginevra in your daughter's day-care class. It's not clear how the name Ginevra — pronounced gin-ev-rah — made it to Italy, since it's of Welsh origin. Can you guess its English equivalent? It's Jennifer!

Giorgia. Pronounced just like Georgia in English, this popular Italian baby girl name also has its roots in ancient Greek, meaning "farmer." Whether your little Giorgia grows up to be a farmer we couldn't say — it's just a fun variation on the English spelling of Georgia!

Giulia. The Italian equivalent of Julia (and pronounced the same), Giulia is a perennially popular girl's name in Italy. Its origins go way back to the founding of Rome: The Julia (Iulia in Latin) family, including Julius Caesar, were said to be direct descendants of the god Jupiter.

Giada. Jade is already a lovely, unusual name, and its Italian equivalent, Giada, pronounced gee-ah-dah, is all the more unique.

Noemi. The Italian version of Naomi (which is a Hebrew name) is pronounced no-em-ee and means "pleasantness" or "delight."

Simona. "God has heard my voice" — that's what Simona means in Hebrew, from which the name originates. What a lovely way to give thanks for your new baby girl!

Serena. This name means "peaceful" or "quiet." The ideal moniker for a future sensible and confident leader!

Sofia. Spelled with an "f" instead of a "ph," Sofia is one of the most popular Italian baby girl names of the last 10 years. The name originates from the Greek word for "wisdom;" for Italians, it also refers to Saint Sophia, a Christian martyr.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Elizabeth Heath is a travel and lifestyle writer and editor based in central Italy. She is fluent in Italian and has lived in Italy for 12 years. She lives on top of a hill with her husband, bilingual school-aged daughter, four dogs and a turtle. Heath's work appears in The Washington Post , Travel + Leisure , TravelingMom.com , FamilyHandyman.com and a number of other outlets. She is the author of The Architecture Lover's Guide to Rome . Heath grew up in Florida, where she earned a BFA in fine art from Ringling College of Art and Design, a MA in humanities from the University of South Florida, and completed doctoral studies in archaeology and anthropology.

Updates history

September 25, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,740 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Gorgeous Chinese Baby Girl Names That Inspire Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Cute, Quirky, and Easy to Say: 19 Adorable Welsh Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Fierce and Fearless: 9 Baby Names for Girls With Superhero Energy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window