Benadryl Recall Issued Over Child Poisoning Risk

Benadryl recall

Here's how to know if your bottle has been recalled, plus what to do next.

Arsell Inc. just recalled certain bottles of Benadryl Liquid Elixir due to packaging that is not child-resistant, making the medication too easy for curious hands to open. This defect raises the risk of poisoning if the medication is swallowed by a young child, according to the Consumer Products Safety Commission (CPSC). Trusted SourceCPSCArsell Recalls Benadryl Liquid Elixir 100 mL Bottle Due to Risk of Child Poisoning; Violation of Federal Regulation for Child Resistant Packaging; Sold on Amazon.comSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCPSCArsell Recalls Benadryl Liquid Elixir 100 mL Bottle Due to Risk of Child Poisoning; Violation of Federal Regulation for Child Resistant Packaging; Sold on Amazon.comSee All Sources

Benadryl is an antihistamine used to treat allergic reactions, pain and itching from things like insect bites and poison ivy. Trusted SourceBenadrylAbout Diphenhydramine Hydrochloride HCl: The Active Ingredient in BENADRYLSee All Sources [2] While the recall impacts adult versions of the medication, health authorities warn that the packaging issue could lead to accidental ingestion by young kids — which could be dangerous and even fatal if they consume too much.

Trusted SourceBenadrylAbout Diphenhydramine Hydrochloride HCl: The Active Ingredient in BENADRYLSee All Sources

"If there is no childproof container, a child could open it and drink an unlimited amount, leading to a serious health event," says Gina Posner , M.D., pediatrician and What to Expect medical review board member.

Here’s what to know about the recall, plus what to remember about safely handling — and storing — medications when you have kiddos.

Key Takeaways

Certain bottles of Benadryl Liquid Elixir have been recalled because the bottle is not child-resistant.

When consumed in large amounts, Benadryl can be extremely dangerous for kids.

If you have a bottle of the recalled Benadryl, throw it away in a container that children can’t access, and contact the company for a refund.

If you think your child has ingested Benadryl or any other medication by mistake, call 911 and Poison Control at 1-800-222-1222 right away.

What you need to know about the Benadryl recall

More than 2,000 bottles of Benadryl Liquid Elixir 100 ml (formulated for adults) are impacted by the recall. The bottles were sold to U.S. and Canadian customers on Amazon between July 2023 and October 2024. No injuries or incidents related to the medicine have been reported.

Plot twist: This particular version of Benadryl (Liquid Elixir) is not authorized to be sold in the United States at all, a spokesperson from Kenvue, Inc., the health company that owns Benadryl, tells What to Expect.

"Benadryl Liquid Elixir 100 ml bottle is a product manufactured in Canada for Canadian consumers," the company explains to WTE. "This product meets Health Canada’s packaging regulations, but it appears this product may have been diverted from Canada and inappropriately sold in the United States by an unauthorized third-party online seller."

Benadryl contains diphenhydramine, which is an antihistamine that’s required to be sold in child-resistant packaging under the Poison Prevention Packaging Act, a law that applies to certain over-the-counter medications, prescription drugs and household chemicals in the U.S.

This particular lot of Benadryl Liquid Elixir does not comply with the Act, which states that medications must be in "special packaging designed or constructed to be significantly difficult for children under 5 years of age to open within a reasonable time and not difficult for adults to use properly," according to the CPSC.

"We take the quality, packaging and safety of our products very seriously," says a spokesperson for Kenvue. "We are investigating this matter as the recalled lot of Benadryl Liquid Elixir is not authorized for sale in the United States."

Diphenhydramine can make children feel very sleepy, even in small doses, and it’s not recommended for use in children under the age of 6 unless your child’s doctor tells you to use it, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics. (Even then, it’s usually recommended that you give a child the children’s form of Benadryl, not the adult version.)

Gina Posner, M.D., pediatrician

"If a child accidentally has diphenhydramine or has too much of it, they may have an abnormally fast heart rate, dry mouth, psychosis, abnormal heart rhythm and even seizures or death," says Dr. Posner.

The recalled bottles are dark plastic and feature a pink and white label on the front with “Benadryl” written in blue text. The package also has a white label on the bottom with the code “X003VRIGUL” written in black text.

What to do if you have a bottle of recalled Benadryl

If you have the recalled Benadryl at home, the CPSC recommends moving it out of the sight and reach of your little ones first and foremost. It’s also important to contact Arsell for a full refund by emailing recall@arsellsupport.com .

Once you reach out, an automated message will give you details and prompt you to submit some information about yourself and your purchase.

Arsell recommends throwing the bottle in the garbage and placing the trash in a secure bin that children can’t access. While only the bottle itself is being recalled, it’s important to throw out the bottle and medicine, says the CPSC.

No other bottles of Benadryl have been recalled, so you should be fine with replacing the recalled bottle with a new one if you need to. "This recall does not impact any other Benadryl product sold in the United States or Canada," Kenvue tells What to Expect. "Benadryl is safe when taken as indicated on the product label."

But, as with any medication, it’s important to make sure anything you buy has child-proof packaging — and that it stays out of reach of your little ones, says Dr. Posner, ideally in a locked cabinet or container. Once you’re done using a medication, put it back in safe storage. Trusted SourceAAPDiphenhydramine Dosing TableSee All Sources [3]

Diphenhydramine Dosing Table

If your curious child gets their hands on this Benadryl product — or any other medication — and accidentally consumes it, or if you notice serious side effects like nausea, vomiting, extreme fatigue, dry mouth, agitation, confusion or seizures, call 911 right away. Then, contact Poison Control at 1-800-222-1222 so they can help guide you through what to do next.

Sources

Arsell Recalls Benadryl Liquid Elixir 100 mL Bottle Due to Risk of Child Poisoning; Violation of Federal Regulation for Child Resistant Packaging; Sold on Amazon.com

Show in the article

About Diphenhydramine Hydrochloride HCl: The Active Ingredient in BENADRYL

Show in the article

Diphenhydramine Dosing Table

Show in the article

Poison Prevention Packaging Act Business Guidance