Benefits of Water Play for Babies and Toddlers

water play activities for babies and toddlers

Here's why your little one takes to water like a fish, and how you can (safely!) maximize the fun with water play.

Splashing in the tub, pouring out cups of water over and over and, of course, swimming! Water play is a huge hit with babies and toddlers — and it’s a great way to distract a cranky tot with a new activity or to simply splash about when the weather’s hot.

Want to dive into some water play with your child? Here’s what this term means exactly, a few ways to encourage it, as well as some important safety tips. Grab a few towels and your bathing suit and get ready for some wet and wild fun!

What is water play?

Water play is exactly what it sounds like — H2O plus any appropriate items that can be used to scoop, pour, sprinkle and more. All you need are a few plastic cups (no glass, please!), buckets, sponges and lightweight toys to float on the water’s surface. Older kids could use large spoons, plastic eye droppers, mini watering cans and other containers that require more dexterity.

To make water play happen, set your baby or toddler up out on the lawn or patio or inside in a spot that you don’t mind getting wet (the laundry room or basement is ideal for this). Line the area with old towels, pop a hat on your tot if she’s outside, and then let her go to town.

What are the benefits of water play?

Water play is a sensory extravaganza as children feel the wetness, hear the splashes, see the bubbles and waves, and maybe even taste a few droplets.

It's also a great learning experience: As your budding scientist pours, splashes and laughs, she is observing cause and effect, experimenting with water's fascinatingly fluid properties and being introduced to basic physics (what floats and what sinks).

And when kids play in water, they’re developing gross motor skills, as it takes some oomph to push water around and to carry it to and fro.

A child’s word bank can also get a big deposit from water fun since creative play is a part of this activity. You might ask your tot whether she’s running a car wash, scrubbing her teddy bear or cooling off on a sweaty day, for example.

Best water play activities for babies and toddlers

How to encourage water play: 0-12 months

Infant water play is really parent-and-baby time, so put on some clothes that you don’t mind getting wet and have some fun with your little one. Here’s how to do it:

Bath tub play. You’ll do this a couple of times a week, of course, but make the most of it by adding colorful cups and showing your baby how the water fills and pours out.

Tray water. Fill your baby's high-chair tray with a half-inch of water and let her experience water from this angle.

Soak it up. Sponges are so fun! Demonstrate how they take in water and then squeeze them out. Your baby will probably prefer to gnaw on the sponge, so be sure it’s a super clean one.

Blow bubbles. Amp up the laughs with bubbles outside or in the tub. Show your child how small bubbles float on the water while others pop and make you wet.

How to encourage water play: 1-2 years

Now that your new toddler has mastered grabbing and grasping (and, let’s face it, throwing too!), water play is about to get a lot more exciting. Try these fun activities:

Kiddie pool. Sit with your child inside a small pool with a few buckets and floating toys (of course, you'll need to be vigilant about sunscreen ).

Set up the sprinkler. Tiny tots adore watching a sprinkler arc overhead and are even more tickled when it gently rains down on them.

Turkey baster. Squirting water from this kitchen item helps to hone hand-eye coordination — plus it’s bound to make your child giggle when she gets you all wet.

Food dye. Just a few drops of food-safe coloring in different bowls of water can transform your afternoon activity (and it teaches the names of each hue).

Float your boat. Experiment with the concepts of light and heavy. Arrange some small toys near a couple of buckets and learn which items float on the surface and which sink.

How to encourage water play: 2-3 years

Toddlers are more adept at water play, which means you can expand the games and pretend play with toys that are more engaging. Try the following water play ideas with your bigger kid:

Water the flowers. A pint-sized watering can is an ideal way for kids to learn how fast (or slow) water flows out of just a few holes. And if you point your tot in the direction of your container pots, she’ll complete a very handy task for you!

Make a dam. Pushing rocks, twigs and dirt together to make a dam for water teaches your child the power of H20. First, it’ll trickle through and, if there’s enough water behind the dam, the levee will give way and wash the debris away.

Water colors. Set up paper, a small brush, a cup of water and a palette of water-based paints and let your child smear and create with every shade of the rainbow.

Toy wash. Sponges and a bit of dish soap make an excellent water play game when you add in stuffed dogs, dollies and anything else that needs cleaning.

Water play safety tips

Always keep safety at the top of the list before engaging in any water play. Here’s what you need to know to stay safe with water toys , in the bath or by the pool.

Gather toys ahead of time. Don’t start to play with water before you have all you need at hand, including gear, towels and sun protection if you’re outside.

Never leave her side. Babies and toddlers can drown in as little as a few inches of water so never, ever walk away from your child when she’s playing with water or in the tub.

Watch for slippery surfaces. Decals on the bottom of the tub and water shoes on your tot’s feet can help prevent a slip or fall when playing with water.

Beware of buckets. Babies’ heads are proportionately large and heavy for their bodies, which means if they lean into a bucket of water, they may struggle to get out again.

Secure pools. Pool alarms and covers can help with pool safety , but the best way to prevent drowning is with a four-sided 48-inch fence that’s self-closing and self-latching.

Learn to swim. Research has found that swim lessons and water survival training can help reduce the risk of drowning in kids ages 1 to 4. Consider signing your tot up today.

With the right clothing, water-safe toys and vigilant supervision, water play can be an engaging and joyful experience for your baby or toddler. Water is free and easy to use, so have fun with it anytime you need a break from regular playtime activities.