Benefits of Probiotics for Toddlers

benefits of probiotics for toddlers

When it comes to diarrhea, you can use good bugs (probiotics for children) to help fight the bad ones.

Let’s face it: No matter how many times you wash your toddler’s hands, sooner or later, he’s going to pick up a bug — an ear infection, a sore throat , some kind of gastrointestinal woe — that might require an antibiotic.

While antibiotics are wonderful for wiping out bacterial infections, broad-spectrum antibiotics — ones that kill not only the bad, illness-causing bacteria, but also the good bacteria that helps keep us healthy — can come with a very inconvenient, very unpleasant drawback: diarrhea. (Talk about adding insult to your already uncomfortable, unhappy toddler.)

One way to manage antibiotic-related diarrhea while your child is on antibiotics — besides investing in extra-absorbent diapers — is to give your toddler probiotics, which are live, active, good bacteria found in supplements or foods like yogurt.

Here’s what you need to know about probiotics for toddlers.

What are probiotics?

Probiotics are live, “good” microorganisms, such as bacteria, that can help keep our tummies healthy.

Some of these good bacteria — in particular, members of the Lactobacillus , Streptococcus and Bifidobacterium groups — are similar to the trillions of other good bacteria that already live peacefully in our gut, help improve our digestion and ward off other, harmful organisms that can make us sick.

Can probiotic supplements be given to toddlers?

Yes, probiotics are generally considered safe for healthy toddlers and even infants (in fact, some infant formulas are fortified with probiotics). Still, it’s smart to ask your pediatrician which bacteria strain or brand of probiotics you should give your child — especially if you want to give him a supplement.

The reason: Dietary supplements are not regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), so there can be a lot of variability in manufacturing, and it can be hard to know exactly what you’re getting (what’s tested in a research study and what’s in a given bottle at your local drugstore may or may not be the same thing).

While you’re at it, ask your pediatrician how frequently you should give a probiotic supplement to your toddler — especially if the package instructions are unclear.

What are the benefits of probiotics for toddlers and kids?

Research shows that some probiotics can help prevent antibiotic-related diarrhea in children. For this reason, pediatricians often recommend that kids take probiotics whenever they’re on antibiotics.

Since some antibiotics wipe out good bacteria along with the infection-causing bacteria, probiotics act as the reserve corps — the reinforcements sent in to bulk up the numbers of helpful bacteria and crowd out the illness-causing bacteria.

These good little soldiers also help strengthen the intestinal lining so that bad bugs can’t multiply freely, and they may change the intestinal environment, making it more balanced and therefore less desirable for bad bacteria.

Other research has found that probiotics can shorten a bout of diarrhea in children who’ve caught an infection by about one day.

For now, at least, the strongest evidence for probiotics is for preventing and relieving the kind of diarrhea that comes with antibiotics and the infectious diarrhea that can be picked up at day care and while traveling.

What are the best types of probiotics for toddlers?

You may want to look for the following when shopping for probiotics for your toddler:

Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) : This strain has consistently been shown to help with diarrhea.

Saccharomyces boulardii: This strain is also thought to help children who have infectious diarrhea.

Keep in mind that there are lots of bacteria strains in supplement form within the Lactobacillus group as well as the Bifidobacterium group, so it’s unclear which strains may be most effective.

Ask your child's pediatrician which strain he or she specifically recommends for your child.

Best probiotic-rich foods for toddlers

Probiotics can be found in supplement form, but it’s always a good idea to find probiotics (and other nutrients, for that matter) in natural foods if you can. The good news is that probiotics are already found in healthy foods that your little one may be eating, including yogurt.

Look for yogurt brands without added sugars that specify “live, active cultures” on the carton. Some may specifically list their strains of active cultures, often Lactobacillus is written as L. acidophilus or L. rhamnosus . Take note of the expiration date, since the probiotic potency can diminish with time.

You can also find probiotics naturally in other fermented foods and soy products (although their benefits haven’t been widely studied), including:

Kimchi

Sauerkraut

Apple cider vinegar

Miso

Tempeh