Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers

best baby bath toys 2023

Baby's first bath can be nerve-wracking for new parents. Placing a tiny newborn into a slippery tub is certainly not for the faint of heart. But as time goes on, most parents come to love the ritual of giving their baby a bath — and many babies can’t seem to get enough of it. In fact, bathtime can serve as a bonding experience as well as an integral part of your baby’s bedtime routine.

Bath toys aren't necessary for infants, but as your little one gets older, toys can help keep him engaged and happy during tub time. Before you know it, your teeny little baby will be splish-splashing around and ready to play with all sorts of bath toys.

Baby bath toys are available in many different styles and materials for various age ranges. In fact, there are nearly as many toys designed and developed for use in the bath as there are toys for outside it, which can make choosing the right ones tough.

How We Chose the Best Baby Bath Toys

We consulted the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) for any safety guidance. Per their recommendations, all the toys on this list are specifically meant for babies and toddlers (ages 0-36 months) to ensure each item is safe and developmentally appropriate.

We turned to the What to Expect community to gather consensus on brands and specific bath toys for babies that real parents have used and loved. Based on their feedback, we made sure that every baby bath toy on this list:

We also prioritized BPA-free products where possible, although not everything on this list is BPA-free.

How To Clean Baby Bath Toys

Because of their constant exposure to water, bath toys are prone to developing mildew and mold if not cleaned properly. This is especially true of squirt toys and others with small crevices where water can get trapped inside. Considering how often your little one will use these toys — and how prone babies and toddlers are to putting things in their mouths — it’s really important to keep your bath toys clean. Here are some tips for getting the job done:

Empty water completely out of all toys. If it can be disassembled, do so to ensure the best possible clean.

Wipe toys down with a washcloth and some mild dish soap. Or check the product’s label to see if it’s safe to throw in the top rack of your dishwasher, which is the case for many plastic products.

Let dry completely before giving back to your child.

To help your bath toys dry out (and reduce the risk of mold and mildew buildup), enterprising WTE parents recommend storing your toys in a large mesh garment bag and hanging it up in the bathroom to air dry. When the bag itself gets grody, you can throw it in the laundry for a quick clean.

To help guide you in your search, here are the best bath toys for babies and toddlers that are sure to make your little one's bathing experience all the more joyous.

Best Overall Baby Bath Toy

The First Years Stack Up Cup Toys

Simple

affordable

loved by lots of kids

Some parents say they're a little small for toddlers

Why We Love It

An overwhelming amount of WTE parents say their babies and toddlers love playing with simple stacking cups in the bath more than any other toy. “Our babe LOVES cups in the bathtub. We have some other toys… but he always goes for the plastic cup,” says one WTE parent .

You can’t go wrong with this top-rated set , which comes with eight bright stacking cups with holes in the bottom for water play. Little hands will love fitting toy cups together and running them under water. Each cup also has big numbers on the bottom to practice counting as he gets older. Plus, they’re BPA-free, giving you extra peace of mind if baby happens to stick them in his mouth. You can also use these simple cups for other kinds of play, like in the sandbox or at a sensory bin — just make sure to wash them well!

Recommended age : 6 months and up

Material : BPA-free plastic

Weight : 4.8 ounces

Dimensions : 3.5 x 3.25 x 2.5 inches

Community Reviews

flocksofbirds we've always just done plastic cups (some of his stacking cups, which sift water through them, plus a few others of diff shapes and sizes). Simple, but cups can do so many things -- stack, float, sink, pour, dump, clap against the surface of the water or wall, fit into each other, etc. :)”

Best Rattling Bath Toy

Munchkin Float and Play Bubbles Bath Toy

Good for younger babies

doesn't leak or crack

easy to clean

Slippery when wet

so may be hard for kids to hold

Why We Love It

Each floating bubble in this bath toy set makes a unique noise that will encourage that sweet, gummy grin you love to see. Two plastic bubbles have cute animals inside, and the other two have colorful shapes that rattle as they move.

These bath toys are small enough for tiny hands to grasp and hold, and can float freely in the water, even if baby tries to sink them. Parents also love that they don’t attract mold, since there are no holes, cracks or crevices to trap water. One WTE mom says chasing after these fun toys helped her son actually enjoy baths for the first time!

Recommended age: 4 months and up

Material : BPA-free plastic

Weight : 3.2 ounces

Dimensions : 7 x 6.5 x 2.3 inches

Community Reviews

jla422 We love these”

Best Bath Toy Accessory

Munchkin White Hot Safety Bath Ducky

Easy way to keep bath temperature safe

cute

classic design

great for young babies

Not BPA-free

Why We Love It

What’s more classic than a yellow rubber ducky ? With a shape and size that’s easy for baby to grasp, your little one will love his new bath time pal. This duck also serves a purpose for parents: A blue safety disc on the bottom of the toy reveals the word “hot” when the bath water is too warm for baby (aka over 104 degrees Fahrenheit) — all for a super affordable price! It’s also water-tight to prevent mold and mildew buildup on the inside (and make it float alongside your little one in the tub). Many WTE moms report receiving this as a shower gift and finding it super useful.

Recommended age : Newborn and up

Material : Rubber

Weight : 2.82 ounces

Dimensions : 3.25 x 3 inches

Community Reviews

MBoone31 We have the duck bath thermometer that tells you how warm the water is.

Best Bath Squirt Toy

The First Years Disney Finding Nemo Baby Bath Squirt Toys

Cute

popular characters lots of kids love

Water can get stuck inside

Why We Love It

Can’t wait to introduce your baby to Finding Nemo ? Get started early with this movie-themed toy set , which includes three of the movie's main characters: Nemo, Dory and Squirt. Kids can shoot water out of each toy through the tiny hole in the characters’ mouth, or just pretend they’re swimming and splashing around the tub. Parents love that these bath toys are small enough for their little one’s tiny hands to grasp and hold, and that they’re made of durable materials.

Just keep in mind that like all squirt toys, the toys in this set need to be emptied after every bath and cleaned on a regular basis to make sure the inner chamber doesn’t get moldy.

Recommended age : 6 months and up

Material : BPA-free plastic

Weight : 0.64 ounces

Dimensions : 4 x 2 x 2 inches

Community Reviews

emcrockett We had our first tear free bath!!! The winning combo ended up being the Munchkin sit n soak tub, some Finding Nemo bath toys (introducing her to them and letting her splash the water with hands before putting her in), and covering her upper body with a cloth while in the water”

Best Boat Bath Toy

Green Toys Tugboat

BPA-free

dishwasher safe

fun to play with

A bit simplistic for some

Why We Love It

WTE parents love the eco-friendly, durable products from Green Toys, and this cute tugboat is no exception. “They are awesome! My son hasn’t been able to break these ones. Lol…he usually breaks all his toys,” says one WTE mom .

The colorful tugboat floats and has a built-in spout and handle so kids can scoop and pour water. Parents love that this toy boat is made from 100 percent recycled plastic milk containers and free of BPA, PVC and phthalates. The boat does have crevices, so it will need to be regularly cleaned. Thankfully it’s dishwasher-safe to make that part easier. The top and bottom parts of the boat come apart, too, so that it’s easier to keep dry after playtime is over.

Recommended age : 6 months and up

Materials : BPA-free recycled plastic

Weight : 0.44 pounds

Dimensions : 9 x 5.25 x 4.5 inches

Community Reviews

MamaEllisof2 We have foam numbers and letters, a few duckies, but his favorite toys are this submarine and we also have the green toys tug boat.”

Best Baby Bath Bucket

Skip Hop Zoo Stack and Pour Buckets

Loved by babies and parents

easy to use and clean

affordable

Not BPA-free

Why We Love It

Sometimes, the best bathtime solution is a simple one, such as this set of five friendly-faced buckets that let your baby splash water around while you get her clean. Each bucket has different holes in the bottom that sprinkle water out, and handles to make them easier to hold and carry. They all stack for fun play (and even easier storage), and their cheerful animal faces should brighten the mood of even the biggest bathtime haters. Once the bath is over, dry them off and stack them by the side of the tub.

Recommended age : 9 months and up

Material : Plastic

Weight : 8.8 ounces

Dimensions : 3.5 x 3.5 x 2 inches

Community Reviews

Carahh our daughter has consistently loved these for at least a year now”

kjp12 Skiphop makes little bath buckets that [my son] loves”

Best Foam Bath Toys

Baby Loovi Foam Bath Alphabet

Educational

easy to use

kids love

Some animals hard to recognize

not meant for babies

Why We Love It

Looking for a more educational bath toy for your little one? Check out this fun foam alphabet . “They stick to the side of the tub and don’t get moldy!” says one WTE mom . You’ll get 52 pieces, each shaped like an animal — think giraffes, zebras and alligators — or like a different letter of the alphabet. Your little one will love helping them float or sticking them on the wall and rearranging them into different patterns and shapes, all while learning his letters, colors and animals. It also comes with a clear plastic bag for easy storage — just remember to let them dry well before packing them up.

Recommended age : 3 years and up

Material : Non-toxic foam

Weight : 4.8 ounces

Dimensions : 4 x 4 x 0.4 inches

Community Reviews

muffin8744 My son likes the foam letters and numbers that you can stick to the tub walls. We have little boats he loves to play with too.”

Best Book for Bathtime

'Barnyard Bath!' by Sandra Boynton

Waterproof

comes with free washcloth

from beloved children's author

Fairly simplistic story

Why We Love It

Meet the waterproof cousin of the classic baby book Barnyard Dance! , which you might remember from your own childhood. Even younger babies will be entertained by this book, as readers are prompted to help “wash” the animals depicted on its pages with the adorable included washcloth. In addition to being waterproof, this bath toy floats!

Recommended age: 1 to 4 years

Material : Non-toxic polyurethane foam and EVA

Page count : 10

Weight : 3.68 ounces

Dimensions : 7 x 1.5 x 7.4 inches

Community Reviews

jennlz We are big Sandra Boynton fans! She has tons of fun books!”

jtl-0264 LOVE Sandra Boynton books!!! My fav!! I have almost all of her books.

Best Bath Crayons

Munchkin Draw Bath Crayons

Easy to use and clean

fun colors

Some parents say they break easily

some surfaces might be harder to clean than others

Why We Love It

Consider this a time when drawing on the walls is actually A-OK. These washable, non-toxic crayons can be used in the bath, allowing your toddler to scribble on tile walls and on the sides of the tub itself to his heart’s content. They’re retractable, so you can click them up for more color, and then press them down before you store them.

When bathtime is over, simply wipe away the art with a damp cloth and a little elbow grease. Many WTE parents say they’re typically easier to clean than competitor bath crayons. “We have been using them for over a year (probably on our 4th set or so), and they always wipe off very easily with water,” reports one happy WTE parent .

Recommended age: 3 years and up

Materials: N/A

Weight: 1.41 ounces

Dimensions: 0.59 x 2.95 x 3.54 inches

Community Reviews

lilmissAng My son is obsessed with his bath tub crayons. The munchkin brand ones are super easy to wipe off the tub compared to crayola.”

ryleigh1020 My munchkin ones wipe off very easily. I usually just wipe the tub quickly with [my child’s] dirty washcloth as it drains and haven’t had a problem.

Best STEM Bath Toy

Boon Pipes Building Toddler Bath Tub Toy

Engaging

easy to use

Some parents find them harder to clean

Why We Love It

This creative water toy is guaranteed to stimulate and challenge your little one — at least, that’s what the 12,000 five-star reviews on Amazon promise! The set has five plastic pipes that can be played with individually, or attached together in infinite combinations. Each pipe has a silicone suction cup on the back so your little one can stick his creation on the wall of the tub and control the flow of water, teaching him about cause and effect. You can also buy more pipes or cogs separately to add on to the fun.

Recommended age : 12 months and up

Material : BPA-free plastic

Weight : N/A

Dimensions : 5 x 1.25 inches (per pipe)

Community Reviews

nicolebells We got her these Boon bath cogs and pipes and they provide endless fun.

Best Bath Toy Storage

Tub Cubby Bath Toy Organizer

Easy to use

comes with hanging materials

easy to clean

Some parents had issues with the suction mounting

Why We Love It

As mentioned, many WTE parents like to store their bath toys in a large garment bag so they can easily dry out. If you’re into that idea, but want a slightly more elegant solution, check out the Tub Cubby . The hanging organizer has three small mesh pockets and then a large mesh pocket below — perfect for storing toys, baby shampoo, bubble bath and more. The sturdy mesh material allows lots of air flow on all sides to help toys dry, and is made out of a mold-resistant material for extra peace of mind. It also comes with two different options for mounting depending on what kind of space you have: adhesive hooks for textured walls and suction cup hooks for smooth surfaces. Toss the bag in the washing machine when it needs a refresh.

Recommended age: 1 year and up

Materials : BPA-free polyester mesh

Weight : N/A

Dimensions : 14 x 20 inches

Other Factors To Consider When Purchasing a Baby Bath Toy

When shopping for bath toys for your baby or toddler, it’s important to keep a few things in mind:

Easy-to-dry shapes: Bath toys get wet (that’s kind of the point….), so you’ll need them to dry quickly and completely to prevent mold and mildew. Avoid toys that seem hollow or have lots of nooks and crannies that might stay damp.

Material: As mentioned, bath toys can develop mold or mildew if you’re not careful. Look for materials that don’t retain moisture and that are easy to wipe clean, like BPA-free plastic or silicone. Even better if the toys are dishwasher-safe for easier cleaning.

Age appropriate-ness: Per the AAP, age recommendations on toys are a crucial way to understand how safe a particular product is for your child and whether it’s developmentally appropriate. (Read: Don’t give your baby a toy designed for 3-year-olds!) Products should also be larger than your child’s mouth and shouldn’t have any small, easily detached parts he could choke on.

Educational elements: Since bathtime will become part of your regular routine, you may want to consider bath toys that offer some sort of educational benefit, be it interesting textures, funny sounds or toys that help teach baby new vocabulary. While not every single toy has to be educational, it can be a nice perk.

American Academy of Pediatrics, How to Buy Safe Toys , December 2021.

Your Next Read

Making Bathtime Fun for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

26 Toys for 18-Month-Olds, According to Child Play Experts and Parents Alike Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

Benefits of Water Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Bathe Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

6 Best Standing Toys to Help Your Baby Meet a Milestone Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Clean Baby Toys By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

When Do Babies Start Playing With Toys? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do When Your Toddler Suddenly Hates Baths Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do if Your Baby Hates the Bath Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Crafts for Toddlers Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Swim Lessons for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Games to Play With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window