The Best Pregnancy-Safe Acne Treatments, Backed By Doctors and More than 1,300 Moms

Best Pregnancy Safe Acne Treatments

Quick Summary

he best pregnancy-safe acne treatments are free from retinoids, parabens, and hydroquinone. They're also rich in glycolic acid and niacinamide, which are known to fight acne.

The hormonal ups and downs of pregnancy can be unpredictable and lead to a host of unanticipated side effects, with acne being one of them. However, the causes of these breakouts differ from those in non-pregnant individuals. Not to mention many skincare ingredients need to be avoided during pregnancy, so finding a pregnancy-safe acne treatment that effectively clears your skin is essential.

According to Kate Viola, M.D., a board-certified dermatologist at Dermatology Partners , the various changes that occur during pregnancy — such as increased blood flow, oil production, and fluctuating hormones — can lead to acne. "Physiological changes [during pregnancy] include increased skin sensitivity, pigmentation, superficial vessels, and dryness, as well as worsening of pre-existing skin conditions," she explains. Women undergoing hormonal fertility treatments, like in vitro fertilization (IVF) or intrauterine insemination (IUI), may also experience heightened skin sensitivity, which can contribute to acne.

However, as mentioned earlier, your usual acne treatment might not be safe during this time. While you should ultimately consult with your dermatologist and OB/GYN to find a pregnancy-safe acne treatment, we’ve compiled a list of such treatments to help get you started.

How We Chose the Best Pregnancy-Safe Acne Treatments

To compile our list of the best available pregnancy-safe acne treatments, we first consulted four dermatologists: Anne Truitt , M.D., a board-certified dermatologist in San Diego, California; Kate Viola , M.D., a board-certified dermatologist at Dermatology Partners in Sparks, Maryland; Stephanie Saxton-Daniels , M.D., a board-certified dermatologist at Westlake Dermatology in Dallas, Texas; and Gary Goldfaden, M.D., a board-certified dermatologist and founder of Goldfaden MD . We spoke to them, and referenced recommendations from the American Academy of Dermatology , to determine which acne-fighting ingredients were safe to use during pregnancy and which ingredients to avoid. Based on this, we eliminated any products that contained the following:

Retinoids/Retinol: Dr. Viola notes that because vitamin A is essential for fetal development, "the vitamin A in retinoids/retinol can easily be transferred from mother to baby via the placenta in amounts far larger than needed, making it a no-go during pregnancy." This can potentially lead to developmental issues, so be cautious of any treatments containing this ingredient.

Parabens: Dr. Goldfaden points out that "parabens have been shown to cause cell changes in animals and should be avoided not only during pregnancy but always."

We also excluded products with high doses of salicylic acid. According to Dr. Goldfaden, high doses of salicylic acid can act as blood thinners, which in some cases could lead to miscarriage when used continuously. Both the American Academy of Dermatology and Dr. Viola agree that using salicylic acid in small doses — around 2 percent or less — and limiting its use to small areas of the face should not cause harmful side effects.

After compiling an initial list of 20 pregnancy-safe acne treatments, we further narrowed it down based on results from the 2024 Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Awards , where over 1,300 moms voted on their favorite skincare products, including those that treat acne. We also considered recommendations from What to Expect community members, as their endorsements suggest the products are worth considering.

Best Face Cleanser for Pregnancy Acne

Cetaphil Oil Removing Foam Wash

Affordable

Made for sensitive skin

Hypoallergenic and paraben-free

Some don't like the foam consistency

Key ingredients: Glycerin and zinc

Why We Love It

Cetaphil is the holy grail of affordable, effective, dermatologist-approved formulas, and the Oil Removing Foam Wash is no exception. The foam formula is made to gently but effectively remove dirt, oil and impurities from skin without causing any over-drying. The calming zinc within the cleanser helps to control surface oil on your face while reducing overall shine.

Because this formula is also pH-balanced, hypoallergenic and non-comedogenic, it’s less likely to cause negative skin reactions or clog pores. This cleanser has been clinically tested and is vetted as safe for use during pregnancy.

Community Reviews

lma010 "I have had horrible acne since I stopped taking my pills last July. I think it’s been even worse since getting pregnant! I’d seen a lot of blogs and stuff suggesting this cetaphil oil removing foam wash. I finally got and am so shocked at how effective it is!! I never held much stock in foam washes but this really does wash and keep excess oil away. I haven’t even been using any of my previous acne treatments, just this and moisturizer. I did have two tiny zits pop up this week but they went away very quickly instead of getting 5 huge ones that last all week long!"

Best Serum for Pregnancy Acne

The Ordinary Niacinamide 10% + Zinc 1% Oil Control Serum

Dermatologist-tested

Vegan

Oil- and fragrance-free

Affordable

May be drying

Key ingredients: Niacinamid and zinc

Why We Love It

Voted Best Acne Treatment in back-to-back Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Awards , The Ordinary’s Oil Control Serum contains a powerhouse acne-fighter: niacinamide. Derived from vitamin B3, niacinamide helps keep skin moisturized while improving texture, including the appearance of pores. When combined with zinc, as in this formula, niacinamide can also help soothe irritation caused by breakouts while enhancing the skin’s overall clarity.

This serum is oil-free and won’t leave a greasy residue after use. However, you’ll want to follow up with a moisturizer to prevent dryness or flaking. If you’re also using a vitamin C serum, apply one serum in the morning and the other at night to avoid compromising the effectiveness of these potent ingredients.

Community Reviews

gelamo "I love using the brand ‘The Ordinary’ for acne! I broke out bad during my pregnancy and their products really help (also with acne scarring if you deal with that). The bottles last long and are inexpensive, also sold at Ulta. I’d recommend NIACINAMIDE 10% + ZINC 1%"

Best Exfoliant for Pregnancy Acne

Dr. Brandt Microdermabrasion Face Exfoliator

Amazon $71.10 See Now Opens a new window Dr. Brandt $79 See Now Opens a new window

Suited for all skin types

Added anti-aging benefits

97% natural-origin ingredients

Expensive

Key ingredients: Glycolic and lactic acid, biodegradable micro-granules

Why We Love It

Mark this exfoliator as a keeper for use both during and after pregnancy. While the formula is incredibly beneficial for treating pregnancy acne, Dr. Brandt's exfoliant

exfoliant offers a host of additional benefits. Formulated to combine the powers of both chemical and physical exfoliation, this scrub uses biodegradable micro-granules along with glycolic and lactic acids to address dull skin, uneven texture, fine lines and acne scarring.

It also helps stimulate the skin’s natural renewal process, aiding in keeping the skin smooth and clear of breakouts. Glycolic and lactic acids are approved as safe for use during pregnancy by Dr. Truitt, who also notes that these chemical components are known to brighten the skin.

Community Reviews

UpstairsBottle "I bought one by Dr. Brandt at Sephora and loved it."

Best Spot Treatment for Pregnancy Acne

The Ordinary Azelaic Acid Suspension 10%

Affordable

Made for all skin types

High concentration of azelaic acid

Cannot be used with niacinamide powder

Key ingredients: 10% azelaic acid

Why We Love It

Though it's a cream formula, this product by The Ordinary functions as a treatment to target acne and layers well under a moisturizer to fight breakouts throughout the day. Azelaic acid is the perfect pregnancy-safe alternative to salicylic acid because it works similarly to reduce blemishes, even out skin tone, and diminish redness.

Despite the high concentration of azelaic acid in this formula, this natural and effective antioxidant is known to be less irritating than other acids, making it safe for daily use. If you have concerns, though, swatch a patch of skin before applying this cream to your face or consult your dermatologist before use.

Community Reviews

JenGorM "The Ordinary has a brightening cream with azelaic acid in it that's good for acne and is safe for use during pregnancy."

Best Moisturizer for Pregnancy Acne

Neutrogena Hydro Boost Water Gel

Affordable

Can get formula with SPF

Lightweight formula

Scent is strong

Why We Love It

Many acne treatments can be drying, which is why it’s important to include a hydrating, lightweight moisturizer in your routine. Dr. Truitt and many members of the What to Expect community speak highly of Neutrogena Hydro Boost Water Gel . The formula is lightweight and oil-free, so it won’t aggravate any breakouts you’re trying to treat. It’s also rich in hyaluronic acid, which provides your skin with the hydration it craves after using drying scrubs and acids.

Hydro Boost works to protect your skin barrier, which is crucial for maintaining healthy skin and combating breakouts. You can even purchase this water gel with SPF 25 if you want added sun protection.

Community Reviews

"I use the neutrogena hydro boost collection. As long as there’s no retinol or anything crazy in that and it’s just the regular moisturizer and cleanser you should be good!"

"I also use neutrogena hydro boost and it has worked really well for me! I combine it with Burt’s bees sensitive skin cleanser and that’s been a pretty great combo this winter. My skin is super sensitive and acne prone which has flared up occasionally over this pregnancy (my first one!) but this has helped me manage it pretty well!"

"love neutrogena hydro boost for the face cream that comes in the little blue jar. I have been using Neutrogena Skin Balancing Milky Cleanser with 2% Polyhydroxy Acid for a face wash twice a day then doing the hydroboost cream at night and a sensitive skin face lotion with spf in the morning ( I believe the one im using is cerave but I would have to check)"

Best Pregnancy-Safe Treatment for Acne Scars

Thayers Witch Hazel Facial Toner

Gentle and alcohol-free

Features skin-soothing aloe vera

Can be drying for some

Key ingredients: Pure grade witch hazel, aloe vera, glycerin and cucumber

Why We Love It

If you’re new to toners but want to add this step to help with acne scarring, witch hazel is a good place to start. Thayers' formula features certified organic witch hazel, which can help reduce the appearance of pores, balance oily skin, and keep your skin barrier healthy. When used after a cleanser and before treatments like The Ordinary Azelaic Acid Suspension 10% , witch hazel can also help fade acne scarring. This formula is also fortified with cucumber, aloe vera, and glycerin, which can restore moisture that witch hazel might remove. Additionally, it can further reduce puffiness, redness, and acne scarring.

Something to note: A few of the dermatologists we spoke to, including Dr. Viola, mentioned that treating acne scarring may be challenging during pregnancy. Most traditional interventions, such as retinoids, chemical peels, and procedures like microdermabrasion, aren’t pregnancy-safe and should be avoided. Dr. Viola suggests focusing on preventing and treating acne as effectively as possible during pregnancy, and then consulting your dermatologist after your baby is born to explore additional treatments if needed.

Community Reviews

pattym87 "Witch hazel every day does wonders"

Best Pimple Patch for Pregnancy Acne

Mighty Patch Invisible+ Patch

Works overnight

Safe for all skin types

Chemical-free and allergy tested

Not completely invisible

Key ingredient: Medical-grade hydrocolloid

Why We Love It

If you’re looking for an excellent spot treatment to target zits as they appear, look no further than the Mighty Patch Invisible+ Patch . Voted Best Pimple Patches in our Pregnancy-Safe Beauty Awards , these effective patches use hydrocolloid to absorb fluid from the pimple and prevent bacteria from entering the area.

Simply stick the adhesive patch onto your spot and wait six to eight hours for the hydrocolloid within the patch to work its magic. Your zit will come to a head, and the patch will effectively remove the whitehead when you peel it off.

There’s no need to pop pimples—this patch helps prevent acne scarring and stops additional bacteria from entering the pimple you're treating. It’s also safe to use during pregnancy, and you'll want to keep these patches handy long after your baby’s arrival to manage any future breakouts.

Community Reviews

CouldbebetterCouldbeworse "I am obsessed with these things called Mighty Patch. You put them on before bed, and the pimple is gone on the morning. Pregnancy safe!"

SamHovland "girl I’m with you! I have chin pimples so bad and they’re painful :( Mighty Patch brand patches every single night on the biggest ones, they work so well and are safe to use!"

FAQ

What is the best treatment for pregnancy during acne?

Unfortunately, there isn’t a one-size-fits-all approach when it comes to pregnancy acne. You might need to try a few products before you find what’s right for you. To help solve ongoing breakouts, it’s always a good idea to establish a routine. An effective cleanser, treatment and moisturizer like the products we recommended above are a good place to start. If you find you’re still having issues with acne, consult your dermatologist.

WhattoExpect.com, Pregnancy Acne , April 2021. American Academy of Dermatology, Is Any Acne Treatment Safe to Use During Pregnancy? , 2024. Gary Goldfaden , M.D., Dermatologist. Stephanie Saxton-Daniels , M.D., Dermatologist, Dallas, TX. Anne Truitt , M.D., Dermatologist, San Diego, CA. Kate Viola , M.D., Dermatologist, Sparks, MD.

Your Next Read

Pregnancy Acne: Why It Happens and Safe Ways to Treat It Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is Acne a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is it Safe to Get A Facial When You're Pregnant or Trying to Conceive? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Oily Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is Better Skin Hiding in Your Grocery Cart? What Dermatologists Want Pregnant Moms to Eat (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Best Home Cleaning Products to Use During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Skin Changes During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Can Leave Your Skin Feeling Parched Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Makes Your Skin Sensitive — and What Actually Helps Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Postpartum Skin Care Guide Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window