The Best Home Cleaning Products to Use During Pregnancy

best pregnancy safe cleaning products

When you’re pregnant, there are a lot of everyday activities to think twice about — from what you eat to how you move and even the products you use to clean your home. “When you're pregnant, the ‘blueprint’ for your baby's body and brain are being mapped out,” says Samantha Radford, Ph.D. , a chemist, exposure scientist and founder of Evidence-Based Mommy. That means that what you do, what you touch and what you breathe in while pregnant matters even more so than usual.

“Potentially toxic substances that get into your blood circulation by swallowing, inhalation or absorption from the skin may cross this fine placental barrier to the fetus,” says Ronald M. Caplan, M.D. , an OB-GYN and clinical associate professor emeritus at Weill Cornell Medical College in New York City. Depending on which chemicals you’re exposed to (as well as how much and how often you are exposed to them), this can put the fetus at risk, cautions Bruno J. Caridi, M.D. , an OB-GYN at Mount Sinai in New York City.

“Most store-bought home cleaning products are safe to use during pregnancy,” says Kelly Johnson-Arbor, M.D. , a medical toxicology physician and co-director of the National Capital Poison Center — provided that people use them as directed. That said, certain chemicals common in cleaning products, like parabens and phthalates, have been linked to potential health issues for moms and babies. “There is also ongoing research that’s looking at whether toxic cleaning chemicals are linked with childhood developmental disorders such as ADHD and autism,” Dr. Caridi says. (The risks are likely higher for women whose jobs regularly expose them to chemicals, such as healthcare workers, hospital staff and nail technicians.)

For these reasons, pregnant people might want to avoid using certain cleaning products, says Dr. Johnson-Arbor. If you have the time and energy, The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) suggestsmaking your own cleaning products using things like vinegar and baking soda. However, if you prefer to buy your cleaning products (or if the thought of DIY is utterly unappealing), the ACOG recommends using products labeled “nontoxic,” or ones the Environmental Working Group (EWG) has deemed safe. The nonprofit ranks and grades products based on the potential toxicity of their chemical ingredients.

How I Chose the Best Pregnancy-Safe Cleaning Products

I sought out advice from four OB-GYNs, a chemist and a medical toxicologist to help inform our selections. Per their guidance, all of the cleaning products on our list are free from parabens and phthalates. We also limited the number of products with fragrances, per their advice.

I searched the EWG’s database for products that were either EWG VERIFIED (meaning the product meets EWG's strictest criteria for transparency and health) or received a letter grade of “A,” which indicates a very low potential hazard to health. Though not every product on the list meets these strict requirements, many do.

I vetted feedback from parents in the What to Expect community, who shared insight about the cleaning products that worked best for them.

One thing to note: These product formulas have not necessarily been clinically tested or clinically proven to be safe during pregnancy, says Tarun Jain, M.D., an associate professor of obstetrics and gynecology at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, medical director of the Northwestern Fertility & Reproductive Medicine-West Region and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. "They just seem empirically safe based on their ingredient profile," he says.

Cleaning Ingredients to Avoid During Pregnancy

Most home cleaning products rely on ingredients that may be harmful to a developing baby. Here are products and ingredients you’ll want to steer clear of:

Phthalates: This group of chemicals — commonly used in products to help dissolve materials or make plastic more flexible — can cross the placenta and potentially impact hormonal function, brain development and reproductive function, says Dr. Johnson-Arbor. Phthalates “have been linked to miscarriage and fetal growth restriction (FGR), a condition that causes an unborn baby to be smaller than expected for its gestational age,” says Dr. Caridi. Exposure to phthalates could also increase the risk in male fetuses for congenital reproductive anomalies, says Kecia Gaither, M.D., an OB/GYN and director of perinatal services at Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center, NYC Health + Hospitals System in the Bronx, NY.

Parabens : Like phthalates, parabens (which are typically used as preservatives) can cross the placenta and potentially affect fetal development, says Dr. Johnson-Arbor. They are also associated with gestational diabetes, she says.

Aerosol cleaners: These products break up liquid cleaning products into super small particles that can be inhaled deep within the lungs — which might trigger breathing problems in people with heart or lung diseases, says Dr. Johnson-Arbor. “These compounds are irritating to the respiratory system and can aggravate clinical medical entities such as asthma or emphysema,” agrees Dr. Gaither. Spray cleaning products are also associated with a higher occurrence of wheeze and asthma diagnosis in young children.

Fragrances : When possible, Dr. Caridi says it’s best to use fragrance-free cleaning products, as fragranced products often contain or are made using phthalates. Fragranced products might also trigger asthma attacks in people with the condition. When you can, opt for “fragrance-free,” not “unscented,” as the latter may have fragrances that mask other smells to keep the overall scent neutral.

Best Dishwasher Detergent

Seventh Generation Free and Clear Dishwasher Detergent Packs

Free of fragrances and dyes

easy-to-use

Some say the packs left a white film on their dishes

sometimes doesn't fully dissolve

Why We Love It

Ever take out the dishwasher detergent only to be bombarded with an overwhelming chemical smell? Enter: Seventh Generation’s dishwasher pods . Enzymes in the tablets are strong enough to beat grease and food stains with a cleaner ingredient list than traditional detergents. Plus, the EWG gave this product an “A” rating, which gives us peace of mind that it’s free of potentially harmful ingredients. It’s why many What to Expect community parents trust it to clean baby bottles , pacifiers and other things baby puts in her mouth, too. “I liked using seventh generation free and clear… hated it when I used something else and I could smell a scent on the babies bottles and pacis,” says one WTE mom .

Size : 20-, 45- or 72-count

Community Reviews

lkm2016 I use Seventh Generation that says “non-toxic” in big letters on the front! Worked great for my first!”

Best Toilet Bowl Cleaner

Attitude Nature+ Unscented Bathroom Cleaner

Works well

well-vetted ingredients list

Hard to find the unscented variety

Size : 27 fluid ounces

Why We Love It

While Dr. Johnson-Arbor says bleach and ammonium are safe for cleaning during pregnancy, you might not relish their signature scent (especially if you’re already fighting off nausea). For tough bathroom jobs, try Attitude’s bathroom cleaner . It’s EWG-certified, meaning its ingredients meet the organization’s highest standards for health and safety, and many WTE moms trust it for tough household cleaning. “I love Attitude brand!” says one WTE parent . This spray cleaner uses ingredients like green tea extract to naturally (and effectively) dissolve soap scum and grime from your bathroom surfaces including, yes, your toilet.

While Dr. Johnson-Arbor says bleach and ammonium are safe for cleaning during pregnancy, you might not relish their signature scent (especially if you’re already fighting off nausea). For tough bathroom jobs, try Attitude’s bathroom cleaner

It’s EWG-certified, meaning its ingredients meet the organization’s highest standards for health and safety, and many WTE moms trust it for tough household cleaning. “I love Attitude brand!” says

. This spray cleaner uses ingredients like green tea extract to naturally (and effectively) dissolve soap scum and grime from your bathroom surfaces including, yes, your toilet.

Best Cleaning Wipes

Babyganics All Purpose Surface Wipes

Trusted brand

convenient

easy to use

Wipes may dry out quickly

Why We Love It

Babyganics might be a baby brand, but if their products are baby-safe, you can be sure they’re solid picks for moms-to-be, too. Made without ammonia, bleach, phthalates or parabens, these wipes work on a variety of surfaces around the house. And What to Expect Community moms love them for cleaning and disinfecting at home and on the go. “Babyganics makes wipes that are free from harmful chemicals and are antibacterial...That’s what I use when we go to a food court to eat,” says one mom . “I love babyganics wipes and cleaning products,” adds another mom . However, some parents report that the wipes dry out quickly, making it harder to effectively clean.

Size : 75 wipes

Community Reviews

LRMamaof2 I use Babyganics for everything. Wipes for toys and highchair. Bottle soap for all bottles, bottle parts, and teething toys.

Best Laundry Detergent

ATTITUDE Nature + Technology Unscented Laundry Detergent

Sustainable and biodegradable formula

cleans effectively

parents like it for sensitive skin

A bit pricier than other brands

might not remove all odors

Size : 30, 40 or 80 loads (or 80-160 loads if you buy the refill)

Why We Love It

Yet another Attitude product on this list, and for good reason: It’s effective and is EWG Certified. It comes in lots of different fragrances, including an unscented version ideal for pregnant people and people with allergies or sensitivities to fragrance. WTE parents swear by it for doing baby’s laundry as well as their own. “I have been using attitude detergent and fabric softener… and LOVE it,” says one WTE mom . Another cool perk: The detergent bottles are designed to be reused. So, you can purchase detergent refills when you run out and subscribe for a discounted price.

Community Reviews

tgreen212 I really like Attitude (EWG gave it a perfect score), and Whole Foods organic baby detergent (received an A).

emgulino We use Attitude laundry soap, it's EWG certified and you can buy it on Amazon.”

Best Product for Hard Water Spots

Arm & Hammer Pure Baking Soda

Inexpensive

versatile

Requires some DIY

Size : 8 ounces, 1, 2 or 4 pounds

Why We Love It

There are only two hard water cleaners that had decent ratings from the EWG. Instead of hunting those down and spending your hard-earned cash, keep it simple by using baking soda (which does earn an A from the EWG) to scrub away stains caused by the mineral build-up in your water. Make it into a paste with a little bit of water or white vinegar, and slather it onto almost any surface in your home (except for hardwood and marble). For thicker areas of chalky residue, let the mixture sit for about 15 minutes and then scrub off with a paper towel or dish brush.

Not only can you find baking soda just about anywhere for just a few dollars, it’s also incredibly versatile and can be used for cleaning all around the house. WTE parents use baking soda to remove spit-up stains , deodorize ovens and kitchen surfaces and wash dishes .

Community Reviews

binkles I use vinegar diluted with water 1:3. so good! Chuck some baking soda on for any tough stains.”

kmosley21 I use a 50/50 mix of vinegar and water (with a few drops of essential oil for scent, but you could take it or leave it) for all purpose cleaner. I also clean a lot with baking soda. Safe, effective and very cheap! “

Best Shower Cleaner

Lemi Shine Shower + Tile Cleaner

Works really well on soap scum

Not unscented

might take longer to work

Size : 28 fluid ounces

Why We Love It

Cleaning the shower isn’t fun to begin with, and harsh-smelling products make the task even worse. This better-for-you alternative spray will do everything you need it to — clean up dirty smudges, mold buildup and bathtub buildup, all the while being powered by natural citric acid. Simply spray it on, wait 60 seconds and wipe away. Parents say it’s particularly great at dealing with stubborn soap scum. Just note that this product is not explicitly fragrance-free and has a light lemon scent, which might be irritating to some.

Best All-Purpose Cleaner

Branch Basics The Concentrate

Eco-friendly

lasts a long time

Requires dilution

more expensive than other options

Size : 33.8 fluid ounces

Why We Love It

Tons of What to Expect moms swear by Branch Basics for home cleaning products, and the brand’s signature Concentrate is no exception. One bottle, when diluted with water, is enough to make three refillable spray bottles that you can use to clean up messes all around the house — all without using parabens, phthalates or other harsh ingredients. (Truly, it can be used on wood decks, doors, furniture, cutting boards, dishes, stovetops, baby bottles and more.) “We use Branch Basics for everything from laundry to hand soap!” says one mom .

Other parents say it’s the best cleaner they’ve ever used, and love how well it works without leaving behind a harsh smell. “Really impressed by how well branch basics works. Even their dishwasher tabs are great, and the all purpose cleaner is fantastic,” says another mom . Starting up can be expensive, but parents say you can get a lot of use out of one bottle that make it well worth the cost if you can swing it.

Community Reviews

I have used Branch Basics for about a year now and love it! It’s a concentrate, but is unscented and definitely gets the job done.

we use branch basics. it is not harsh at all but has cleaned things the smelly full of chemical stuff couldn't.

It is [expensive] but depending on what you use it for it goes a long way.

Best Floor Cleaner

Bissell PowerFresh Scrubbing and Sanitizing Steam Mop

Super effective

works on many different floors

natural cleaning solution

More expensive up-front cost

Capacity : Holds 16 ounces of water

Weight : 6.2 pounds

Why We Love It

Pregnancy-safe floor cleaners are hard to come by, which is why the What to Expect Community overwhelmingly recommends using a steam mop instead to clean around the house. Instead of chemical solutions, these mops use steam heat to clean and sterilize sealed hard floors. “I LOVE my steam mop, there's no smell or sticky anything left behind,” says one WTE mom. “Steam mops are the best. Cleans all the gross sticky mess and with no chemicals!” says another mom .

This highly-recommended model from Bissell can be used on hardwood, ceramic, granite, marble and linoleum floors, and offers three steam levels to help you tackle even the grimiest floors with ease. The mop pads are machine washable so you can reuse them again and again without adding to landfill waste. It also has a flip-down scrubber attachment to help you eliminate dried stains or spills. The swivel head and 23-foot power cord make it easy to reach every nook and cranny on your floors without constantly having to unplug and replug.

Community Reviews

Wholesalecity Several years ago, I had this super basic bissell one that worked great. I eventually upgraded to the bissell crosswave so I gave the steamer away to my cousin. She still uses it and loves it and my sister has had hers forever and still uses it and loves hers also. My sister actually upgraded to the cross wave shortly after I did, but she didn’t seem to care for it so much. She returned it and went back to her steamer.”

paige29072 I have the Bissell 1940 Powerfresh Steam Mop and love it. It's fast & easy to use, only uses water to clean, you can wash and reuse the cleaning pads, and the water reservoir cleans all my tile floors."

Best Glass Cleaner

Aunt Fannie's Glass and Window Vinegar Cleaner

Parents say it works as well as Windex

no streaks

Scented

more expensive than other options

Why We Love It

Many WTE parents love to use vinegar around the house for cleaning, but if you hate the smell, or don’t want to mess around with diluting, opt for this vinegar-based product instead. It uses distilled white vinegar plus plant essential oils to clean glass surfaces without streaks. (You can also use it on stovetops and stainless steel.) The natural formula works surprisingly well, according to parents who swear by it. It’s marketed as hypoallergenic, but does have a scent, which might irritate some people who are sensitive to fragrance.

Size : 16.9 fluid ounces

Community Reviews

jbord96 I never use chemicals in my house anymore. Some of my favorite brands are Mrs. Meyers, Method, Seventh Generation and Aunt Fannies. … Aunt Fannies has a lot of stuff with vinegar (vinegar also kills germs) but it’s scented so you don’t have to smell vinegar.

Tips For Cleaning While Pregnant

In addition to avoiding specific ingredients and products, Dr. Caplan recommends you keep the below pointers in mind while cleaning during pregnancy:

Don’t breathe in fumes, as they can make you dizzy, nauseous or cause breathing problems. (And sadly, masks don’t always help, according to Dr. Johnson-Arbor.)

Wear gloves when cleaning to minimize absorption of chemicals into your skin.

If a cleaning product is irritating to you, stop using it.

If possible, open the windows and let in the fresh air. Broadly speaking, make sure that you’re cleaning in a well-ventilated area.

If possible, allow others to help with the cleaning.

Never mix chemicals (like ammonium and bleach). “You can create something that has exceedingly toxic fumes,” says Dr. Gaither.

Air Quality, Atmosphere and Health , Fragranced consumer products and effects on asthmatics: an international population-based study , April 2019. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Toxic Chemicals: Steps to Stay Safer Before and During Pregnancy , October 2022. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Chemical Disinfectants and Sterilants – Reproductive Health , October 2019. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Parabens Factsheet , April 2017. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Phthalates Factsheet , April 2021. Cleveland Clinic, Household Chemical Products and Their Health Risk , May 2018. Environmental Health Perspectives , Attention Worthy: Prenatal Phthalate Exposure and Subsequent ADHD Diagnosis , March 2019. Harvard Health, Something Else to Avoid in Pregnancy: Phthalates , March 2019. International Journal of Molecular Sciences , Endocrine-Disrupting Chemicals in Human Fetal Growth , February 2020. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Association of use of cleaning products with respiratory health in a Canadian birth cohort , February 2020. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Occupational Exposure to Chemicals and Fetal Growth: the Generation R Study , March 2012. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Parabens exposure in early pregnancy and gestational diabetes mellitus , May 2019. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Phthalate-Induced Fetal Leydig Cell Dysfunction Mediates Male Reproductive Tract Anomalies , November 2019. Ronald M. Caplan, M.D. , Clinical Associate Professor Emeritus, Weill-Cornell Medical College, New York, NY. Bruno J. Caridi, M.D. , OB-GYN, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY. Tarun Jain, M.D. , Associate Professor, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL. Kelly Johnson-Arbor, M.D. , Co-Director, National Capital Poison Center, Washington, D.C. Samantha Radford, Ph.D. , Chemist, Founder, Evidence-Based Mommy, Altoona, PA. Additional reporting by Erin Cavoto.

Your Next Read

Do You Really Need to Avoid Antibacterial Products During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Best Pregnancy-Safe Hair Dye Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

7 Products to Help with Constipation During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Can You Use Essential Oils While Pregnant? Here’s What to Know Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

Manicures and Pedicures During Pregnancy: Simple Do’s, Don’ts, and Smart Picks Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Make Sure Your Water Is Safe to Drink When You’re Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

11 Holiday Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy and Safe Alternatives to Enjoy Instead Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is It Safe to Take Baths While You're Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Herbal Remedies and Supplements in Pregnancy: What's Safe and What to Skip Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Should You Try a Bleach Pregnancy Test? Here’s Why Experts Say No Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window