Best Activities for a 10-Month-Old Baby

best activities for 10-month-old babies

At 10 months, your baby is mastering some major developmental milestones. These fun activities are great ways to engage a baby on the verge of toddlerhood.

Baby is now well on her way to toddlerhood. If she’s not already, soon she’ll be crawling — and even taking those first steps — all over the place.

At 10 months old , your baby probably isn’t saying much, but chances are she’s beginning to understand what you have to say to her — and this can make playtime so much more stimulating for both a child and her caregiver.

In the meantime, you can help your little one along by setting aside time for play every day. This is vital, since young children don’t differentiate between play and learning. In fact, it’s how they learn all about the world, how it operates and how they fit into it.

What skills is your child developing at 10 months?

Skills like understanding the word “no” (a biggie!), copying sounds and gestures and, later, chatting up a storm are called developmental milestones.

But while they are helpful, these milestones are not meant to be absolute markers. It’s normal for babies to develop at slightly different paces, and because of this, milestones serve as guidelines, not timelines.

In general, though, here’s what you can expect to see your baby accomplishing around the 10-month mark:

Social and emotional skills

Develops hesitation towards strangers

Clingy with familiar adults

Shows preference for favorite toys

Language and communication skills

Begins to understand the word “no”

Makes repetitive sounds like “mamamama” and “bababababa”

Copies sounds and gestures

Uses fingers to point

Cognitive skills

Watches the path of something as it falls

Moves things smoothly from one hand to the other

Develops the pincer grasp , picking things up between the thumb and index finger

Gross and fine motor skills

Begins to pull up and stands holding on

Sits without support

Starts to crawl

Best activities for a 10-month-old baby

So what can you do to engage your little one at this age and encourage her as she masters these important emotional and physical skills? The following activities are great ways to play with your 10-month-old baby.

Set up a kitchen orchestra

This activity is a classic for a reason — it allows your child to explore pitch and rhythm and is a precursor to mathematical thinking. Not to mention, it's easy to set up and endlessly fun for your little one!

Simply place baby on the floor with an array of pots and wooden spoons. Let her hit the pots with the spoons or bang spoons together to create different sounds.

Count dry cereal

Though baby won’t be rattling off her numbers quite yet, you can begin to get her acquainted with mathematics by placing dry cereal on the tray of her high chair and letting her explore and play.

As she thumbs through the pieces, she'll be working on her fine motor skills (and mastering the pincer grasp), and you can count off each piece together. All around, this is a great activity for exploring texture, shapes and sizes. (And of course, always supervise your baby closely while she's eating.)

Hide an everyday object under a cup

Place a set of stacking cups (a great toy for babies at this age!) in a line on the table, then put a smaller item inside one of the cups. Shuffle the cups around and ask your baby to show you which cup the object is in. Chances are, you’ll have to help her along — especially the first few times — but you’ll notice her intensely tracking the cups and showing surprise when she discovers the item inside.

Through this game, you're helping your baby develop important cognitive skills like object permanence and tracking. You can also teach baby prepositional language — over, under, inside — this way.

Play catch

Throwing and catching is a basic activity, but it’s one that helps strengthen both gross and fine motor skills, as well as coordination.

Use a large, soft, lightweight ball to ensure the activity is safe enough for a baby at this age — and if you need to, you can modify the game by sitting on the floor together a few feet apart and roll the ball back and forth. This simpler version of the activity still offers all of the same benefits.

Inside surprise

Place a toy or a book inside an empty cardboard box — it doesn’t have to be anything new! — and wrap it with colorful paper, newspaper or magazine pages. Show baby how to unwrap it, then let her manipulate the box in effort to get the paper off, open the box and discover the item inside on her own.

When baby succeeds, clap your hands and announce what’s inside. This activity not only helps with fine motor skills and executive functioning, but also language skills that stem from your positive reinforcement .

The most important thing, though, is to simply make time for play in your child's day. Through age-appropriate playtime with peers and caregivers, babies (and older children, too!) develop important social-emotional, cognitive, language and self-regulation skills, as well as physical skills that help them develop muscles and coordination.

The good news? While more involved activities like kitchen orchestras are fun and enriching, research shows that play can be as simple as reading, singing and talking to your child.