Best Activities for a 1-Year-Old

best activities for 1-year-olds

At 12 months, your little one is officially a toddler! These are some of the best activities and games to play with 1-year-olds.

You’ve made it through the first year — congratulations! During the past 12 months, your little one has grown from a sleepy newborn to an active toddler. She sure has come a long way!

At the 12-month mark , your child is beginning to explore the world around her even more — and she may also be starting to communicate with you with an ever-expanding vocabulary.

To help your toddler master new skills, make sure to set aside plenty of time for a vital activity: play. Playtime isn’t all fun and games — at such a young age, experts say play and learning is one and the same.

What skills is your child developing at 12 months?

Skills like waving , taking those first steps and, later, stringing sentences together are called developmental milestones, or things most children can accomplish by a certain age.

These milestones help pediatricians and parents track a child’s growth in four important categories of development: social and emotional, language and communication, cognition, and gross and fine motor skills. But these markers aren’t written in stone, and it's important to remember that all chhildren grow at slightly different paces. If you have any concerns about your child's development, always reach out to your pediatrician for guidance.

In general, though, here’s what you can expect to see baby accomplishing around her first birthday:

Social and emotional skills

May be shy or nervous with strangers

Cries when her parent leaves

Has developed favorite objects and people

Hands books when she wants to hear a story

Repeats sounds or actions

Puts out arm or leg when being dressed

Language and communication skills

Responds to simple requests

Uses simple gestures, like shaking head “no” or waving “bye-bye”

Makes sounds with changes in tone

Tries to repeat words you say

Cognitive skills

Explores objects in different ways (like shaking or banging)

Can find hidden items easily

When an object is named, looks at the right picture

Copies gestures

Starts to use objects correctly

Pokes with pointer finger

Can follow simple directions

Gross and fine motor skills

Pulls up to stand and "cruises" while holding onto furniture

May take a few steps

May stand alone

Best activities for a 1-year-old

To encourage your now-toddler as she learns — and soon, masters — these skills, try the following activities, all of which are great ways to play with a 1-year-old.

Have an interactive storytime

While reading to your child , you can now make the experience more enriching by interacting with books beyond the words on the page. For example, point to people and objects and ask questions like “Where is the baby?” or “What sound does the duck make?”

At 12 months, your toddler is rapidly developing her language skills. The more words she hears when you talk and read to her, the more she'll start to make connections between sounds and words.

Play with puzzles

Place a few large, chunky wooden puzzles out and help your child through the activity. At this age, she may still struggle to get the pieces in on her own, but playing with puzzles can still help with spatial awareness and problem solving skills.

And don’t forget to show her praise upon completion — it’s a big confidence booster!

Go on a nature walk

Get outside and explore together! There are so many ways nature can be the teacher at this age. Let your child feel the grass on her feet to explore different textures, encourage her to pull to stand at a park bench to strengthen her gross motor skills, and let her scoop sand or dirt into a bucket to improve cognitive development.

Narrate your activities, too — pointing and talking about the birds, the trees and everything else around you helps with language development.

Play patty-cake

At 12 months, your child may now be able to play patty-cake without your help. This simple clapping game is a fun activity for 1-year-olds, since at this age your child is more coordinated and has the motor skills to bring her hands to yours.

In addition to fostering the development of this physical feat, the game also teaches important social skills about taking turns.

Create an obstacle crawl

To help your child better understand the space around her and hone her gross motor skills, encourage her to crawl over, under and through various objects in your home.

An easy method: Remove the tops and bottoms from an assortment of boxes, then tape them together to create a long tunnel. (You could also use a play tent and tunnel for this.)

Make a sensory bottle

Put cereal, glitter or grains of rice in a tightly sealed water bottle, then give it to your little one and let her shake it around to help baby develop her sensory and visual skills. You could also make an assortment using various containers to increase the stimulation.

best activities for 1-year-old

Most importantly, remember that your toddler is always at play — even something as simple as banging pots and pans together can become playtime. So don’t feel guilty if you don’t have time to craft elaborate sensory bins or enough space to house dozens of toys.

While active playtime of any kind is important, even simple activities like talking, singing and reading are some of the most important things caregivers can do with children.