Meet the Winners of the What to Expect Feeding Awards

What to Expect Feeding Awards 2025

Every family’s baby-feeding journey is unique. Whether you’re breastfeeding , formula-feeding , pumping and bottle-feeding (or doing some combination of all three), the truth is that you often need quite a lot of stuff to support you and your baby. And the need for the right gear continues once you start to introduce solid foods .

But knowing where to start can be a daunting task. Which breast pump should you choose? Is a bottle warmer worth it — and if so, which one is best? Which of the many baby bottles on the market is a reliable choice? While a lot comes down to personal preference (including what your baby responds to), it can help to learn which products have worked well for experienced parents who’ve been there.

That’s why we set out to ask the experts — parents like you! — about their tried-and-true baby-feeding products for the fourth annual What to Expect Feeding Awards. The winners include beloved products trusted by the What to Expect community in 24 different categories.

How the What to Expect Feeding Award Winners Were Chosen

First, we created a list of the items we knew were key for feeding your little one, from the best breast pumps (we’re talking electric, wearable and manual) to the best baby food brand.

We then selected a thorough list of contenders for each category based on what our community of parents have recommended time and time again, as well as products parents on the What to Expect editorial team have tested themselves.

From there, we polled parents in our community, asking them to vote for their absolute favorite feeding-related products in each category. This year, nearly 6,000 votes were cast to help finalize the list of winning products.

Below, the winners of the What to Expect Feeding Awards.

Best Bottle Brand

Dr. Brown's

Why We Love It

Earning nearly 40% of the votes, it’s no surprise that Dr. Brown’s bottles are back-to-back-to-back WTE Feeding Award winners. Although the brand has several great bottles, WTE parents highly recommend the Options+ Anti-Colic bottles — with many saying these are the only bottles their baby will take.

Earning nearly 40% of the votes, it’s no surprise that Dr. Brown’s bottles are back-to-back-to-back WTE Feeding Award winners. Although the brand has several great bottles, WTE parents highly recommend the

— with many saying these are the only bottles their baby will take.

The reason? The bottles include a special internal vent system (which can be removed, if you find your baby doesn’t need it) that’s designed to help preserve milk nutrients and aid in smooth digestion for your baby. And yes, it works. Several parents saw a difference in their infant’s gas, burping, and spit up after switching to Dr. Brown’s bottles. Parents also praise the brand’s slow-flow nipples, which they say more closely mimic the experience of breastfeeding and makes it harder for babies to guzzle milk from these bottles.

The shape of these bottles is thoughtfully engineered: Parents say the breast-like nipple helped transition their little ones from breast to bottle, and that the narrow size is easy for tiny hands to grip once your baby can hold things.

While there are more pieces to clean than the typical bottle, everything is safe to throw in the dishwasher, sterilizers, or boiling water. And many parents say that they don’t mind the extra parts since their babies took to these bottles so well. They’re available in several sizes, too, all the way from 2 to 8 ounces.

Community Reviews

"These were the only kind [of bottles] our daughter liked. It's also nice that they’re skinny so easier to fit into some bags."

nly kind [of bottles] our daughter liked. It's also nice that they’re skinny so easier to fit into some bags."

"Easy to clean, easy to store, easy to hold for little hands!"

"I like how Dr. Brown's made transitioning to a sippy cup so easy with the milestone nipple."

"My baby has never had an issue transitioning between the narrow nipple bottle, wide nipple bottle, or breast. And the anti-colic vent is great for reducing gas."

"Two fo my three of my kids used Dr. Brown's, including one who had feeding difficulties."

of my kids used Dr. Brown's, including one who had feeding difficulties."

"My son has severe reflux and with these there has been a noticeable difference in him after he eats!!!"

Best Bottle Brush

OXO Tot Bottle Brush

Why We Love It

Removing remnants from baby’s bottle is a lot easier when you have a bottle brush on hand. OXO Tot’s Bottle Brush , which our editorial team also deemed the Best Bottle Brush , has everything you need for a gentle and deep clean. The flexible head with soft and firm bristles ensures you get to all the nooks and crannies without leaving any scratches. But the standout feature: a detail cleaner hidden in the handle so you can tend to nipples and narrow pump parts.

Removing remnants from baby’s bottle is a lot easier when you have a bottle brush on hand. OXO Tot’s Bottle Brush

But the standout feature: a detail cleaner hidden in the handle so you can tend to nipples and narrow pump parts.

Bonus: It’s dishwasher-safe so you can clean it instead of replacing it when you think it’s a little too grimy. Although, at $10, it’s affordable enough to replace if you prefer.

Community Reviews

"The most sturdy bottle brush, and I’ve tried virtually every brush. This one lasts! It doesn’t have a sponge that falls out over time, it's easy to rinse clean, and has a sturdy base that doesn’t fall over every 10 seconds."

"I tried them all— I'm an exclusive bottle feeder. OXO gets the bottles the cleanest, and doesn’t break."

"Love the stand it comes in and the detachable smaller brush which I use in all my pump parts."

"Works well and inexpensive to replace the brush; you can buy just the brush and keep the stand."

Best Baby Bottle Warmer

Philips Avent Fast Bottle and Baby Food Warmer

Why We Love It

Most parents debate getting a bottle warmer. And those who do say the Philips Avent Fast Baby Bottle Warmer is worth the money (which, TBH, isn’t that much compared to others). It's small enough to keep on your countertop — crucial for those wary of yet another baby appliance — and it’s easy to take on the go, with a warming chamber that’s big enough to fit several different types of bottles.

The device gently warms milk to a comfortable temperature in minutes. Just set the milk volume, press start, and the machine does the rest, detecting the milk’s initial temperature and warming it evenly to the ideal temp. It’s intuitive and a breeze to navigate, parents say. Also good: It can warm baby food containers, and defrost frozen milk or food if you keep some stashed away in the freezer. A number of the parents we polled said they prefer it to higher-end models they’ve tested, because it offers multiple modes of use, is so straightforward and boasts a sleek, minimalist design.

Parents also appreciate that the machine keeps the milk or food at the ideal temperature for 60 minutes before automatically turning off. That way, you don’t need to worry about grabbing the bottle or jar right when it’s done. As one survey respondent pointed out, you can even warm a bottle shortly before your baby wakes up from nap time so that it’s ready as soon as she wants it.

Community Reviews

"We're a Philips Avent family all the way. This is a super fast and easy-to-use bottle warmer. Looks great on counter."

hilips Avent family all the way. This is a super fast and easy-to-use bottle warmer. Looks great on counter.

"Best bottle warmer that does not heat wayyy too hot. Other brands don’t heat evenly, but this one has been our absolute favorite!"

"Absolutely love the Phillips' bottle warmer!! It’s quick, easy to use, and gets the bottles warm fast."

"Easy to use even for grandparents or sitters. Not complicated at all"

Best Bottle Sterilizer

Baby Brezza Baby Bottle Sterilizer and Dryer Advanced

Why We Love It

One splurge parents won't regret: the Baby Brezza Baby Bottle Sterilizer and Dryer .

Doubling as a sterilizer and dryer, this device saves you precious time when cleaning your bottles, pump parts, and other feeding accessories. Parents note that it has a generous capacity. Between the two tiers, they can fit up to eight bottles and two sets of pump parts. Plus, everything remains sterile for up to 24 hours as long as you keep the lid closed.

Depending on how much time you have, items can be sterilized in eight minutes, and they can be dried in 30 minutes. When you’re not sterilizing, parents recommend using the “dry only” feature to avoid air drying bulky bottles and other items that could take up countertop space.

Community Reviews

"Cleaning bottles is already a pain, but I love that it sterilizes and dries the bottles and other parts in an hour or less."

"Was my best friend during the newborn stage. Fits many bottles and bottle parts. Works quickly and efficiently."

"This was life changing when I went back to work. Capacity is exceptional. Holds so many bottle and pump parts. Cycles are thorough. Easy to descale. So glad I bought it."

"Gets my bottles, pump parts, and pacifier sterile and DRY quickly and I can fit so much in one go."

"Love that it has two tiers. The top part fits binkys, bottle tops and the bottom part is large and deep that you can fit 6 bottles plus more! I used to throw everything and fill it up with bottles, toys, teethers! Very happy with the sterilizer!"

Best Formula Brand

Enfamil

Why We Love It

Enfamil is a trusted formula brand that countless families rely on. For a conventional cow’s milk-based formula, the NeuroPro variety is a tried-and-true formula with all the nutrients your baby needs to grow and thrive, and lots of moms say they’ve noticed their babies digest it with ease.

If, however, your child can’t digest cow’s milk, Enfamil offers plenty of other options; something parents say they appreciate. The NeuroPro Gentlease Infant Formula , for example, is ideal for babies who have excessive gas, while the Enfamil Prosobee Plant-Based Baby Formula can be given to babies with milk allergies.

Community Reviews

"They have so many variations of formula. The price is okay in comparison to most others and they have an actual dairy free option for our sensitive baby."

"Gentle, well tolerated by our baby with acid reflux, and saved us when we had to supplement nursing."

"The hospital gave it to us and my son responded well when he needed to be on it before milk came in (newborn to 2 weeks old)"

"Enfamil has always been my go to if I needed to supplement. I’ve tried many others and they either don’t mix as well or it’s a thinner water like consistency."

Best Nipple Shields

Medela Contact Nipple Shield for Breastfeeding

Why We Love It

There’s a pretty steep learning curve when it comes to breastfeeding, and it can be particularly challenging for moms with flat or inverted nipples. The answer for many? A solid pair of nipple shields, which can help with latching or protect sensitive or sore nipples during feedings. Moms in the What to Expect community and lactation consultants alike love the Medela Contact Nipple Shields , which have been named the Best Nipple Shields by our editorial team — one editor even referred to them as a “complete game changer,” and a WTE mom called them a “life saver.”

These are designed with a thin silicone material and shape to promote more skin-to-skin contact, and moms appreciate the wide range of sizes to get the most comfortable fit and latch. Each set comes with two nipple shields, which you can store in a clamshell-shaped case.

Community Reviews

"Helped baby latch when baby had lip tie and mommy’s nipples were too flat."

"The perfect shape and size for my baby to latch onto. Completely saved our breast feeding journey!"

"Helped continue feeding with cracked nipples and on my one that’s inverted."

Best Breastfeeding Care Product

Lansinoh Hot & Cold Breast Therapy Packs

Why We Love It

Those first few weeks of breastfeeding or pumping can come with some unpleasant pains, which is why many moms rely on Lansinoh’s Hot and Cold Breast Therapy Packs . The beauty of these packs is that, as the name suggests, they can be used hot or cold depending on your needs. Warm them up in the microwave, and they can increase circulation and open up milk ducts, helping with let-down. Toss them in the fridge or freezer, and they can reduce swelling to provide relief from engorgement, clogged ducts and mastitis.

The packs come with machine-washable covers, which provide a comfortable barrier between your breast and the extreme temperature. These covers also come with a snap to create a round, nipple-cover-like shape, making it easy to place into your bra when your breasts could use some R&R in between feedings or during pumping sessions.

Community Reviews

"Helped me through constant clogged duct issues."

"Freeze and heat great. Now that I dont use them for pumping, they make good boo boo ice packs."

"Can be used hot or cold. I kept mine in the freezer for cooling off worn out nipples for those cluster feeds. And helped immensely with engorgement!"

Best Nipple Cream

Earth Mama Nipple Butter

Why We Love It

If you’re interested in lanolin-free nipple cream options, join the many moms in the What to Expect community who have discovered (and loved) the Earth Mama Nipple Butter . The first non-GMO verified nipple cream, it’s also USDA-Certified organic and made with key ingredients like olive oil, beeswax, cocoa seed butter, shea butter, mango seed butter and calendula flower extract. One mom insists there’s “magic” in this product, saying it’s the reason why she’s been able to exclusively pump for more than 10 months. Not to mention, moms also use it for their lips, cheeks and other spots that could use more hydration.

Moms report that it’s super soft and non-sticky, and you can apply it directly to your breasts or smooth it onto pump flanges. Our editorial team backs it, too, and recently named it Best Organic Nipple Cream .

Community Reviews

"Soft buttery feel, organic ingredients, doesn't need to be washed off before feeding, easy to apply"

"I don't know how to describe the magic of this product … I had awful damage to my nipples after EP for 3 months and then trying and failing to get my baby to latch. After two or three uses my skin was completely healed. I'm still EP at 10+ months and would not have been able to go this long without it. I coat the inside of the flanges with this and apply after showering."

"Light feel, easy to spread. Not overly thick like lanolin that's super hard to spread."

"It's organic and I didn't have to wipe it off before breastfeeding. A little goes a long way and it has many uses other than nipple cream."

Best Silver Nursing Cups

Silverette: The Original Nursing Cup

Why We Love It

If there were an MVP of breastfeeding tools, the Silverette might just take the gold. So many What to Expect Community members — and even our own staff — say these tiny silver wonders were game-changers, easing pain and helping them keep going when breastfeeding got tough.

Silverettes fit snugly over your nipples and are made from hypoallergenic 925 sterling silver, a metal that naturally boasts antibacterial, antifungal, and anti-inflammatory properties . Translation: They help minimize chafing, soothe soreness, and speed up healing — no creams or pads required. Their contoured shape makes them extra comfy, and they’re discreet enough to wear under your nursing bra between feedings for round-the-clock relief. And bonus: They're a breeze to clean.

A bit of a splurge? Yes. A total must if you're dealing with nipple pain? Absolutely.

Community Reviews

"These are historic! My own mom used them and I’m sure my own daughter will use them! The old reliable!"

"I have not used them as much as other moms but I love using them in the early postpartum weeks."

"This brand was the only one I tried, and they worked great. No need to try others. Worth the price."

"Breastfeeding journey saver. Initially had latch issues that left sore and cracked nipples, these help heal between feeds ever 2-3 hours so we could continue until the latch improved."

Best Nursing Pillow

Boppy Nursing Pillow

Why We Love It

If we had to describe the Boppy in one word, it would be versatile. This durable pillow is essential no matter how you are feeding your baby. While countless What to Expect parents rave about how helpful it is as a breastfeeding or bottle-feeding pillow, the Boppy really stands out for its ability to do so much more.

For starters, this pillow provides much-needed ergonomic support when you’re feeding your baby. It’s comfortable for little ones to snuggle into and offers crucial support for all parents, but especially for nursing moms — it gently lifts baby to the breast to prevent the need to hunch over. Some moms say they like sitting on it for extra support during the postpartum period, too.

Best yet, once your little one is old enough, the Boppy can be used to prop her up for supported sitting and for tummy time. Many What to Expect parents say their toddlers still use it to lounge or play, so you could potentially use this humble pillow for multiple years. (Just remember that this pillow is for supervised awake time only, not for sleeping.)

There are tons of machine-washable covers that you can swap out so you can get one that’s perfect for your nursery aesthetic, and it’s easy to slide the different covers into place.

Community Reviews

"Great for breast or bottle feeding. I also use it for back support on the couch and I even sat on it freshly postpartum! It’s seriously MVP."

"The best with both kids from pregnancy, breastfeeding, to tummy times and sitting up. Heck my toddler still uses it as a comfy pillow."

"Easily slides around the waist and saves your arms from baring the load of baby while feeding."

"High quality, washable, easy to use, lightweight."

High quality, washable, easy to use, lightweight.

"I've used both the boppy and the breast-friend pillow and the boppy is by far my favorite. It's very comfortable and easy to clean."

"Very comfortable for both of my kids and I to use. I loved how cozy it was and how versatile it became after; my girls still use it even to play it snuggle with throughout the day."

Best Electric Breast Pump

Spectra S1 Plus Electric Breast Pump

Why We Love It

Named the Best Breast Pump by What to Expect editors and moms alike, the Spectra S1 boasts plenty of impressive features. (So many, in fact, one voter said it should be in the Hall of Fame!) For one, this hospital-grade pump is efficient. Moms say this double electric breast pump has superior suction that very effectively expresses a noticeably larger amount of breast milk than other pumps, which can help cut back the amount of time you spend pumping. A true win for time-strapped moms.

Although this pump isn’t the smallest one on the market, it’s still surprisingly portable, thanks to its handle and built-in rechargeable battery. (Another win: You don't have to be plugged into a wall while you pump.) Moms say it’s relatively lightweight and easy to move from room to room. It also operates on a closed-system design, which makes the whole thing more hygienic and easier to clean. And it’s consistently reliable — many moms note that they simply have never had any issues using this pump and that it lasts a long time.

Also nice? The fact that you can easily change the speed without altering the rhythm for ultimate customization. It even has a built-in night light that comes in handy during late-night pumping sessions. All of these essential features are probably why Spectra has won a Mom Must-Have Award for six years in a row.

Community Reviews

"Amazing and effective. I use this pump everyday and it never disappoints. It has great suction, long battery life, comes with different size flanges to accommodate user, multiple modes you can adjust to your comfort level, and it DOES NOT LEAK. There's nothing worse then losing your milk because you have a leaky pump. Go with Spectra and you'll get successful pumps each time and keep all.your milk. Highly recommend."

"I liked that it could be battery operated, and that I could carry it with me to another room while I pumped."

"When I tell you I got every last bit of breast milk with my spectra s1, i did. I love that it is rechargeable, has multiple settings and saves your settings!!!"

"Lots of customization in suction/speed, compatible with many bottles, easy to use, has nightlight feature, screen to track pumping time/speed/suction."

"Portable, has a nightlight for those midnight sessions, long battery life. It's an affordable hospital-grade pump! The suction settings are easy to understand and doesn't hurt the breast when using an appropriate flange. Best pump!"

Best Wearable Breast Pump

Momcozy S12 Pro Wearable Breast Pump

Why We Love It

Wearable breast pumps give moms the ability to pump without being plugged into a wall, and the Momcozy S12 Pro is a fan favorite. At $140, it’s significantly more affordable than other wearables. But the low price doesn’t take away from the efficiency; one voter shared that it yields about the same amount as her standard electric pump. Another standout feature: the double-sealed flanges. Made from soft, suction-sealed materials, the flanges are extra comfortable against the breast and also prevent leaks.

The Momcozy S12 requires about 130 minutes of charging, but then you can pump hands-free throughout the day. It’s designed for 240 minutes of use, or about seven to eight pumping sessions. Each container can collect up to 6 ounces, so you can pump up to 12 ounces total per session.

Although the Momcozy S12 took home the crown for Best Wearable Breast Pump, plenty of moms gave shoutouts to other Momcozy models that earned a spot in their hearts (and diaper bags). Some top contenders?

Community Reviews

"Most affordable, same amount of parts to clean as most others, holds its charge well, and doesn’t leak!"

"Quiet, good output, [abd] easy to clean."

Quiet, good output, [abd] easy to clean.

"Straightforward and consistent experience every time."

Best Manual Breast Pump

Haakaa Silicone Breast Pump

Why We Love It

Few feeding products have received as many rave reviews as the Haakaa . This manual pump is, simply put, a game-changer. It’s completely hands-free, doesn’t require any power source, and can help you save a shocking amount of breast milk. Moms have called it “indispensable,” “the best” and “a total lifesaver.”

As you nurse your little one on one breast, attach the Haakaa to your other breast. It easily suctions on and naturally draws milk out into the pump, which would otherwise be lost onto a nursing pad. (One writer previously shared that using the Haakaa yielded about 50 bottles' worth of breast milk in the first month alone.) As many of the moms we surveyed noted, it can easily help you build a freezer stash with little effort.

Not only does this manual pump help you save a ton of milk, but it can also provide much-needed relief to engorgement pain. Made of 100 percent food-grade silicone, this pump is small in size and incredibly easy to transport. Cleaning is also simple, as it’s dishwasher-safe and can be boiled and sterilized.

At $13, tons of moms say it’s worth its weight in (liquid) gold. For a higher price, you can upgrade to the second-generation iteration with a suction base and silicone lid. And if you tend to leak throughout the day, you might also consider the brand’s breast shells , which let you capture that milk, too.

Community Reviews

"So easy to use, clean and carry with you. Used on opposite side of nursing and collected just as much milk as when pumping."

"The Haakaa is fantastic because it allows milk that is expressed passively while baby is feeding on the other breast to be collected with no additional effort needed. The minimal suction is great and easy to use. It has allowed me to create a large freezer stash."

"Great for opposite boob let down when doing one at a time or when you're in a pinch. Saved me when I was a bridesmaid in a wedding but didn't want to travel with my full size pump!"

"Great for collecting milk from letdown to prevent a mess. Also handy when engorged and uncomfortable but the electric pump is not dry, or is not clean."

"Easy to use, affordable, and collects more milk than other manual pumps."

Best Breast Milk Storage Bags

Lansinoh Breastmilk Storage Bags

Why We Love It

After you’ve pumped that liquid gold, you’ll need a secure bag to store it. While building up their freezer stash, countless moms rely on the Lansinoh Breastmilk Storage Bags , which are made to stack in neat and compact rows. Moms share that there’s no leakage, thanks to the double zipper and double-sealed side seams, and it has a nifty pour spout to help with the transfer from bag to bottle.

A major win for pumping moms is that you can pump directly into these storage bags. It’s a seamless process if you use a Lansinoh pump, but you can also purchase a set of bags with two pump adapters, which are compatible with most standard breast pumps.

Community Reviews

"Easy to use with the pump, stores well in the freezer and refrigerator. Accurate measurements and mess-free pouring."

"Has a great seal and easy to fill. Plus you can pump right into the bag."

s a great seal and easy to fill. Plus you can pump right into the bag.

"Easy to source, easy to use, and decent price point. They also freeze well flat, which made storing easy."

"I love the way these fit in my freezer so perfectly. They flatten out nicely and the seal on them never leaked. I went through hundreds of these and never had one leak."

Best Portable Milk Cooler

CERES CHILL OG Breastmilk Chiller

Why We Love It

There’s no limit to where and when you can pump with a Ceres Chiller in tow. The portable design (think the size of a water bottle) is easy to take on the go, and it can chill six to 12 ounces of breastmilk for up to 16 hours.

Here’s how it all works: The device comes with a cup, cap, connector, inner chamber and outer chamber. For the 6-ounce method, add ice and a splash of cold water to the outer chamber and fill the inner chamber with breast milk. As an alternative, you can store 12 ounces by doing the opposite; fill the inner chamber with ice and pour up to 12 ounces of milk into the outer chamber. It can also keep already hot or cold beverages at its temperature for hours. You can pump directly into your chiller, or attach any standard nipple to the neck of the connector and use the cup to feed baby on the go. For even more versatility, it also works as a bottle warmer.

Community Reviews

"Love Ceres Chill! The product really keeps milk cold for a very long time. They have many different colors to choose from. High quality. Just amazing."

"Ultra portable, fits in cup holder, cold even in the heat."

Best Nursing and Pumping Bra Brand

Kindred Bravely

Why We Love It

Kindred Bravely has made a name for itself in the pregnancy and postpartum space, creating high-quality items in a wide range of sizes. So it’s no surprise that moms who nurse pump highly recommend their extensive line of pumping bras.

You have plenty of bras to choose from, (as well as a variety of maternity and nursing loungewear, pajamas and basics) but the brand’s Sublime Hands-Free Pumping & Nursing Bra is particularly excellent. This style was recently selected as the best nursing and pumping bra thanks to its innovative design. It’s a two-in-one nursing and pumping bra with two fabric layers, one that pulls down to reveal horizontal slits for pump flanges, and a second that opens to reveal the whole breast for nursing. For moms who both breastfeed and pump, this eliminates the need to purchase separate nursing- and pumping-specific styles.

The best part? Thanks to the supportive fit, soft seamless fabric and the fact that Kindred Bravely styles don’t necessarily look or feel like a pumping bra, many women find they’re still able to wear them long after they’ve stopped pumping.

Community Reviews

"Quality is amazing, super soft and comfortable. Fairly affordable and can be purchased in multiple stores."

"Comfortable, large range of sizes, looked great under my work clothes when I returned to work. Leak through resistant!"

"Best quality, stood up to washing over and over and over, through body changes, perfect to sleep in, nurse in, pump in - I LIVED in these for MONTHS!!!"

"It holds the pump parts in place better than others, is comfortable enough to sleep in without any clasps, and is supportive."

Best Nursing-Friendly Clothing Brand

Old Navy

Why We Love It

Whether you plan to nurse for a few weeks, months or years, having some nursing-friendly tops or dresses will make your feedings significantly easier (a major perk when you’re trying to feed a hangry baby!). Fortunately for moms’ comfort and budgets, Old Navy has hundreds of styles designed to accommodate your growing bump during pregnancy and allow you to nurse more conveniently after baby’s arrival. They also host sales frequently, so you can usually score a deal when you’re shopping for maternity and postpartum clothing.

Community Reviews

"Affordable for any budget and still stylish. A good selection of different styles and can find other nursing friendly option outside of the nursing/maternity category."

"Affordable with a variety of styles - I felt like I could still be stylish and comfortable without spending too much money."

"Comfy! Sizing was easy and they had great products at a good price point. Their nursing bralettes were my favorite!"

Best Nursing Pads

Lansinoh Stay Dry Nursing Pads

Why We Love It

It’s not surprising that several award-winning products from Lansinoh appear on our Feeding Awards winners list. The brand’s trusted Stay Dry Nursing Pads are a tried-and-true favorite of breastfeeding parents, and our editorial team also named them Best Disposable Nursing Pad .

These nursing pads are thin, but still manage to soak up an impressive amount of excess milk, helping you confidently stay dry for hours. (In fact, a number of the moms we surveyed said they never experienced a leak while wearing Lansinoh pads.) They never feel thick or bulky inside a bra, and you can’t see them through thin clothing. Moms appreciate the extra-sticky adhesive, which helps to hold the pads securely in place. They fit well in several different nursing and pumping bras, too.

And despite the fact that they stay on so well, they feel super soft and gentle against your skin. The fabric is made from recycled materials and free of fragrance, BPA and BPS.

Community Reviews

"I was a leaker!! The pads were amazing! They soaked up everything, never had any break through leaking!! The sticky sides attached well to all different materials and I loved them!"

"It’s not overall expensive and they are high quality. The pads are super comfortable and don’t move around they stay in one place making you always feel secure. They are also discrete and super easy to change. Also because they are affordable you can always use more than one at a time and not feel like your spending to much money. Great product."

"Love these super absorbent affordable and easy to find. Perfect for the first few months when breast frequently leak and don’t want more laundry to keep track of. Once supply regulates switch to washable pads."

"Sticks and stays in place! I could wear them in any of my bras or bralettes. And comfy!!"

"Thick enough to keep leaks out for atleast an hour or so!"

"These have a higher absorbency than reusable pads, and lasts longer than other disposable ones."

Best Burp Cloths

Comfy Cubs Muslin Burp Cloths

Why We Love It

You can never have too many burp cloths . And while they can seem like a not-so-exciting baby purchase, What to Expect parents love Comfy Cubs' muslin cloths . So much so that it was voted the most reliable pick for the third year in a row.

Comfy Cubs burp cloths are soft, easy to clean and (most importantly) ultra-absorbent; What to Expect parents say they “catch everything.” The fabric is gentle against your little one’s skin while protecting you from any spit-up. These burp cloths are just the right size — not too big, not too small, and easy to pack in a diaper bag. Despite the elegant white fabric, parents say they don’t stain, though they’re also available in four other colors if you prefer something more vibrant.

You can use them as more than just burp cloths, too, whether you’re wiping up everyday messes, want a breastfeeding cover in public or use them as a washcloth. In the words of one mom, "THE. BEST. PERIOD."

Community Reviews

"The most absorbent burp clothes. I reached for these over any other one."

"Super absorbent, high quality, withstands constant wash and wear. Out performs all other materials and brands we've tried."

"They’re long and oh so soft. They don’t shrink much after the first wash."

"Great protection, good absorption, flexible fabric for putting wherever you need it."

"After 3 years we still use these! They are great for spit up, cleaning up after solids, and general wipe ups! Super soft too!"

Best High Chair Brand

Graco

Why We Love It

High chairs can be one of the pricier baby gear picks, but Graco offers more budget-friendly options that still check all the boxes for quality, comfort, and convenience. The brand has several models to choose from, each with a wipe-clean plastic frame — a lifesaver when your little one starts flinging peas with flair. The seats are made from machine-washable fabric (yes, really!), though you can also spot-clean smaller messes.

Graco’s high chairs are also designed with busy parents in mind. Most fold with just one hand and can be wheeled away for easy storage — though honestly, they look nice enough that you won’t mind keeping one out. They’re also super adjustable, so you can find the right height and recline for your baby’s stage (and squirm factor).

But the perks don’t stop there. Graco high chairs are built to grow with your little one — literally. The Graco Table 2 Table Premier Fold 7-in-1 Convertible High Chair , for example, transforms through seven (!) stages, from an infant high chair to a dining booster to a big-kid table and chair.

Community Reviews

"Graco’s compact feature makes it easy to store to the side when done and doesn’t take up so much surface area when open."

"The compact folding feature of my Graco high chair is the ultimate space saver and makes my small home feel less cluttered."

"Many affordable options. Adjustable and comfortable for baby."

"TI've had this Graco highchair for almost 5 years and it has been a hit for both of our babies. Being able to adjust the height of the chair to fit both our dining table and our breakfast counter is great!"

I've had this Graco highchair for almost 5 years and it has been a hit for both of our babies. Being able to adjust the height of the chair to fit both our dining table and our breakfast counter is great!

"Sturdy, versatile, and affordable."

Best Baby Spoons

Num Num Pre-Spoon Gootensils

Why We Love It

Before baby is ready to fully chow down, it’s important to find a solid set of utensils that will promote eating and support their tender gums from teething. Named Best Starter Spoon by our editorial team, the Num Num Pre-Spoon Gootensils include Stage 1 and Stage 2 “pre-spoons." Stage 1 has raised dimples and can help you start introducing solids, while also getting your little one more comfortable with holding a utensil. From there, the Stage 2 pre-spoon has an open channel, so baby can try out thicker blends and other solids.

Parents in the What to Expect community were wowed by the Gootensils and how their babies were able to get the hang of holding them so quickly. Because of the textures and channels, it also kept food on the utensil and off the floor ... for the most part.

Community Reviews

"Great first untensil when baby is first starting solids, as it come in a 3 pack of different stages. Can find similar alternatives easily that are more budget friendly, though num num is pretty affordable."

"Easy for baby to hold and helps food to stay on the spoon. These are genius and helped out baby learn to feed with much less frustration than the normal spoon design where everything just slides off before they find their mouth. Amazing!"

"Allows baby to feed self, and great for teething gums, as well. Purees even stay nicely in the open spoon and does not fall off and / or fall out."

"These were great for baby led weaning with mashed foods!"

"Have made weaning really easy and son has managed to feed himself using these with ease from the start with minimal mess."

Best Plates and Bowls

Munchkin Stay-Put Suction Bowls

Why We Love It

True to their name, the Munchkin Stay-Put Suction Bowls won’t leave the high chair. Parents say the suction at the base is quite impressive, and there are different sizes so you can adjust to baby’s increasing appetite. They’re also microwave and top rack dishwasher safe, making warm ups and cleaning a breeze. Durability is another pro, with not one, but two moms sharing that they’ve used their sets for the past six years.

The stay-put design also gives more independence to baby, since they’ll be able to practice self-feeding (as opposed to moving around the bowl or dropping it from the high chair).

Community Reviews

"Good size range bowls for baby and decent grip to prevent spills."

"Best bowls! Other bowls baby would grab and fling. And after two kids, these bowls have lasted!"

"They do well in the dish washer!"

They do well in the dish washer!

"Super easy to place down for baby and sticks really well. Perfect size for feeding and doesn’t end up with a silicone smell either. Good value for money."

"These don’t hold the smell like silicone plates. stains with orange purées tho ?? ."

don’t hold the smell like silicone plates. stains with orange purées tho ??

Best Bib

Mushie Silicone Bibs

Why We Love It

Parents love Mushie products for their functionality, and their snap-on bibs are no exception. Although a little more expensive than other bibs on the market (especially cloth ones!), the ease of clean is worth the extra cost. The silicone bib — which is free from BPA, BPS, PVC, and phthalates — can be wiped clean or tossed in the dishwasher for deeper-set stains. They adjustable neckline ensures a custom, secure fit, and the deep front pocket will catch any and every crumb.

Parents love Mushie products for their functionality, and their snap-on bibs are no exception. Although a little more expensive than other bibs on the market (especially cloth ones!), the ease of clean is worth the extra cost. The

silicone bib — which is free from BPA, BPS, PVC, and phthalates — can be wiped clean or tossed in the dishwasher for deeper-set stains. They adjustable neckline ensures a custom, secure fit, and the deep front pocket will catch any and every crumb.

Community Reviews

"Our baby loves silicone pocket bibs because she can retrieve dropped food herself."

"These are great because it catches the mess and rinses clean!"

"Goes in the dishwasher - easy clean up for all!! Most comfortable for kiddo."

"Mushie silicon is the BEST food bib. Catches everything. Huge size range (used from 6 months to age 2.5), cute colors, throw in dishwasher. NEVER FULL ARM BIBS - so hard to keep clean / not moldy."

Best Baby Food Brand

Once Upon a Farm

Why We Love It

When it comes to baby purees, lots of families turn to Once Upon a Farm — and not just because Jennifer Garner is one of the co-founders (though that’s a fun bonus!). From puree pouches to pantry snacks to frozen meals, this brand serves up organic, non-GMO options that feel as wholesome as homemade.

Each item is packed with a variety of fruits and veggies, which can be a total win for parents of picky eaters. Because let’s be real — sometimes peace of mind comes in a pouch.

Community Reviews

"I love how it has simple ingredients — nothing I cannot pronounce. They make good blends, and are so easy to travel with!

"Organic, healthy, natural, no added sugar, tastes great!"

"Less recalls, great ingredients, and flavors my kids loves."

Your Next Read

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Best Bottles for Preemie Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

5 Best Formula Dispensers That You Can Safely Stash in Your Diaper Bag Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Best Nipple Shields to Help With Latching and Minimize Pain Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Free Baby Samples? Yes, Please! How to Score Diapers, Formula and More By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Formula-Feeding Your Baby? Here’s What You Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Supplementing With Formula (Combo Feeding) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

You're Going to Need to Track Your Baby’s Feedings, Diaper Changes, Sleep, and More. Here's How Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Best Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

How to Do Paced Bottle-Feeding With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window