Best Products for Pregnancy Hemorrhoids

best products for pregnancy hemorrhoids

Your first trimester symptoms have come and gone — good riddance, morning sickness! — but once you’re in your second or third trimester, there are new pregnancy symptoms on the horizon like ankle and foot swelling and even congestion . Another unfortunate symptom that might appear around the second trimester? Pregnancy hemorrhoids .

Hemorrhoids are varicose veins in or around the rectum that can be itchy and painful, especially while sitting or pooping. During pregnancy, these swollen, twisted veins are usually caused by poor blood flow and increased pressure within your lower pelvis, says Aimee Eyvazzadeh, M.D. , a board-certified OB-GYN. And it’s no surprise that you might experience postpartum hemorrhoids , too.

“This pressure could be due to the growing fetus, pushing during labor or differences in bowel movements [during pregnancy],” Dr. Eyvazzadeh says. “Increased progesterone levels can cause slowing of the gut and less frequent bowel movements or constipation, which could cause more hemorrhoids.”

Thankfully, we’re here to help with advice and vetted over-the-counter hemorrhoid medications to help relieve discomfort and pain. And, if you’re also experiencing postpartum hemorrhoids from delivery, don’t worry — you can certainly use these products after baby is born, too.

How We Chose the Best Products for Pregnancy Hemorrhoids

We spoke with Dr. Eyvazzadeh to learn what causes hemorrhoids during pregnancy and what hemorrhoid relief products are safe to use while pregnant.

We utilized feedback from pregnant and formerly pregnant people in the What to Expect Community to find a variety of products that provided hemorrhoid relief. We included products that received numerous positive reviews and were deemed:

How Do You Treat Hemorrhoids During Pregnancy?

Modifying your diet and habits can significantly reduce hemorrhoids during and after pregnancy. But for hemorrhoids you experience during pregnancy, Dr. Eyvazzadeh says you may want to consider the following:

Try to have regular bowel movements that are not too hard; taking stool softeners could help

Drink a lot of non-caffeinated fluids

Get regular exercise, especially cardio activities like walking or swimming, which can increase blood flow and help prevent hemorrhoids

Take measures to prevent constipation , like eating a high-fiber diet

Avoid sitting for long stretches of time by moving around to take the pressure off the veins in your pelvic area

Using witch hazel pads can help relieve pain and reduce swelling

Soak in a warm bath

Do Pregnancy Hemorrhoids Go Away?

Typically, yes, hemorrhoids during pregnancy tend to go away after delivery. But don’t think that it’s as instant as “baby out, hemorrhoids gone,” because hemorrhoids can still happen within one month postpartum.

“Medication commonly given during labor can cause constipation and hemorrhoids,” says Dr. Eyvazzadeh. She advises patients to start taking a stool softener a few weeks prior to their due date to try and avoid constipation and unnecessary straining before delivery, but you’ll want to ask your doctor if that’s right for you.

Although hemorrhoids aren’t typically a cause for concern, hemorrhoids that worsen despite lifestyle changes and over-the-counter treatments may mean it’s time to talk to your doctor. Possible surgical treatment after pregnancy may be discussed. And if you notice any bleeding , speak with your doctor. Even though it could be a normal symptom of hemorrhoids or an anal fissure, it’s better to be on the safe side.

Below, find the best products for pregnancy hemorrhoids.

Best Topical Cream for Hemorrhoids

Preparation H Rapid Relief Hemorrhoid Cream

Travel-size tube

instantly numbs the area

No applicator

Why We Love It

For instant hemorrhoid relief, you simply can’t beat the numbing quality of Preparation H cream. Although there are a variety of different options on the market, this version is at the top of the list because it contains lidocaine which numbs the area and instantly eases the itching and burning you might experience.

One pregnant reviewer said they tried every natural remedy they could, but the only product that finally provided relief was this Preparation H cream with lidocaine. Another person said that because of the high lidocaine concentration — higher than any other creams you can find over-the-counter — it was the only thing that gave relief after experiencing hemorrhoids and having an episiotomy. The main downside is that this tube doesn’t come with an applicator, which means that you’ll have to apply it by hand.

Size: 1 ounce

Active ingredients: Phenylephrine, witch hazel

Community Reviews

ccarr1986 "I discovered Preparation H brand has a hemorrhoid cream that actually has lidocaine in it so it basically numbs the area and relieves the discomfort of the hemorrhoid significantly. It's expensive but worth it!

penny213 "Also, preparation H with lidocaine and tucks pads are awesome!"

Best Soothing Pads for Hemorrhoids

TUCKS Medicated Cooling Pads

Disposable

cooling and soothing

fit easily on top of a pad

Pads are small

Why We Love It

When it comes to cooling, immediate relief from hemorrhoids discomfort, Tucks’ witch hazel pads are highly recommended by moms and moms-to-be. The highly cooling and soothing witch hazel-soaked circles work wonders on irritated areas, reducing inflammation almost right away. And, because reviewers swear that they never dry out, you can stock up without worry. You can use them to wipe after each bathroom visit or, follow the lead of many pregnant people, and line your underwear or pad with one or two for instant soothing power. Either way, you’ll feel immediate and lasting relief from burning and itching.

“Tucks Cooling Pads all the way,” says Joyce Slaton, Commerce Editor at What to Expect. “I had painful sore hemorrhoids after giving birth, and dry toilet paper hurt. Tucks got me feeling fresh and clean, and felt like a cool breeze instead of like sandpaper. They were the only thing I could tolerate for a week or two after giving birth.”

Many moms say they also used these pads for postpartum relief from vaginal soreness, so, again, it’s worth stocking up and having them on hand.

Active ingredient: Witch hazel

Size: 100 to 200 pads

Community Reviews

"Baking soda in warm bath. Really helps and also makes your skin so soft. Also the tucks really help."

"I got them after my first and have been using them for the last two months of pregnancy. Love them so much."

"I’ve always just struggled with them or used prepH when they were really bad. But these are a game changer for me."

"I LOVE them, they have also been a life changer postpartum. Lining a pad with them, I also struggled with hemorrhoids during pregnancy and I would roll them up and wear them while sitting. Life changers for sure!"

Best Stool Softener for Hemorrhoids

Colace Stool Softener

Works within 12 to 72 hours

capsules are small

Some said capsules melted together when ordered for delivery

Why We Love It

Colace Stool Softener is one of the products many new moms get at the hospital after delivery, but also appreciate having at home during the pregnancy period. It’ll make going to the bathroom easier for those currently experiencing hemorrhoids and will help avoid making them worse by avoiding constipation. It’s made of a stimulant-free formula that uses pregnancy-safe docusate sodium in order to allow water and fats in to soften the stool.

during the pregnancy period. It’ll make going to the bathroom easier for those currently experiencing hemorrhoids and will help avoid making them worse by avoiding constipation. It’s made of a stimulant-free formula that uses pregnancy-safe docusate sodium in order to allow water and fats in to soften the stool.

Many moms in the What to Expect Community found that Colace was a reliable stool softener to keep on hand throughout pregnancy and the postpartum period. It served as a quick, efficient solution for those who needed to go without experiencing pain. In fact, some decided to take it as a precautionary measure, too, to avoid hemorrhoids either during or after pregnancy. “I used Colace towards the end of my pregnancy and, because I had a planned C-section, continued using it to make sure going to the bathroom was as easy as possible,” says Alexandra Bisonó, Senior Art Director at What to Expect.

Active ingredient: Docusate sodium

Size: 10 to 250 capsules

Dosage: 1 to 3 capsules a day as needed

Community Reviews

"Brought the issue up to my doctor today. She said it was really important to get them under control before labor. She mentioned a lot of water, walks, leafy salads, Colace, witch hazel pads or hemorrhoid cream."

"It took me a week after birth to poop! I feel you. It helped to remember the dr reassuring me I wouldn’t pop any stitches or hurt anything by pooping. I did colace a lot and miralax every day. Drank a ton of water. Now I’m back to normal."

"Colace worked great for me with my first."

Best Donut Pillow for Hemorrhoids

FridaMom Perineal Comfort Cushion

No need to blow up

two-sided

includes reusable gel pack and washable cover

More expensive than other donut pillows

Why We Love It

Many women don’t think about getting a portable, donut-shaped cushion until the postpartum period. But taking pressure off of your perineal area can benefit you long before baby is here.

There are a few features that moms and moms-to-be say make the FridaMom Perineal Comfort Cushion stand out from other donut pillows on the market. The seat is dual-sided, so you can either use the donut for when you need pressure relief, or you can use the flat side and add the included gel packs for cooling relief. The ice pack is also specially designed with contouring on both sides, one which can just cool your bottom or vagina, while the other side had two bumps for cooling both at the same time.

Although this cushion is said to be used for episiotomies and postpartum relief, many reviewers said it is best for hemorrhoids. Moms and moms-to-be loved how versatile it is, with one person calling it “heaven sent.” Aside from the effectiveness of this donut pillow, many people called out how discreet it is as a major plus. Because it’s inflatable and foldable, pregnant people were able to carry it around in their purse which came in handy when having to sit somewhere for a long time.

Weight: 1.36 pounds

Dimensions: 3.75 x 6 x 8.75 inches

Community Reviews

SnaxLikeaMutha "The donut pillow was a life saver for me. I gave birth vaginally and had a second degree tear and ended up with painful hemorrhoids. I used it in the hospital, in the car and at home for quite awhile."

frsoftball10 "The donut pillow is a must! I took it all around the house the first month after my first baby. I didn't tear but pushed for 2 hours and the hemorrhoids were unreal."

Best Fiber Supplement for Hemorrhoids

Metamucil Psyllium Fiber Capsules

Plant-based fiber

only two ingredients

easy-to-swallow capsules

Dosage is high

Why We Love It

Drinking plenty of fluids and eating a high-fiber diet has been shown to reduce your chances of constipation, which can be one of the culprits behind pregnancy hemorrhoids. Dr. Eyvazzadeh recommends having bowel movements that are not too hard and not pushing too much to get things out — which is easier said than done if you’re struggling to get enough fiber in your diet. Enter: Metamucil.

You can’t really go wrong with any of the Metamucil fiber supplements, but the capsules are an easy on-the-go solution with just two ingredients in each pill, so you’re getting as much fiber as possible without additives. Some What to Expect Community moms found it easier to take the capsules than the drink mix if they had a sensitive stomach.

And although the dosage is pretty high, moms noted that they’re small and easy to swallow. Many said that they found incorporating Metamucil into their diet helped soften their stools so they weren’t having painful bowel movements any more. One What to Expect mom called it a “lifesaver” while another said, “It’s honestly the only thing that has given me any sort of relief.”

Just note that like any supplement you take during pregnancy, it’s best to reach out to your health care provider first to make sure that it is the best solution for you.

Size: 300 capsules

Dosage: 2 to 5 capsules up to 4 times per day

Fiber per serving: 2 grams

Community Reviews

ch-2014 "My doc recommended starting a regimen of Metamucil and miralax for me. It’s honestly the only thing that has given me any sore of relief. Constipation had gotten to a point with me that I had given myself an anal fissure. I take Metamucil once a day and miralax every other day. It has helped a ton and I plan to continue until things even out post partum."

ShivRedd "I have been using Metamucil capsules daily to keep bowels moving smoothly (I was never really constipated but for occasional hard stools to avoid any unnecessary bearing down or pressure) and wipes every time I needed to wipe my butt, it’s soothing."

Best Healing Foam for Hemorrhoids

FridaMom Perineal Medicated Witch Hazel Healing Foam

Foam covers more area

dye- and fragrance-free

portable size for hospital bag

Needs to be used on maternity pads or wipes

Why We Love It

In addition to using witch hazel pads, you can also try this FridaMom healing foam that might allow for greater coverage than wipes alone. Use this bottle to pump the soothing solution directly on your maternity pads to cover the entire area and get to hard-to-reach places. Some moms in the What to Expect Community even suggest pairing the foam with witch hazel wipes for as much coverage as possible. You can use the wipes after going to the bathroom, then spread this foam on a pad or liner to wear for longer-lasting relief.

The formula is also unscented and dye-free, so it shouldn’t aggravate sensitive skin. And, at 5-ounces, it’s large enough to last you but compact enough that you can bring it in your hospital bag . Similar to the Tucks wipes, you’ll find that this foaming spray will also be beneficial for postpartum relief for reducing swelling and inflammation.

Active ingredient: Witch hazel

Size: 5 ounces

Community Reviews

KayleyLow "Frida Mom witch hazel healing foam, put this on top of the wipes, it will get further up helping you heal faster."

cheryl9999 "Also look into frida mom perineal healing foam, amazing!"

Best Sitz Bath for hemorrhoids

Soothic Sitz Bath

Spill-free drainage

wide seat

no weight limit

Might not fit some toilets

Why We Love It

Along with products you can apply topically, Dr. Eyvazzadeh recommends a warm bath for instant relief. Just that sensation of warmth and the pressure off of your pelvis can do a lot to relieve tension. But not everyone has access to a bathtub and not everyone who is pregnant feels comfortable getting in and out of a bath, which is exactly where a sitz bath comes in handy.

The Soothic Sitz Bath is an over-the-toilet perineal soaking tub that stands out thanks to the wider-than-most seat and contoured front that will make the overall experience more comfortable. It also has a deep bowl to fit more water to make sure that you can soak your bottom with ease. When you’re done, simply tilt the seat back and the water will pour into the toilet through the openings. Several pregnant people appreciated how sturdy it was and that it was able to support their weight without bending or budging. Even moms-to-be who said they had “severe” hemorrhoids found relief with this bath, and many praised the design that allowed for zero spills when emptying the bath.

Just note that this bath is designed to fit directly on the bowl of your toilet, not the seat. Some reviewers pointed this out as others thought the bath was too wide.

Weight: 15.84 ounces

Dimensions: 16.5 x 13.97 x 5 inches

Community Reviews

"I bought a sitz bath that can go on top of the toilet on Amazon. It’s helped soooo much. I’ve been doing it everyday for 15-20 min."

"Invest in a Sitz Bath! Peri bottles are great and all, but I love using a sitz bath to help with cleaning/soothing my battered lady bits and relieving my hemorrhoids. Can also add epsom salt for extra relief."

"A sitz bath is good too if it’s particularly painful."

Best Ice Packs for Hemorrhoids

Fomi Care Hemorrhoid and Perineal Gel Bead Ice Pack

Includes washable sleeves

can also be heated

two per pack

Might be uncomfortable

Why We Love It

Whether you’re worried about hemorrhoids during pregnancy or trying to relieve postpartum pain , ice packs are one of the easiest ways to relieve that sharp discomfort in your perineum area. For an ice pack actually designed to contour to your body, the Fomi Care Hot/Cold Pack uses gel beads so you’ll feel comfortable while getting maximum relief. The design mimics a pad, so you can freeze it, then sit on it or line your underwear. Many reviewers used these ice packs for both pregnancy and postpartum relief, so you’ll get plenty of use out of them too. Moms who had a vaginal birth used them to help with swelling, especially if they had a tear, while C-section moms said putting this on their incision was comforting.

, ice packs are one of the easiest ways to relieve that sharp discomfort in your perineum area. For an ice pack actually designed to contour to your body, the Fomi Care Hot/Cold Pack uses gel beads so you’ll feel comfortable while getting maximum relief. The design mimics a pad, so you can freeze it, then sit on it or line your underwear. Many reviewers used these ice packs for both pregnancy and postpartum relief, so you’ll get plenty of use out of them too. Moms who had a vaginal birth used them to help with swelling, especially if they had a tear, while C-section moms said putting this on their incision was comforting.

Weight: 13.76 ounces

Dimensions: 12.13 x 3.19 x 1.26 inches

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, What can I do for hemorrhoids during pregnancy? , October 2020. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth, Preventing hemorrhoids during pregnancy , April 2022. Mayo Clinic, What can I do to treat hemorrhoids during pregnancy? , April 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Hemorrhoids During Pregnancy , November 2022.

Your Next Read

Experts Say More Than a Third of All Moms-to-Be Struggle With Pregnancy Hemorrhoids — Will You? Medically Reviewed by Lisa Hickman, M.D.

7 Products to Help with Constipation During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

10 Best Home Remedies for Varicose Veins When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Best Products for Pregnancy Congestion, According to an OB/GYN Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Varicose Veins During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Best Products for Postpartum Stretch Marks Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Constipation is Super Common in Pregnancy. Here's How to Get Things Moving Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Is Constipation a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Relieve Itchy Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Noticing Spider Veins on Your Legs? Causes, Prevention Tips, and When They’ll Fade Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Diarrhea During Pregnancy? Here’s What's Normal — and How to Ease It Medically Reviewed by Lisa Hickman, M.D.

How to Manage IBS Flare-Ups While Pregnant (and Which Meds Are Actually Safe) Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Can Make Sex Hurt — and Simple Ways to Find Relief Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Why Your Pregnant Belly Itches (and What Actually Helps) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window