Great Goodie Bag Ideas for Toddlers and Preschoolers That Aren't Junk

Minor copy and formatting changes.

goodie bag ideas

Wondering what to put in a goodie bag for your tot's next birthday party? These party favor ideas are sure to wow your pint-sized party guests (and their parents).

With all the planning it takes to coordinate a spectacular birthday party for your little one and his pals, the goodie bag can feel like a bit of an afterthought. But stuffing a favor bag with trinkets that self-destruct after five minutes is a money-waster for you and disappointing for the critters. Instead, wow your littlest guests with these smart suggestions for what to include in a goodie bag.

What should you put in a toddler goodie bag?

Building a goodie bag? You've got a lot of choices, which can be overwhelming. The trick to creating a fun goodie bag is to think about items that kids will actually use with when they get home, whether that's small toys, non-toxic craft supplies (crayons are always a hit) or little treats that will make them smile (when in doubt, get some stickers). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsToy Buying Tips for Babies & Young Children: AAP Report ExplainedSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsToy Buying Tips for Babies & Young Children: AAP Report ExplainedSee All Sources

Here's your buying guide for the littlest years: ages 1, 2 and 3.

Goodie bag ideas for a 1-year-old's birthday party

Newly-minted toddlers are too young to expect a goodie bag, but you can still send guests home with one of these fun party favors that tots will get a kick out of (and parents will appreciate, too).

Puree pouch

Shaker toy or rattle

Rubber duck

Bath toy (e.g. sailboat)

Bubbles

Board book

Animal hand puppet

Sippy cup

Baby spoon and fork set

Small plush animal

Large, easy-to-hold crayons

Sand pail and shovel set (perfect for summer birthdays)

Mitten set (perfect for winter birthdays )

Goodie bag ideas for a 2-year-old's birthday party

Tots this age love anything that brings out their natural sense of creativity and curiosity.

Sidewalk chalk

Stickers

Crayons

Washable markers

Building block set

Coloring book

Toy vehicle (e.g. construction, car, truck, airplane)

Small ball

Bubbles

Small plush animal

Sensory toy

Play dough

Inflatable beach ball

Plastic animal or dinosaur figure

Bath crayons

Mini pack of crackers

Goodie bag ideas for a 3-year-old's birthday party

Many of the favors that would work for a 2-year-old's treat bag could also go into a 3-year-old's, but with this age group you can also consider toys and activities that require more advanced motor skills or emphasize imaginative play. Trusted SourceZero to ThreeTips for Choosing Toys for ToddlersSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceZero to ThreeTips for Choosing Toys for ToddlersSee All Sources

Activity book

Squishy toy

Fidget toy

Bubbles

Sidewalk chalk

Watercolor set

Small puzzle

Book

Toy race car

Bubble bath or bath bomb

Superhero cape and mask

Fairy wand

Mini notebook

Large magnets

Beach towel

Reusable straw in a fun shape

Water-growing animal or dinosaur

Mini chalkboard and chalk

Mini bags of crackers

Fresh fruit cup

Tips for building a great birthday party goodie bag

Here's how to create a goodie bag that will get kids excited:

Bypass junk. The prepackaged favors sold at party stores seem like a great deal: 12 sunglasses for $2.99! But they're inexpensive because they're poor quality and will probably break before your wee guests are buckled into their car seats. And the toys that do survive are the ones that aren't fun to begin with. Instead of relying on cheap plastic filler, choose one or two small, better-crafted toys to put in your goodie bags.

Consider the theme. Let the birthday party theme inspire the favors. "Adoptable" puppy stuffed animals would thrill guesets at a dog-themed birthday party . Hosting a carnival-themed party ? Try sending attendees home with boxes of animal crackers.

Craft together. A well-thought-out party favor can be a two-fer — something for your preschooler's playmates to take home as well as an activity at the party itself. Decorate T-shirts or kid-sized aprons, paint wooden birdhouses or jewelry boxes, or create wee wizard (or fairy) wands. Then when the party's over, place their craft into a gift bag. (Hey, they can decorate those too!)

Skip the sugary goodie-bag treats. From the snacks to the juice to the smash cake and ice cream, sugar often plays a starring role at birthday parties. So cut candy from your goodie-bag must-have list — you'll save money and you'll save the other parents from having to deal with their cranky cuties' sugar crash. If you need to pad the goodie bag, try a healthier snack, like a chocolate-milk box or a mini-pack of graham crackers.

Give them something to do. The best gifts are ones that keep kids occupied over time, so when you're searching for what to put in a goodie bag, think in terms of longevity and what they'll really want to go home and use again.

Package well. Presentation is everything, even among the preschool set, so bypass boring in favor of out-of-the-box packaging. Try stamping fun pictures on simple brown-paper lunch bags, then tying them with ribbon or twine. Or put presents and treats in plastic beach pails or a small metal mailbox (available at craft stores). Another option: Pack the loot in a reusable carrier, like a zippered pencil pouch, a water bottle or a mini backpack. What you put in the goodie bag will look that much better if the goodie bag itself is a hit.

Keep party safety in mind. Select toys that are appropriate for each age group, and always avoid choking hazards (like small Legos, marbles or coins). All toys should be at least 1 1/4 inches in diameter and 2 1/4 inches in length so they can't be swallowed. Also look for non-toxic art supplies. For example, crayons should have "ASTM D-4236" on the package to indicate that they've been evaluated by the American Society for Testing and Materials. Trusted SourceKidsHealth by NemoursChoosing Safe Toys for Toddlers and PreschoolersSee All Sources [3]

After partying it up, it's time for guests to collect their treasures. Creating a goodie bag ensures the fun times can continue for the kiddos, so skip the candy in favor of art supplies, small toys or sensory objects. These are treats that little ones (and parents) will want to keep around to enjoy.