9 Best Baby Beach Tents — Safe, Shady & Parent-Approved

Best Baby Beach Tents

QUICK SUMMARY

The best baby beach tent, based on expert's guidance and parents' feedback, is the Pacific Breeze Easy Setup Beach Tent because it's made of UPF 50 fabric, provides ventilation, is easy to assemble and spacious.

Pacific Breeze Easy Setup Beach Tent because it's made of UPF 50 fabric, provides ventilation, is easy to assemble and spacious.

As I prepared for my daughter's first beach trip three years ago, I made sure to have all the essentials: bathing suits , baby-safe sunscreens , baby sunglasses and a baby beach tent to keep her safe from the sun. Thought, I’ll be honest, I was hesitant about the latter. I like to pack light when I go to the beach, and the idea of lugging another bag wasn’t appealing. Plus, I figured my daughter would be fine with the typical sun gear. (Heck, I was a tent-free beach baby and I turned out fine.) But I was immediately proven wrong after talking to fellow moms and our pediatrician

"Sun protection needs to be multifaceted since — let's face it — we aren't perfect when it comes to applying sunscreen," says Hayley Goldbach , MD, FAAD, FACMS a double board certified dermatologist and dermatologic surgeon at Brown University. She recommends keeping your baby out of the sun during peak hours (from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.) when the UV rays and heat are the strongest. One way to do that is to utilize a baby beach tent, says Dr. Goldbach.

Baby beach tents, which can also be used at parks, playgrounds and your backyard, are made of sun protective fabric to protect your little one’s skin from the sun’s rays while giving them a comfy spot to stay cool — and even nap. But narrowing down the choices can be tricky, especially if you’re not used to using a beach tent for yourself. So to save you some time, I've done the research for you and found the best baby beach tents for your al fresco hangs.

How I Chose the Best Baby Beach Tents

Sun protection is, of course, the top priority when selecting a beach tent for your baby. But you also need to make sure that the tent allows for air flow to avoid overheating and just keep your baby comfortable. I spoke to Dr. Goldback and consulted recommendations from the American Academy of Pediatrics and Skin Care Foundation to learn what beach tent features keep your baby safe. Per their guidance, all beach tents on this list are made of UPF 50 fabric and feature mesh or roll-up windows to provide proper airflow and keep the space from getting too hot.( It’s worth noting that mesh windows won’t offer the same sun protection those made of the tent fabric and, therefore, should be placed away from the sun.)

With this information in mind, I then considered what I looked for when shopping for my first beach tent. I also spoke to a colleague who takes her son to the beach regularly, and turned to the What to Expect community to ensure my criteria met the needs of the masses. Based on this feedback, I made sure all of the baby beach tents on the list received positive reviews for:

Security : Some tents have sand pockets to help hold them in place while others have stakes. Ones with stakes can also be used at older sibs soccer games, backyard play dates or when you’re camping.

Portability : If you have a lot of children or tend to go to the beach without your partner, portability should be at the top of your list. Look for lightweight tents and one that comes with a carrying bag. Similarly, if you are going on a beach vacation, lightweight beach tents with carrying bags will be easier to pack.

Ease of use : Pop-up tents are the easiest to set up and take down. For others, you may want to check out a YouTube video before hitting the beach for the first time.

Durability : Sturdier tents are built to withstand strong wind gusts and will last more than a summer. They also tend to cost more, an investment that is worth it if your family spends a lot of time outdoors or you plan on having more children.

Best Baby Beach Tent

Pacific Breeze Easy Setup Beach Tent

Easy to assemble

Lightweight

Spacious

Pockets for storing beach essentials

No way to contain crawlers and walkers

Dimensions : ‎95 x 51 x 52 inches

Weight : 6.5 pounds

Carrying case : Yes

Waterproof : No but water-resistant

Why We Love It

The Pacific Breeze classic pop-up tent was the first baby beach tent I tried, and it truly checked all the boxes. And it doesn't hurt that it has thousands of 5-star ratings.

Made of a water-resistant, UPF 50+ polyester, this pop-up tent has three large windows and an open front to ensure plenty of ventilation. As much as I like to soak up the sun, I found myself escaping to the tent with my daughter when temperatures got a little too hot.

And that fact that it's not a total pain to carry or set up adds to the appeal. The tent is very lightweight — comparable to a camping chair, one user noted — and can be easily folded and stored in the included carrying case. As for set up, all you have to do is pull the two strings at the top of the tent and it'll pop into place. Just be sure you secure the tent with the four included sand stakes and sand pockets.

Another thing that drew me to the Pacific Breeze was its durability. “This is the third beach tent that I’ve purchased and the only one that has made it through multiple trips to the beach,” one parent says. I've had my tent for two years and though it's a little scuffed up, it still does its job.

When unfolded, the tent has enough room for four people, and features several pockets where you can store your phone, sunscreen or even a portable white noise machine.

So what's the downside? Unfortunately, there is no way to close the opening. So if you want complete privacy when breastfeeding or need to contain a super antsy baby, this may not be the tent for you.

Community Reviews

ftm012022 "We love our beach tent. It’s lightweight, our family of 3 fits in it, and it’s very easy and quick to put up."

shannaanne "I live near the beach and got this as a baby gift. So nice, light, easy to pop up…if it’s in your budget."

Best Affordable Baby Beach Tent

LetsFunny Beach Tent

Lightweight

Waterproof

Two inner pockets to store your belongings

Can take time to assemble

Dimensions: ‎86 x 59 x 47 inches

Weight : 3.85 pounds

Carrying case : Yes

Waterproof : Yes

Why We Love It

At $40, LetsFunny’s no-frills tent is perfect for families who aren’t frequent beachgoers but want to keep their little one safe from the sun when they do make the trip. Although it’s cheaper than other tents on the market, it doesn't skimp on space. It’s spacious enough to seat two to three people, so adults won’t feel cramped when sitting inside with baby. Another plus? The tent floor extends past the top shade, so older family members can be close to baby while still soaking up the sun — the best of both worlds.

The tent provides 360 degrees of protection, with a zip-up the front curtain to provide extra privacy. It does take some time to set up, as it's not a pop-up model, but if you plan on spending a whole day at the beach then it's worth it for the protection and space.

Best Splurge Baby Beach Tent

California Beach Co Tent Pop N’ Go Playpen

Spacious

Comfy

360 ventilation

Expensive

play mat sold separately

Dimensions : ‎59 inches x 48 inches

Weight : 7.2 pounds

Carrying case : Yes

Waterproof : No

Why We Love It

The California Beach Co tent gained a mass following thanks to Instagram and TikTok, and parents say it’s worth the hype — and money. At $210, it is more expensive than most beach tents on the market. But the high price is a result of high quality. Made of a wipe-clean fabric, parents note that the durable tent has lasted them for years.

Tika Fender, Art Director and mom of one, lives in sunny California and invested in this tent to maximize her son's outdoor time while keeping him safe from the rays.

"I love it because it's a super big tent and I can comfortably fit inside and play with my toddler," Tika says.

Although I don't own the California Beach Co tent, I was lucky enough to enjoy it when we went away with friends who bought it. It was so nice to place all three children (all under 1 at the time) in the tent so they could play together outside without being exposed to the sun. And we didn't have to worry about them crawling away, thanks to a mesh zip-up panel.

It’s roomy enough to fit at least three kids and a grown up or two. The mesh sides allow the cool ocean breeze to flow through freely.

If you foresee your child taking a lot of naps in the tent, you can add-on the mattress and mattress cover to create a cozier environment. That will, of course, increase the price, but several What to Expect community members have a way to cut the cost. "They immediately give you 25 percent off your next order so I did three separate orders," one member said . "I believe the blanket was the cheapest so I ordered that first. Then got 25 percent off the playpen. Then I ordered the mattress and got 25 percent off that too." Another parent suggested signing up for their text notifications to receive discount codes up to 15 percent.

Tika does warn that the inflatable mat takes forever to deflate and she often finds herself "having to wrestle it to make it fit in the little carrier." But if you don't mind a little work and need something spacious, the California Beach Co Tent is a worthwhile investment.

Community Reviews

anaviky "I have it and I love it! - it's more $$ if you get the mattress and sheet but it makes it more comfortable for the kiddo. It’s super easy to set up and put away. I've used it on the nice days and just let my LO on it while I do some yard work or something!"

mamalovely14 "We got the California Beach Co playpen and are very happy with it. It has been so nice to have a contained shaded area for the baby while I work outside. It’s also large enough that my 3-year-old will sit in it and play with the baby too."

Best Baby Beach Tent With Pool

Monobeach Baby Beach Tent

Easy carrying

Simple set-up

Difficult to fold back up

Dimensions : 4‎7.5 x 31.5 x 27.5 inches

Weight : 1.15 pounds

Carrying case : Yes

Waterproof : NA

Why We Love It

If your baby loves playing in the water but you’re worried about sun exposure, consider Monobeach’s pool tent . The tent comes as two separate parts: a dome covering and base that zip together to form a shaded area where your child can safely splish and splash. To utilize the pool feature, simply dig a not-too-deep hole, place the circular part of the base over it, and then fill with water.

The tent features a large roll-up back panel that offers plenty of ventilation to let in the breeze and keep your baby cool on hot days. There is also a small side pocket where you store toys and sunscreen. Included are four pegs that keep the beach tent secure from blowing away in the wind and a handy carrying bag.

As easy as this is to set up, many parents note that it is extremely difficult to fold and store. “Even with the included directions, it took two people and about 30 m[inutes] to figure it out,” one parent wrote. To save yourself some time and sanity, check out some YouTube videos and practice at home before hitting the road.

Community Reviews

mamabearz2022 "We used this because our baby loves water. We filled it with ocean water and just sat next to her so we could always see her and interact with her."

Best Baby Beach Tent Playpen

Hicapop PlayPod Portable Playpen

Quick set up

Well-ventilated

Heavy

Dimensions : ‎‎53 x 48 x 30 inches

Weight : 16 pounds

Carrying case : Yes

Waterproof : Yes

Why We Love It

If you're not sure how often you'll be outside with baby, you may want a "beach tent" that can be used inside for year-round use. Several parents purchase Hicapop's portable playpen for that exact reason. The UPF, machine-washable dome is easy to attach and remove, so it can be used in just about any environment. (Just make sure you purchase the playpen with the dome, as the company sells it separately.)

I had bought this to keep at my mom, who we visit often and has a very spacious backyard. In addition to the tent's versatility, I appreciated how easy it was to set up: It has an easy, two-latch set up and take down that even the most harried parent can manage. It also has two zip-open mesh doors which can be tied to the side to avoid flapping or locked from the outside if you are trying to keep your little one contained.

I had bought this to keep at my mom, who we visit often and has a very spacious backyard. In addition to the tent's versatility, I appreciated how easy it was to set up: It

One downside is that it's a heavier tent. It wasn't an issue for me, as we weren't carrying it back and forth on the beach, but some parents may find that a deterrent. The carrying case can help make that process easier, and also doubles as a place to store the tent when not in use.

Community Reviews

kjn0906 "We have the Hiccapop playpod (the 69” version). We have a small house and I wanted something that we could easily collapse every night after baby goes to bed so it’s not taking over our living room 24/7. It literally takes 10 seconds to collapse. Way easier than even a pack n play. We also put a playmat underneath it for extra padding."

Most Spacious Baby Beach Tent

Veer Basecamp

Spacious

Insect-protection

Expensive

Dimensions : 32 x 5 x 5 inches

Weight : 7 lbs.

Carrying case : Yes

Waterproof : No but water-resistant

Why We Love It

If you have multiple children, you want to ensure they all have protection from the sun. Although most beach tents can accommodate two children, Veer Basecamp's tent can hold up to four people — potentially more depending on their size.

At such a large size, one would expect the Veer Basecamp beach tent to be heavy. However, at seven pounds, parents say they don't struggle toting it from car to beach and back. The task, of course, is made a little easier thanks to an included carrying case.

Setup and takedown is a breeze, too: Simply pull two poles at the top or it to pop out, and push those same poles inward to fold up the sides and store in the carrying case.

The Veer Basecamp tent isn't just focussed on sun protection; the fabric and mesh windows help protect your kids from insects as well. There's also a zip-up panel that makes it easy to get in and out of the tent, but not so easy that your baby will be able to escape.

Community Reviews

mt1123 "We LOVE the veer basecamp for napping on the beach we still use it for him today he uses it as a play tent on the beach and will for years."

Best Pop-Up Baby Beach Tent

WolfWise UPF 50+ Easy Pop Up Beach Tent

Easy to assemble

Extra security from wind

Two zip-up openings

Not super spacious

Dimensions : 59.06 L x 59.06 W x 49.21 inches

Weight : 3.8 pounds

Carrying case : Yes

Waterproof : No but water-repellent

Why We Love It

Pop-up tents are the ultimate convenience, especially if you're having to set up your beach tent while holding your baby. Though all of the tents on our list are relatively easy to assemble (even the non-pop-up tents), WolfWise receives rave reviews for it's ease of assembly. All you have to do is take it out of the carrying case, undo the Velcro loops and, with the flick of your wrist, it pops up to a spacious tent.

Though it's an affordable find at under $50, the WolfWise tent doesn't sacrifice on features. It has easy-to-fill sandbags to secure your tent to the ground, and comes with wind ropes that can provide extra security on breezier days. It's not the most spacious, fitting two to three people, but it has plenty of room for your baby to roam without risking sun exposure.

What parents particularly like about the WildWise pop-up tent is that there are two openings — one at the front and one at the back — and both can be zipped up if you need extra privacy.

Best Baby Beach Tent for Newborns

Babymoov Babyni Premium Baby Dome

Raised walls

removable mattress

toys included for extra entertainment

Expensive for longevity

Dimensions : 24 x 4.3 x 24 inches

Weight : 2 pounds

Carrying case : No, but folds into itself

Waterproof : Yes

Why We Love It

If your little one isn’t super mobile, then you don't need a large tent to contain them. You may, however, want something a bit more structured to keep them safe outside. Enter the Babymoov Aquani Tent. Built more like a bassinet, this tent has a flat, sturdy pad that baby can safely lay on, plus raised, stable sides to keep them contained. The UPF 50 canopy, which also protects baby from bugs and mosquitos, unfurls and pulls over the top to provide additional sun protection. As your child gets a little older, you can add some water to make them their own little pool. It also comes with two toys to hang from the top of the tent.

If your little one isn’t super mobile, then you don't need a large tent to contain them. You may, however, want something a bit more structured to keep them safe outside. Enter the Babymoov Aquani Tent . Built more like a bassinet, this tent has a flat, sturdy pad that baby can safely lay on, plus raised, stable sides to keep them contained. The UPF 50 canopy, which also protects baby from bugs and mosquitos, unfurls and pulls over the top to provide additional sun protection. A

The tent can be folded and stored in a compact, circular case that is so light and easy to carry. That said, some parents (including me) struggle to fold it the first few times.

Best Baby Beach Tent for Toddlers

Schylling UV Play Shade

Spacious

front flaps can be opened or closed

can be opened with one hand

May need extra security on windy days

Dimensions : 31 x 51 x 39 inches

Weight : 2.2 pounds

Carrying case : No, but folds into itself

Waterproof : Yes

Why We Love It

Trying to contain a toddler (or several toddlers) can be a herculean task. But Schylling’s tent makes it a little easier. At 51 inches wide by 39 inches deep, a few toddlers and their toys can comfortably fit inside for playtime. Although you can tie back the flaps so kids can come and go as they please, you can also tie them closed for a little extra privacy, like with a diaper change or nap. And, as an added bonus, the tent can easily be opened with one hand, leaving your other one free to hold your toddler back from running towards the ocean.

Hayley Goldbach , MD, FAAD, FACMS, Dermatologic Surgeon at Brown University American Academy of Pediatrics, Sun Safety: Information for Parents About Sunburn & Sunscreen , July 2021. Skin Cancer Foundation, Sun-Protective Clothing .

Your Next Read

Most-Bought Prime Day Baby Deals: Sunscreen, Stroller Fans, and More Summer Essentials By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The 10 Best Stroller Footmuffs To Keep Your Baby Warm on the Coldest Winter Walks Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

9 Best Swim Diapers to Keep Your Baby’s Poop Out of the Pool Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Sunscreen and Sun Protection for Babies: What Parents Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

The Best Infant Life Jackets, According to Sailing Instructors and Boating Parents Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

The 9 Best Baby Floor Seats, According to Parents and Experts Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Protect Babies and Toddlers in the Heat Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Stroller Travel Systems That Parents Say Make Life Easier Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Smart Tips for Getting Your Baby to Sleep Anywhere (Yep, Even on Vacation) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window