The Best Babymoon Destinations for a Relaxing Vacation Before Baby Arrives

Best Babymoon Destinations

Pregnancy, while wonderful, is also an exhausting experience. Each trimester brings a new physical feat to endure — from nausea and round ligament pain to a sore back and bouts of insomnia. Many expecting women look forward to a vacation way with their partners to indulge, relax, receive some much-needed R&R and cherish the last few weeks before their little one’s arrival. In recent years, this getaway has been called the "babymoon."

What is a babymoon?

As the name suggests, a babymoon the last travel hoorah before becoming parents. A babymoon is a trip that couples take before they go from a family of two to three. Though most traditionally, first-time parents invest in this experience (since they have the time!), it’s not uncommon for duos to plan a babymoon with each pregnancy. The goal of this trip is different based on individual preferences. While some moms-to-be appreciate a spa escape, some would rather dine their way around a town. More than anything, however, it's an opportunity to connect with your partner before gearing up for your next role as parents.

Babymoons can range in length from a long weekend to a week or more. For most, it depends on their budget, the time they can take away from work and how well the pregnant person is feeling being away from the comforts of home. (Might we suggest bringing your beloved pregnancy pillow for the journey, if you can?).

How to plan for a babymoon

First and foremost, decide where you want to go! While the world is your oyster, for your babymoon, it could be better to stay within the country, particularly if you’re well into your second trimester. Speaking of which, is there a best time to fly? That’s a question to ask your OB/GYN since every pregnancy is different. Generally speaking, though, most physicians ask you don’t board a flight past 35 weeks , and truthfully, you may not be very comfortable at that point anyway. If you choose to drive for your babymoon, make sure to give yourself extra time for frequent bathroom pitstops, too.

Give the hotels on your list a quick call to find out the location of the closest hospital and whether there’s a doctor on call. Or if you opt for a VRBO or Airbnb, make sure to do your own research so you feel as comfortable and prepared as possible. And of course, look at the CDC’s website for travel advisories due to the coronavirus pandemic.

Not sure where to head out? We have you covered. Here are our top babymoon destinations in the USA:

For a Relaxing Beachside Vacation

Fort Lauderdale, FL

Why We Love It

Rather than fighting crowds and party-goers in Miami, consider going a little north to Fort Lauderdale. This calmer yet equally-as-beautiful section of the shoreline features the crisp, white ocean sand you crave, without all the chaos. While you’re here, you can enjoy fresh-caught seafood at many oceanfront restaurants, book a boat tour or schedule a massage (or two) to enjoy. Don’t forget: the best way to lay on the beach while pregnant is to dig a hole for your belly, so your back gets some much-welcomed relief.

Where to stay

Starting at $110 per night, minimum stay ranges

Book this stylish beachfront studio that overlooks the Atlantic. In addition to being cozy, it also includes a kitchenette for when you need to cook something to fulfill your cravings. You can also enjoy a shared pool, a tiki bar for mocktails and an on-site salon and spa within the property. You can also easily walk to a grocery store and to Galt Ocean Mile, which offers plenty of entertainment options.

Starting at $287 per night

For more of a splurge, you can’t go wrong at the Conrad Ft. Lauderdale (551 N Fort Lauderdale Beach Boulevard). They have two on-site restaurants, but if you’d rather stay in your bathrobe all day, choose a suite that includes a kitchen complete with a refrigerator, stovetop, microwave and dishwasher. As a guest, you can catch up on your parenting book reading goals at the private beach, or head over to their pool that overlooks the water. For a special treat for your tired body, book a massage treatment before you go, too.

For a History-Filled Adventure

Charleston, SC

Why We Love It

If you love history with a side of fresh crab cakes, Charleston, South Carolina, may become your new favorite destination. Founded in 1670, you’ll feel as if you journey back in time as you explore the French Quarter, complete with horse-drawn carriages, cobblestone streets and old mansions. There’s plenty of romance to be found in this Southern town, so make sure to book dinner and show reservations before you head out. Best of all, you don’t have to choose between beach and city with this babymoon destination, since it has the best of both worlds with beaches less than a few miles away from downtown.

Where to stay

Starting at $97 per night, with a three-night minimum

Stay on budget and still have a fun time at this one bedroom on James Island. It’s only four miles to Charleston and six miles to Folly Beach, so you can split your time between exploring South Carolina’s historical city and soaking up the sun. Plus, it includes everything you need to enjoy meals at home (and save money!), with a fully-equipped kitchen.

Starting at $296 per night

For those couples who want their babymoon to be all about luxury, choose the Grand Bohemian Charleston (55 Wentworth Street). It’s located downtown in the historic district and is home to the Grand Bohemian Gallery, which showcases local and global art. (And psst : this high-end hotel is only a seven-minute walk from the iconic Gibbes Museum of Art, too.) In addition to the plush, romantic suites, make sure to grab dinner at the hotel’s rooftop restaurant that offers spectacular views — and mouthwatering dishes from locally-sourced ingredients.

For a Desert Oasis

Sedona, AZ

Why We Love It

Even if you’re not getting much sleep in pregnancy, do you still dream of a sunkissed morning, looking over the beauty of Mother Nature with a cup of coffee in your hand? If so, you may need to head over to Sedona, Arizona. This town is nestled deep in the desert, offering unbelievable views of canyons, red rock buttes and pine forests. Unlike other desert regions, Sedona is known to be milder (think: you might not be sweating the whole time), allowing you to enjoy nature walks, have an outdoor picnic and explore the local art scene.

Where to stay

Starting at $130 per night, with a two-night minimum

If you crave privacy but still want to be part of the action, consider this two-bedroom beauty that’s a short walk from shops, restaurants and trailheads. It’s on a corner lot, which means you won’t have the neighbors peering in your windows, and with an expansive backyard, you can enjoy sunset mocktails each night.

Starting at $259 per night

For a splurge, the location and charm of Hilton Sedona Resort at Bell Rock (90 Ridge Trail Drive) can’t be beaten. In addition to a highly-rated spa with views of the beautiful red rocks, the concierge staff will also help you find the right excursion for your fitness level — and safety for your pregnancy. Choose from many romance and spa packages to make it an unforgettable babymoon in Arizona.

For a Stint in the City

New York, NY

Why We Love It

Forget the spa, the beach or the great outdoors — you’re craving the rush of the Big Apple. Your babymoon is all about what will make you feel the most supported and loved before your baby’s arrival — and for you, that might be seeing Broadway shows and dining at an endless array of ethnic cuisine. There’s plenty to do in the city that never sleeps, including walks in Central Park or across the Brooklyn Bridge, touring countless museums and much, much more. Just make sure to bring some comfortable walking shoes — and take breaks when you need to, mama!

Where to stay

Starting at $136 per night, minimum stay ranges

This studio is in the heart of midtown Manhattan and less than $150 a night. You’re within walking distance to must-see landmarks, including Rockefeller Center and Bryant Park, and you’ll enjoy the extra space in a king-sized bed. While there isn’t an kitchen, the bathroom has been upgraded with a five-head massage shower to wash off the grime of the city.

Starting at $195 per night

Rather than being in the touristy center, travel a few blocks away to stay at the Moxy Chelsea NYC (105 W 28th Street). This hotel chain offers many luxuries you’ll enjoy for a New York babymoon: There’s an on-site restaurant, bar and lounge, as well as a coffee shop and deli. While the rooms are small, they pack in comfort with rainfall showerheads and amenities. Plus, the location in the Chelsea neighborhood puts you within easy walking or train distance to uptown and downtown, so you can see as much of the city as you desire.

For an Excursion to the Windy City

Chicago, IL

Why We Love It

The windy city is known for many qualities: the friendly, Midwestern inhabitants, beautiful views of Lake Michigan, renowned architecture and, of course, deep-dish pizza! For the couple who wants to explore on their babymoon, it’s a worthwhile destination to consider. You can spend your days sightseeing and your evenings finding a new restaurant to enjoy. And for history buffs, there’s plenty to learn about this Illinois town. Chicago is known for its extreme winters, but the spring (Go Cubs!) and fall are great times to visit for more mild weather.

Where to stay

Starting at $117 per night

Luckily, in Chicago, you can stay at a five-star hotel without the typical five-star price tag at Loews Chicago Hotel (455 N Park Drive). In addition to city skyline views from the rooftop lounge, you can also enjoy their on-site restaurant and a heated indoor lap pool. It’s within a 10-minute walk from Navy Pier, and each guestroom offers either city or Chicago River views. Its central location makes your touristy checklist easy to finish.

Starting at $376 per night

For a splurge that’s worth it, consider The Langham Chicago (330 N Wabash Avenue), a quick two blocks from Michigan Avenue’s Magnificent Mile. As a luxury skyscraper tower, you won’t believe the view from your suite. Or the view from inside your suite, which includes a deep-soaking tub, ideal for healing your achy back. For moms- (and dads)-to-be who want to be nourished during their babymoon, book a visit to their wellness retreat, Chuan Spa, offering a range of treatments inspired by traditional Chinese medicine.

For a City and Nature Combo

Seattle, WA

Why We Love It

As Washington’s largest city, surrounded by gorgeous Pacific Northwest mountains, Seattle is a retreat that offers a little bit of everything for your babymoon. You can nibble your way through Pike Place Market (and take a photo at the first Starbucks!), walk through picture-perfect neighborhoods, tour museums and scale the Space Needle — and if you’re lucky, enjoy some rain-free weather. On clear days, you’ll be amazed by the beauty of the often snow-capped mountains that surround this port city.

Where to stay

Starting at $113 per night, mininum stay ranges

Snuggled in the heart of Seattle with views of the Space Needle from the rooftop deck, this apartment rental is a rare find. It’s centrally located within walking distance of the Seattle Center, the aquarium, Pike Place Market, and more. With the private kitchen, you can save on meals at home — and store all of your must-have pregnancy snacks, too.

Starting at $590 per night

For a one-of-a-kind babymoon experience and splurge, book your stay at the Four Seasons Seattle (99 Union Street). It’s within walking distance to Pike Place Market, the Seattle Art Museum and the Washington State Convention Center. However, you’ll likely enjoy your time at the hotel itself, with a full spa, a rooftop infinity pool that’s heated year-round and an outdoor fireplace. It’s a luxury experience that’s worth the splurge for you — and your baby belly.

For a Sunny SoCal Stay

San Diego, CA

Why We Love It

San Diego is a warm retreat for a laid-back babymoon on the West Coast. It’s known for its many beaches, parks and, of course, world-renowned tacos! You can spend your trip touring through the legendary San Diego Zoo, stopping by artist studios and galleries and enjoying the sunshine. It’s a relaxed experience with the same charm of other popular California spots. With a buzzing downtown and a chill beach, you’ll fill your days with excitement and R&R.

Where to stay

Starting at $100 per night, with a one-night minimum

Book this two-bedroom condo in the heart of San Diego. It’s only a short drive to Petco Park and the San Diego Zoo, and you're sure to feel at home in this rental. Also, having a washer and dryer for longer stays will make laundry easier, especially if you bring the older sibling along for the trek.

Starting at $256 per night

Or consider The US Grant (326 Broadway), a luxury hotel by the water for a meaningful splurge. Each of the 270 rooms offers the fancy amenities you appreciate for a babymoon, like bathrobes and slippers, pillowtop beds and Egyptian cotton sheets. It’s within walking distance to many hot spots, including the beach, and their on-site spa will have you feeling nourished and pampered from head (to belly) to toe.

For a Rock 'n Roll Babymoon

Memphis, TN

Why We Love It

Memphis is a Southern destination for country and blues music fans with strong notes, flavors and history. It’s located on the Mississippi River and is where many legendary musicians — including Elvis Presley, Johnny Cash and B.B. King — recorded their chart-topping records. When you’re in town, you can tour Graceland (Elvis’s former home!), the Rock 'n' Soul Museum, the Blues Hall of Fame and more. Plus, if one of your pregnancy cravings are comfort foods like barbeque, macaroni and cheese and biscuits, you’ll be in culinary heaven in Memphis!

Where to stay

Starting at $125 per night

Consider booking your babymoon stay at the Sheraton Memphis Downtown (250 N Main Street). It’s located on the vintage Memphis Main Street Trolley Line, which takes you to all of the popular downtown attractions. The guestrooms are comfortable, and when you need to wash the day away, you can go for a dip in their on-site pool.

Starting at $144 per night

For a bit more, book your fancy babymoon stay at The Peabody (149 Union Avenue), a few steps away from the must-see Beale Street. You can choose from their several fine dining options, take a dip in their indoor pool and book treatment at the full-service spa. One of your favorite experiences might be their Southern-inspired breakfast, with all of the fixins’ — from bacon and eggs to biscuits and gravy and more. But perhaps the most charming amenity? The daily Duck March, during which the hotel's resident ducks scoot around the lobby fountain. When you’re not at the hotel, enjoy a quick walk to the Rock 'n' Soul Museum, the Gibson Guitar Factory, and other must-sees.

For a New England Excursion

Portland, ME

Why We Love It

For seafood fans who love the charm of New England, Portland will check all of your babymoon boxes. It’s situated on the Casco Bay peninsula, with a vibrant waterfront. You can tour boutiques, art galleries and restaurants, all while witnessing working fishermen in wharves. For a fun afternoon of daydreaming, stroll past Victorian-era homes, tour the Victoria Mansion museum and eat as much lobster as you can!

Where to stay

Starting at $119 per night

For a romantic babymoon experience that won’t rob the bank, book a long weekend at The Chadwick Bed & Breakfast (140 Chadwick Street). Each boutique-style room includes cozy bathrobes and a plush bed, and some upgrades also have a balcony. You’ll enjoy a complimentary breakfast during your stay, and you can easily walk to all of the fun in a flash.

Starting at $199 per night

Book your babymoon adventure at the Inn By The Sea (40 Bowery Beach Road) for a more seaside escape. This four-star property is situated right on the beaches of Maine. Their generous rooms provide modern touches with nautical charm, and their spa menu includes massages, aromatherapy and reflexology. It’s also a short distance to shops and restaurants, making for a relaxing experience for you and your partner.

For a Rodeo-Style Retreat

Austin, TX

Why We Love It

It’s the state capital of Texas — and it’s been buzzing in popularity for years. You and your partner will enjoy the live music scene featuring the tunes of country, rock and blues, as well as the diverse dining scene featuring BBQ, Tex-Mex and more flavors from around the globe. For those who are enjoying an active pregnancy, there are countless parks and lakes in Austin that are ideal for hikes, swimming, boating and biking. Plus, for home design fans, it’s not a far drive to Waco, Texas, where you can visit Chip and Joanna Gaines' Magnolia Silos for a day, too.

Where to stay

Starting at $138 per night

The Homewood Suites by Hilton Austin Downtown (78 East Avenue) is centrally located, allowing you to walk to many of your bookings and reservations. Plus, there’s a pool for a quick dip — and breakfast is included, too. Though it may not be the fanciest experience, it provides all you need for a comfortable stay.

Starting at $595 per night

The Commodore Perry Estate (4100 Red River Street) is on the pricier side, but for a luxury babymoon experience, it’s a well-deserved treat. It’s in the Hancock neighborhood, which is within walking distance to the shopping streets of 6th Street and South Congress Avenue. You also won’t be too far from Lady Bird Lake and Lake Austin for evening strolls with your one-and-only. The property also features a pool and restaurant, giving you plenty of options for your babymoon.

For a Mix of Everything

Asheville, NC

Why We Love It

Nature lovers will fall in love with this eclectic town in the Blue Ridge Mountains. There’s much to do, see, experience and taste in Ashvegas, as the locals call it. From a farm-to-table food scene and a vibrant arts community, as well as endless hikes and mountains to climb, your babymoon will be enriching and exciting. Plus, you can’t miss a visit to America’s largest privately-owned home, the Biltmore House, built in the 19th century. The downtown area is full of cafes, boutiques and even a Pinball Museum to explore.

Where to stay

Starting at $109 per night

If Biltmore is at the top of your list of things to see in Asheville, book your stay at The Residences at Biltmore (700 Biltmore Avenue). There, you're within minutes of the mansion, and a free shuttle can take you to the front door. Also, you’re just a 10-minute drive away from the River Arts District, where you can see the works of more than 185 artists. The rooms are all comfortable and cozy, and the concierge is happy to arrange massages, chocolates and flowers upon arrival for special occasions — like your babymoon!

Starting at $174 per night

For a pricier option, stay in the heart of downtown at The Foundry (51 South Market Street) — which, as the name suggests, used to be a foundry! Each of their 87 rooms offers bathrobes, pillow menus and a welcome amenity of local snacks. They also have a restaurant that serves up traditional Southern fare and a lounge ideal for grabbing an bump-friendly nightcap. Music venues, restaurants, shops and more fun are right outside the hotel's doors.

Your Next Read

One Week to Go? 10 Things to Do Before Your Due Date Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Smart Tips for Getting Your Baby to Sleep Anywhere (Yep, Even on Vacation) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Your Pre-Pregnancy Check List: How to Get Your Body, Budget, and Life Ready for Baby Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Your Guide to a Calmer, Cozier Holiday Season During Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The Ultimate Third Trimester Checklist: Everything to Do Before Your Baby’s Birthday Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Picture-Perfect Maternity Photo Ideas for Every Parent-to-Be Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Smart Ways to Get Ready for Labor (Physically and Mentally) Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

What to Pack When Traveling With Baby Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Taking a Hospital Tour During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

In a Baby-Making Rut? Here's How to Keep the Romance Alive Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window