Best Activities for a 7-Month-Old Baby

best activities for 7-month-old babies

At 7 months, your baby is now likely sitting up and possibly even starting to crawl as she explores the world around her.

Now that your baby has officially entered the second half of her first year, she’ll be making physical, emotional and cognitive leaps and bounds. By now, your little one is likely sitting up by herself and maybe even starting to crawl to get an even better look at her surroundings.

You can help your 7-month-old on her path of discovery and foster the development of important skills through regular play. For babies, play is just as important to growth as sleep and diet. In fact, experts say it’s the primary way little ones explore and interact with the world around them!

What skills is your child developing at 7 months?

Skills like responding to her name, rolling over in both directions and, later, crawling and walking are called developmental milestones, or actions most babies can complete by a certain age.

Though they shouldn't be considered a strict schedule (all babies grow at slightly different paces), these markers can help serve as a guideline for pediatricians and parents to track a child's progress in four important developmental categories: social and emotional, language and communication, cognition, and gross and fine motor skills.

Missing one — or even a few — of these markers shouldn’t be immediate cause for concern, but reach out to your child's pediatrician if you have any questions.

Here’s a glimpse into what you can expect to see your baby accomplishing around the 7-month mark:

Social and emotional skills

Knows familiar faces and begins to know if someone is a stranger

Likes to play with others, especially parents and caregivers

Enjoys looking at self in the mirror

Responds to expressions of emotion

Language and communication skills

Responds to sounds by making sounds

Strings vowels together when babbling

Starts to respond to her name

Babbles a chain of consonant sounds

Cognitive skills

Can find a partially hidden object

Uses mouth and hands to explore objects

Struggles to get objects that are out of reach

Gross and fine motor skills

Can sit unassisted, with and without the support of hands

Best activities for a 7-month-old baby

So what can you do to encourage your baby as she explores those skills — and more? The following activities are great ways to engage your 7-month-old and help her master these milestones.

Play peekaboo with a mirror

By now, your baby is probably no stranger to peekaboo . This classic game teaches children about object permanence , an important concept that helps your little one understand that you’re still there even when she can't see you. Now that she's a little older, you can put a fun spin on the game by incorporating a mirror.

Because your 7-month-old is likely fascinated by her own reflection, she’ll love this new twist on the game. To play, stand in front of a large mirror and readjust your body to cover certain objects, like a chair. Then say “Where’s the chair?” Move to uncover the chair and say “Peekaboo, there’s the chair!” You can also ask a second person to hide in and out of the reflection to add another element to the game.

Place items just out of reach

Although some babies start to crawl as early as 6 or 7 months, it's more likely that your little one won't master this skill until closer to the 9-month mark (other babies are late crawlers or never crawl at all, which is not a cause for concern). But you can encourage your child to start moving by placing objects just out of her reach.

At this age, your baby may be starting to show preference to certain toys or objects. Place an item she loves (such as a stuffed bear or favorite rattle) out of reach to motivate her to make movements towards it.

Blow bubbles

Bubbles are a fun way to stimulate your baby's senses, promote smoother tracking of objects and develop her hand-eye coordination as she tries to reach out and touch the bubbles.

You don’t need much for this one — just a small container of baby-safe bubbles and a wand. Simply blow some bubbles in your baby’s direction. At first, she might just watch them float, but you can show her how tactile they can be by reaching out and popping a few yourself.

Ball bath

According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), young babies don’t need bath toys — the sensory experience of touching and splashing in the water is enough to entertain. But as your child gets a little older, you might consider adding a few water-safe toys to the mix to teach hand-eye coordination as well as fine motor skills like grabbing .

Colorful floating balls are a great choice: Your baby will learn all about cause and effect as the ball rolls away from her or splashes in the water. As always, supervise baby closely, and always be in arm's reach during every single second of your baby's bath.

Baby in the middle

Place a few of your baby’s favorite toys on the floor in a large circle, then position her in the middle, tummy down. Watch her move around and reach for various items.

You can get down on the floor with her and encourage her to interact with certain toys. This activity helps improve your baby's core muscles (think of it as a more involved version of tummy time !) and helps her learn to coordinate multiple movements at once.

Regardless of the activities you choose, the most important thing is to try to set aside time for play every day. But don’t put too much pressure on yourself. While the above activities are great ways to make playtime more enriching for your baby, simple activities — think talking, singing and reading — are some of the most important ways parents can engage with children of any age.