Best Activities for a 9-Month-Old Baby

activities for 9-month-old babies

As she gets ever closer to her first birthday, your 9-month-old is mastering exciting new skills. Here's how to play with your little one at this age.

At 9 months, your little one is entering the final quarter of her first year — and it’s almost like she’s a whole different baby than that little bundle you brought home. In what surely seems like the blink of an eye, your baby is likely sitting up without support and maybe just about ready to crawl . What’s more, your child's emotional intelligence is skyrocketing, and before long, she’ll be uttering her first words .

To help your 9-month-old along, you can — and should — set aside time for play every day. Experts say it's vital, as young children don’t yet differentiate between play and learning, and it’s through these activities that babies learn all about how the world around them operates — plus, how they fit into it.

Parent or caregiver engagement is important, too. It’s through these interactions with you that your little one discovers boundaries. Not to mention, the positive reinforcement encourages baby to press on, honing her newfound skills.

What skills is your child developing at 9 months?

Skills like pointing , sitting without support and, later, walking and talking are called developmental milestones. These milestones serve as a way to help pediatricians and parents track a child’s progress in four important categories of development: social and emotional, language and communication, cognition, and gross and fine motor skills.

But it's important to keep in mind that all babies grow at slightly different paces, and the milestones below shouldn't be considered a strict schedule. If you have any questions or concerns about your baby’s development, your pediatrician is a great resource.

In general, though, here’s what you can expect to see baby accomplishing around 9 months:

Social and emotional skills

Develops hesitation towards strangers

Clingy with familiar adults

Shows preference for favorite toys

Language and communication skills

Begins to understand the word “no”

Makes repetitive sounds like “mamamama” and “bababababa”

Copies sounds and gestures

Uses fingers to point at things

Cognitive skills

Watches the path of something as it falls

Begins to understand object permanence

Moves things smoothly from one hand to the other

Develops the pincer grasp , picking things up between the thumb and index finger

Gross and fine motor skills

Begins to pull up and stands holding on

Sits without support

Best activities for a 9-month-old baby

So what can you do to engage your bigger baby and encourage her as she develops these important emotional and physical skills? The following activities are great ways to play with your 9-month-old:

Experiment with textures

Place toys of different textures in a circle around your baby (think a soft stuffed animal, a smooth or squishy teething toy, a firm board book). Get down on her level and show her each item to encourage her to crawl and examine them. Allow your baby to bang each toy, even bring it to her mouth or drop it. All of these actions are great ways to develop both fine and gross motor skills, as well as cognitive development.

Play clapping and sing-along games

By singing songs like "The Wheels on the Bus" and encouraging your baby to clap her hands (or open and shut them, or beep the horn) along with you, you’re helping her develop language and communication skills through imitation. At this age, she'll also love that feeling of anticipation as she tries to figure out what comes next — an important social-emotional skill that helps build confidence as she grows.

Introduce utensils and practice open-cup drinking

Older babies who have started solids should drink between 4 and 6 oz. of water a day. Help your little one stay hydrated — as well as encourage coordination and motor skills — by filling a cup with an ounce of water to help her practice drinking from an open cup . (If you're not quite ready to introduce an open cup, a 360-degree training cup is a good option to limit messes.)

And although baby might not get much food in her mouth at this point, learning how to use utensils is important for hand-eye coordination, and is also an excellent cause-and-effect activity. Give your baby some infant-friendly utensils with foods that are easy to scoop, such as Greek yogurt. Sitting at a table and watching you eat will encourage her to imitate you and develop these important skills, too.

Play music together

Give your baby a toy musical instrument (think a drum or xylophone) and show her how to use it. You can also fashion homemade instruments out of household objects (tightly secured plastic containers filled with rice, empty coffee cans, or pots and pans with wooden spoons).

By exploring the different sounds these objects make, your baby will develop important sensory skills. Plus, if you get in on the fun, you’ll foster social skills, too, like turn taking.

Tunnel time

While lying down, create a tunnel with your legs and encourage your baby to crawl through. Once she makes it halfway, “catch” her by gently squeezing your legs together (and cue the giggles). Eventually, as baby’s gross motor skills advance, she'll try to crawl faster in an attempt to pass through.

Phone talk

Using everyday objects (a banana, a board book, a teething toy), pretend to talk on the phone. “Call” people your baby is familiar with and engage in a “conversation” as she listens in. Then, offer the "phone" to your baby and encourage her to do the same to help her develop communication skills, as well as promote imaginative play .

The bottom line? No matter how you go about it, play is key for developing babies. In early childhood, play is the primary way in which children explore and interact with the world around them. In fact, play and learning are one in the same!

But while you should aim to factor playtime into your baby's daily routine, you also shouldn't be too hard on yourself or feel like you have to invest in tons of gear. Research shows that simple activities like talking, singing and reading are some of the most important things parents can do to engage with their children.