Best Pregnancy-Safe Hair Dye

Best Hair Dye to Use

Many first-time moms choose not to dye their hair while they’re pregnant. After all, hair dyes are made of pretty harsh chemicals, and if you’re already having to ditch natural stuff like raw fish and soft cheeses, it stands to reason that your salon appointments should also go on pause, right?

Not so — many health experts say it’s safe to keep dyeing your hair while you’re pregnant. According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) , hair dye and hair treatments are not dangerously toxic and are generally safe to use during pregnancy. Your skin also only absorbs a small amount of hair dye through the scalp, and the small amount of chemicals is unlikely to have any harmful effect. That said, most dermatologists recommend that expectant moms wait to dye their hair until after the first trimester, which is a critical period for development.

“Hair dyes do contain some ingredients that could be harmful in large amounts. However, the amount of hair dye you’ll use in a dyeing session would still be harmless,” says board-certified dermatologist Ife J. Rodney, M.D. , founding director of Eternal Dermatology + Aesthetics and professor of dermatology at Howard University and George Washington University. “Unless you work in cosmetology or you’re exposed to large amounts of dyes daily, hair dyes — both temporary and permanent — are safe to use.”

However, you should still take some precautions to minimize any risks of causing harm to your developing baby.

What to look for in a pregnancy-safe hair dye

There are a few factors that may make a hair dye safer during pregnancy than others. Those include products that are:

Plant-based or organic. You may absorb more of the chemicals in hair dye if your scalp is irritated or infected, so invest in hair dye that is specifically labeled as having plant-based or organic ingredients — which might be gentler on your skin. ”Plant-based hair dyes containing henna or organic products are very popular. So you can use those while pregnant and switch to regular dyes after childbirth or breastfeeding,” Dr. Rodney says.

Free of certain irritants. Where possible, look for a product that doesn’t contain ammonia, heavy metals, parabens or phthalates, Dr. Rodney says. Why? Per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , high amounts of ammonia have been found in animal studies to affect a baby’s birth weight and size, although it’s unknown if those findings translate to humans, too. (There’s no evidence that environmental exposure to ammonia can cause birth defects, either — although the fumes can make you feel nauseous.) Exposure to heavy metals during pregnancy has been associated with miscarriages, birth defects and other health issues for babies. And parabens (common preservatives) and phthalates (which are used as solvents in products with fragrance) may potentially affect the reproductive system , although more conclusive research is needed. Because there’s so much unknown with these ingredients, many experts will say it’s better to be safe and avoid them.

How to use hair dye safely during pregnancy

Dyeing your own hair at home inherently comes with some risks, regardless of whether you’re pregnant or not. To ensure that you don’t experience any negative side effects when coloring your hair (even when using an all-natural dye), Dr. Rodney recommends keeping the following in mind:

Always do a patch test at home. Swab a small amount of product on an inconspicuous area on your body (like the inside of your arm) and monitor it for 48 hours to ensure you don’t have an allergic reaction. This can also be performed at your doctor’s office if you prefer the insight of a medical professional.

Dye your hair in a well-ventilated area. This limits the amount of fumes you breathe in, which can make you feel dizzy and sick. (Last thing you want while you’re pregnant.)

Apply dye for the shortest amount of time to limit exposure to chemicals and fumes.

Use ointment on the skin around your hairline to limit skin exposure to the dye. (This also helps you avoid getting pigment on your forehead and skin when you’re applying.) Petroleum jelly or a thick moisturizer can do the trick.

Read the instructions on the box before starting. Do not leave the chemicals on your hair any longer than indicated, and wash your scalp thoroughly after the treatment.

Avoid contact with skin and eyes. Wearing protective gloves can help with this.

Don’t dye your hair if you have a skin infection. This can increase the amount of dye your skin absorbs.

If you work in a salon and you’re pregnant, you may want to take extra precautions to keep you and baby safe, since you’re exposed to hair dye and chemicals in the air for long periods of time. Be sure to wear gloves and take frequent fresh air breaks.

Of course, if you have concerns about the safety of your hair products or other hair treatment, consult your physician first.

How we made our picks for the best pregnancy-safe hair dye

We made our selections for the best pregnancy-safe hair dye by looking for products that are plant-based and/or organic and free of certain ingredients as outlined in the guidance above. We also consulted What to Expect community and user reviews to make sure we were picking the best of the best.

Best Budget-Friendly Option

Garnier Olia Ammonia-Free Hair Color

More affordable than other dyes

no strong odor

Some people say the color didn’t look as advertised

Why We Love It

This ammonia-free hair dye is formulated with 60 percent natural oils. It stands out from most hair colors because the oil is concentrated within the colorant to boost the coloring process and make your hair color more vibrant. Garnier Olia can be used to touch up your roots or do an all-over color. It’s also available in 34 shades (including fun ones like rose gold and silver), so it’s easy to find exactly the color you’re looking for. Reviewers love that it's made of natural oils so hair is left feeling soft and smooth, and has a pleasant scent (no ammonia, means no gross ammonia smell!).

Applications per box: 1

Best Natural Hair Dye

ONC Natural Colors Healthier Permanent Hair Color

Ammonia-free

uses organic ingredients

Some users say it doesn’t cover grays well

may fade quickly

Why We Love It

ONC Natural Colors lets you dye your hair while avoiding ammonia and parabens, a big win for pregnant moms. The product’s organic argan and coconut oils work to moisturize your hair without weighing it down or making it look greasy. Reviewers have noted that it provides the same bright color as regular hair dye, and smells like bananas (thanks to banana extract). It’s available in 29 different shades, so you’ll be able to find a close match to your desired hair color.

Applications per box: 1

Best Henna

Hannah Natural 100% Pure Henna Powder

Chemical-free

inexpensive

No color options

Why We Love It

If you’re looking to change your hair color to a rich auburn or brassy red, this natural powder — a staple in many South Asian beauty routines — is the way to go. It’s made from pure henna leaves, so it will only make your hair darker. There are no color options — you determine the shade based on the amount you use. You can adjust the ratio of liquid you use in your paste and how long you leave it in your hair to determine how dark you go.

Applications per box: 2

Best Vegan Pregnancy-Safe Hair Dye

Naturtint Permanent Hair Color

Vegan

ammonia-free

Some reviewers say it doesn’t effectively cover grays

Why We Love It

This ammonia- and paraben- free hair dye contains oleic acid, a fatty acid that’s derived from olives to help soften your hair as it colors. It also features meadowfoam seed oil for extra softness and shine. There are no artificial fragrances, so you won’t be left with a lingering scent. While it’s not the only vegan and cruelty-free option on this list, vegans love this brand for its natural, realistic colors. There are 35 shades to choose from, so you won’t have a hard time finding the right one for you.

Applications per box: 1

Community Reviews

Cooper9 They're lovely & I use them all the time..

friend2earth I do use a more natural hair dye called Naturtint. I used to get it at whole foods but just ordered it online through amazon for less than half the price.”

Best for Dark Hair

Herbatint Permanent Herbal Haircolor Gel

Ammonia-free

good for sensitive skin

vegan

Some people said the color was darker than expected

Why We Love It

This is another pregnancy-safe option that relies on natural ingredients like rosemary and walnut husk instead of ammonia or parabens. The dye is designed to both tone your color and smooth your locks, leaving you with a rich color that won’t add frizz. Reviewers raved that this hair dye — which is available in 36 shades — left their hair feeling soft and moisturized, but noted there was no plastic container or applicator included for stirring the color. However, colors might set darker than expected, so it might not be the best brand if you want to lighten up your hair color.

Applications per box: 1

WhatToExpect.com, Hair Dye and Highlights During Pregnancy , January 2020. WhatToExpect.com, Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care , May 2021. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Is It Safe to Dye My Hair During Pregnancy? , October 2020. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Public Health Statement: Ammonia , September 2004. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Prenatal Heavy Metal Exposure and Adverse Birth Outcomes in Myanmar: A Birth-Cohort Study , November 2017. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Safety of Hair Products During Pregnancy , October 2008. Nemours Kids Health, Pregnancy Precautions: FAQ , February 2017. Ife J. Rodney, M.D. , Founding Director, Eternal Dermatology + Aesthetics , Columbia, MD.

Your Next Read

Roots Showing? Expert Tips For Safe Hair Coloring in Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Best Home Cleaning Products to Use During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Here’s How to Remove Unwanted Hair Safely During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Kameelah Phillips, M.D.

Manicures and Pedicures During Pregnancy: Simple Do’s, Don’ts, and Smart Picks Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Should I Use Sunscreen When I'm Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

From Frizz to Fabulous: The Real Deal on Pregnancy Hair Changes Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Got Blotches, Patches, or Mottling? The Truth About Pregnancy Skin Darkening Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Makes Your Skin Sensitive — and What Actually Helps Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Can Prenatal Vitamins Really Help Your Hair Grow? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is it Safe to Get A Facial When You're Pregnant or Trying to Conceive? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window