Best Iron-Rich Foods for Toddlers

toddler eating eggs

Could your child's diet need more iron? (And how can you even tell?) Here's how to make sure your toddler is getting enough iron-rich foods.

Is your toddler pumping enough iron — in her veins, that is? Iron is an essential mineral that your child needs to grow properly. And although most people in the United States get enough of it in their diets, some young children may be running low. In fact, research suggests that nearly 1 in 10 toddlers in the U.S. are deficient in iron.

Here’s how to guard against iron deficiency and up your child’s intake of this important mineral.

What is iron?

Iron is a mineral that’s needed to make hemoglobin, a protein in red blood cells that shuttles oxygen from the lungs to the rest of the body. It’s also needed to make myoglobin, a protein that brings oxygen to the muscles.

Iron can be found naturally in plant and animal foods.

Why do toddlers and children need iron?

Toddlers and children need iron to make red blood cells; without enough red blood cells, the body won’t get the oxygen that it needs. A lack of iron can lead to growth deficiencies, learning problems and behavior issues.

Toddlers who don’t get enough iron are also at risk for developing iron-deficiency anemia, which can cause symptoms such as weakness, fatigue and an inability to fight off infections successfully.

How much iron does a toddler need?

Children ages 1 to 3 need 7 milligrams (mg) of iron per day. However, it can be tricky to know whether your child is getting enough, since most of the signs and symptoms of iron deficiency don’t appear until anemia develops.

Some of the signs of iron deficiency anemia include:

Pale skin

Cold hands and feet

Slow growth

Poor appetite

Behavioral problems

Getting sick often (for example, infections)

Pica (cravings for non-food items like ice, dirt or paint)

Most pediatricians check children’s iron levels between 6 and 18 months of age. If your doctor hasn’t yet, ask for a blood test — all it takes is a simple finger or toe prick.

Also, make sure your child’s iron levels are checked if she has symptoms of iron-deficiency anemia. If your child’s iron levels do turn out to be low, talk with your pediatrician about whether you should revamp your toddler’s diet or consider an iron supplement.

Best iron-rich foods for toddlers

The iron in foods comes in two forms: heme iron and non-heme iron. Heme iron is the most easily absorbed kind, and is found in animal products like red meat, seafood and poultry. Non-heme iron comes from plant sources, but because of its chemical structure, is not as easily absorbed by the body.

Still, both sources are worth eating. In fact, heme iron helps improve the absorption of non-heme iron, so eating foods that contain both forms (like a turkey sandwich on whole wheat bread) is ideal.

Here are some of the best heme iron-rich foods to include in your child’s diet:

Beef

Pork

Chicken

Turkey

Scallops

Shrimp

Salmon

Eggs

Tuna (opt for canned chunk-light tuna, which comes from smaller skipjack tuna and therefore has considerably less mercury than albacore)

Here are some of the best non-heme iron-rich foods to include in your toddler’s diet:

Prunes and prune juice

Figs

Peanut butter

Beans (black, kidney, lima, pinto)

Lentils

Tofu

Hummus

Leafy, dark green vegetables (turnip greens, kale, broccoli)

Oatmeal and cream of wheat

Enriched breads, pastas and cereals

How to incorporate iron into your toddler’s diet

Besides including iron-rich foods into your toddler’s diet, here are a few other ways to boost your child’s intake:

Pair non-heme iron-rich foods with vitamin C-rich foods

Vitamin C helps with iron absorption, so you can boost your toddler’s intake by pairing non-heme foods with vitamin C-rich foods, like citrus fruits, tomatoes, berries, broccoli and sweet potatoes. Good match-ups include:

Iron-fortified oatmeal with strawberries or kiwi

Hummus with sliced tomatoes and red peppers

Iron-enriched pasta with broccoli

Keep in mind, too, that calcium blocks the body's ability to absorb iron, so it's best not to pair iron-rich foods with calcium-rich ones .

Consider a supplement

If your toddler doesn’t eat much meat or other iron-rich foods, ask your pediatrician if you should offer her an iron supplement. (You don’t want to end up overcompensating, though; too much iron can cause constipation, nausea or vomiting.)

Don’t overdo it on milk

As important as milk is to a growing toddler, there can be too much of a good thing. In fact, it’s common for toddlers to fill up on milk (which has no iron) and then not have an appetite for any other nutrient-rich foods. Plus, if your little one is drinking milk with iron-containing foods, the calcium in it can block some iron absorption.

Why do kids get stuck on milk? Toddlers are used to drinking lots of milk from their recent baby days, and some kids are simply slow to transition away from their liquid diets. Plus, parents of milk lovers often think that if their kid doesn’t eat lunch or dinner, it’s not so bad because at least their tot’s getting nutrients from milk.

But if your toddler overdoes it on milk — or eats too much of any one type of food — she may end up missing out on iron. Have your toddler stick to about 2 cups of milk each day so that she has room in her tummy for a variety of foods.