7 Pregnancy-Safe Nail Polishes That Let You Keep Your Mani Routine

Best Pregnancy Safe Nail Polish

Quick Summary

For a mom-approved mani that will last, the What to Expect community loves Essie's 8-free, plant-based LOVE line. It also boasts an impressive EWG rating of 1.

When you’re pregnant, there’s a long list of things to give up (alcohol, unpasteurized dairy, deli meat) or consume in moderation (looking at you, coffee). But figuring out which beauty and personal care products to skip can be trickier, particularly when it comes to nail polish. Many moms-to-be find themselves confused about what’s okay when it comes to prenatal manicures and pedicures . As one What to Expect Community user asks: ‘Am I safe to do my nails at all throughout my pregnancy?’

Nail polish does contain chemical compounds, and more research assessing their safety during pregnancy is needed. There have been concerns about some ingredients in these formulas, such as formaldehyde, a common preservative often used to harden nail polish, and phthalates like dibutyl phthalate (DBP), used to prevent polish from cracking. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) doesn’t directly address nail polish use, although it does recommend some personal care ingredients to avoid when possible.

The good news? Using any kind of nail polish during pregnancy is probably perfectly fine. “We tell our patients that nail polish and nail polish remover are safe,” says Jennifer Wu , M.D., a board-certified OB/GYN with her own private practice in New York City, Women's Health of Manhattan, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board.

While chemicals in nail polish can be absorbed through the nail bed and into the body, “the exact amount that is absorbed and whether or not this is harmful remains unknown,” explains Jeriel Weitz , D.O., a dermatologist with Schweiger Dermatology Group in New York City. The likelihood of these compounds getting into the bloodstream of a pregnant person after applying them to the nails is very small. Long story short: you don’t have to stress much about the type of polish that you choose.

But if you are concerned about chemicals or want to be extra cautious, “it’s certainly reasonable to consider a non-toxic polish,” adds Marisa Garshick, M.D., clinical assistant professor of dermatology at New York Presbyterian-Cornell. Adds Joshua Zeichner , M.D., a dermatologist and Director of Cosmetic & Clinical Research in Dermatology at Mount Sinai Hospital: “Whether nail polishes with these ingredients pose any risk is up for debate, but the good news is that there are products on the market that you can purchase that do not contain them, so there are options for everyone.” (If you haven’t been using a non-toxic polish, though, you don’t need to be too worried!)

How I Tested and Selected the Best Pregnancy-Safe Nail Polish

If you’ve ever found yourself in the nail polish aisle wondering which bottle is safe to bring home, I’ve been there too. During both of my pregnancies, I caught myself squinting at tiny labels and Googling ingredients. So when I set out to create this list, I wanted to take that guesswork off your plate. I pulled from my own experience as a manicure-loving mom and paired it with research deep dives, leaning heavily on expert guidance to choose polishes that are readily available at drugstores, align with the ACOG's recommendations for safer beauty products in pregnancy , and receive rave reviews from moms in the community and on staff. Here’s exactly how I narrowed things down:

I referenced ACOG’s guidance on avoiding toxic chemicals during pregnancy . When possible, the organization stresses skipping beauty or personal care products that contain phthalates, parabens, oxybenzone, triclosan. Again, experts say it’s not necessary to exclusively use “non-toxic” polishes during pregnancy.

To refine the list of nail polishes that fit this criteria, I referenced the Environmental Working Group’s Skin Deep Ratings for nail polish, and only considered polishes that had a score of no more than 5 on the EWG’s scale, meaning their ingredients have a relatively low hazard risk.

I also consulted eight experts to better understand how moms-to-be can use nail polish safely during pregnancy:

I then scoured What to Expect’s community forums and message boards, where moms-to-be share honest reviews of beauty products like nail polish.

In summary, based on the above research, I made sure the seven recommended polish brands featured on this list are:

Easy to find in stores or available online

Certified “3-free” at minimum, though most of the products on this list have eliminated even more potentially concerning ingredients

Have an EWG Skin Deep score no higher than 5, indicating its formula is made with ingredients that are the lowest level of concern

Have many positive reviews from online retailers and in the What to Expect Community

Best Overall Pregnancy-Safe Nail Polish

LOVE by Essie

8-free

Salon quality

Lots of beautiful colors

Not always available at brick-and-mortar retailers that sell Essie

EWG Rating: 1

Why We Love It

You’re probably familiar with Essie’s distinctive nail polishes — the brand is a mainstay at salons everywhere and known for its lovely color range. But you may not realize that Essie also offers a plant-based line that’s 8-free, meaning the polish does not contain formalehyde, DBT, toluene, plus a number of other potentially concerning ingredients. The LOVE line includes the richly pigmented polishes you’d expect from the brand and scores extra points for applying evenly and drying relatively quickly. Reviewers also note that the scent isn’t overwhelming, a nice plus for moms-to-be experiencing a heightened sense of smell .

Best Long-Lasting Pregnancy-Safe Nail Polish

Olive & June Nail Polish

Easy to remove

great color choices

Some colors require up to three coats for full coverage

chips easily

EWG Rating: 4

Why We Love It

Olive & June nail polish is 15-free (!), as well as vegan and cruelty-free. But unlike other vegan beauty products, which can be hit or miss, these polishes apply beautifully and look gorgeous. You can also find them in over 100 shades — known for their cheery bright options! — to match your mood (or outfit). Moms also say this polish is especially long-lasting, going up to a week without chips, as long as you take the time to apply it correctly.

It's also a repeat winner of What to Expect's Beauty Awards , too. The community adds Olive & June doesn't have a harsh, headache-inducing smell and the durability has been compared to a gel mani at the salon.

Tested by Olivia DeLong , mom of one and What to Expect's Senior Health Editor:

"Olive and June make it so easy to feel good about the manicure you're doing at home. I found comfort knowing their polish was made without 15 of the most common chemicals in nail polish. They had lots of colors, were sold at Target, which made for easy buying, and the nail polish scent didn't seem super overwhelming to my very sensitive pregnancy nose. Five years later, I'm still using their products to do at-home manis and pedis. The polish went on great, stayed put for 5-plus days, which is truly a miracle, and I love that they have the base and top coats too, to help it set and stay."

Community Reviews

michiri "i’ve been doing home manicures my entire pregnancy! i use the olive and june nail polish, it has no toxic chemicals and they have some super cute colors."

Best Budget-Friendly Pregnancy-Safe Nail Polish

Sally Hansen Good. Kind. Pure. Nail Color

16-free

30 nicely saturated colors

Affordable

Easy to find online and at drugstores

It takes a little longer to dry

EWG Rating: 5

Why We Love It

Like the brand’s regular polish, Sally Hansen’s Good.Kind.Pure range is affordable (most bottles are just $5), easy to find in stores, and available in 30 gorgeous color options. But the plant-based formula is also free of (a very impressive) 16 chemicals, plus 100% vegan. The brush bristles are even plant-based. Though it’s not the fastest-drying option, reviewers love how long-lasting the polish is and how easy it is to apply.

Tested by Leah Rocketto , mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Shopping Director:

“I've been using the Sally Hansen Good.Kind.Pure polish this pregnancy. I like the color waves and that it's readily available. It goes on smoothly and I rarely need more than one coat of polish, which is a nice time-saver. It does take a little longer to dry, maybe 10 minutes. But worth it because it lasts through multiple dish washes.”

Community Reviews

anj8509 I went to target and found a WHOLE section of sally hansen nail polish and it says right there that it is free of all those chemicals... I loved it! Bought 2 to hold me over and they are not that expensive at all!

maggie92010 "I'm using Sally Hansen polishes from Target too!! I love that it lists there are no harmful chemical right on the store sign so they are easy to spot. I like to change my colors a lot over the summer so I opt for cheaper store brands..."

Best Pregnancy-Safe Nail Topcoat

ZOYA Naked Manicure Glossy Seal Top Coat

Easy to use

Delivers high shine and long-lasting gloss

Also available in gorgeous color polishes

Slow to dry

Not the most affordable

EWG Rating: 2

Why We Love It

Zoya’s gorgeous polishes are all 10-free, meaning they lack formaldehyde, formaldehyde resin, DBP, toluene, camphor, parabens, xylene, ethyl tosylamide, lead, and triphenyl phosphate. It doesn’t hurt that the brand’s many, many shades all have a nice undertone of shimmer and high-gloss finish for a more dressed-up vibe. But in addition to their colorful polishes, the brand offers a truly excellent top coat that can give any home manicure a high-gloss, long-lasting finish like the salon.

Community Reviews

ala234 I splurged on some nontoxic Zoya polishes.

LondonGrace “I own a salon/spa and the best one free of chemicals is Zoya. They have great colours and last on the nails.”

Best Pregnancy-Safe Nail Polish Set

Manucurist Green Hortencia Manicure Set

8-free

Luxurious formula

Available as part of a full manicure set

A little more expensive

EWG Rating: 3

Why We Love It

Though Manucurist’s polishes are a little on the pricey side, many reviewers say they deliver an especially luxurious, salon-quality experience in a bottle and last a long time without chipping. The formulas are vegan, made with up to 84% plant-based ingredients, and 8-free. (As a bonus, a number of Manucurist shades also boast some of the lowest scores on EWG’s ratings.) If you want to commit to the home manicures, the brand’s professional manicure set may be worth investing in — in addition to polish, it comes with nail prep, a base and top coat, and drying drops.

Best Pregnancy-Safe Nail Polish System

OPI Nature Strong Natural 3-Step System

Quick-drying

Vegan and cruelty-free

Need just two thin coats

Vibrant and bold color choices

Long-lasting when paired with OPI's base and top coat from the same line (pricey investment)

EWG Rating: 4

Why We Love It

OPI is another salon staple offered in a myriad of formulas, but moms love the Nature Strong line most of all. It's 9-free and features a formula with naturally-derived ingredients like sugar cane and clay that still produces a high-gloss, bold finish. Reviewers suggest thin coats that cover as much of the nail as possible, as it starts to dry in seconds — though that's one of the reasons why it earned a spot on our list. It's ideal for quick touch-ups, though the brand claims it should last at least a week without peeling or chipping when you use the three-step system: pair this with a base coat and top coat!

Best for Manicures With Your Kids

Ella + Mila mommy&me Set

Applies well

good quality polish

More expensive compared to other brands

EWG Rating: 5

Why We Love It

Nothing like a mom and daughter (or son!) manicure! Ella + Mila nail polish is 17-free, making its ingredient list one of the strictest you can find. Because of that, it’s a popular brand for parents to use on their kids. This particular set comes with a full-size bottle (0.75 ounces) for mom and a smaller bottle (0.24 ounces) in a different shade for your little one, plus a sheet of adorable nail stickers.

Community Reviews

katinsrq I use Ella + Mila. I've tried a few different kinds & their polish is the best.

A Doctor’s Note on Pregnancy Manicure Safety

Painting your nails while pregnant is generally safe, and so is going to a nail salon to get a professionally done manicure or pedicure. However, there are some things to keep in mind to ensure you have a safe and optimal mani experience.

Painting your nails while pregnant is generally safe, and so is going to a nail salon to get a professionally done manicure or pedicure.

Choose a salon you trust. Dr. Weitz says you should go to a high-quality place that you know properly sanitizes its tools to reduce your risk of infection. This is always true, but especially important during pregnancy because your body might be less able to fight off infections (or have more severe symptoms) while you’re pregnant.And if you’re getting a pedicure, opt for portable foot baths over the kind built into spa chairs, as the latter is a potential source of bacterial infection.

Consider bringing your own tools. For even more peace of mind, you could bring your own manicure tools to the salon, Dr. Zeichner says.“In the event of a cut in the skin and exposure to unclean tools, it could result in a skin infection requiring antibiotics to treat.”

Call ahead. If you’re being choosy about what type of nail polish you use during pregnancy, such as using a formula that doesn’t contain formaldehyde or phthalates, you’ll want to inquire about what nail polish the salon stocks, and if necessary, bring your own.

Get some air. It’s a good idea for everyone to use nail polish in a well-ventilated room, Dr. Zeichner says, and that’s especially true during pregnancy. Fumes from these products can sometimes “contribute to nausea during some women's pregnancies,” Dr. Thosani adds. Choosing a seat at the salon that has good air flow or opening the window when using polish at home is your best bet. “Always use polish in a well-ventilated area, avoid inhaling fumes, and wash your hands afterward when the nail polish has dried,” says Dr. Mysore.

However, professional manicurists, who are consistently exposed to these chemicals due to their work, may be at an increased risk of birth defects. If you’re pregnant and work in a nail salon, wearing protective equipment like masks and gloves, improving ventilation at work and taking regular breaks for fresh air may help reduce your risk.

Jessica Migala originally contributed to this article.

Jessica Migala originally contributed to this article.

Pregnancy-Safe Nail Polish FAQs

Is gel polish safe during pregnancy?

As with “regular” nail polish, more research is needed about the chemicals used in gel manicures. “Gel manicures use specific ingredients to help the polish adhere to the nails, [and] some experts suggest sticking to regular manicures rather than gel manicures to avoid exposure to those chemicals,” says Dr. Zeichner. Gel manicures also use a UV lamp to dry the polish, and some moms-to-be might find that this process irritates their skin. “Skin can be more sensitive in pregnancy, so keep that in mind when using UV lights to cure gel manicures,” says Megan Bernstein, assistant clinical professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA. “You might want to wear sunscreen on your hands or wear gloves if you are noticing more skin sensitivity.” Keeping your treatments simpler, such as by opting for a less-involved manicure, can also reduce your exposure to fumes, says Dr. Weitz. But as with nail polish in general, the choice is ultimately yours. If you have questions about your personal risk, have a discussion with your doctor.

Can I use standard nail polish remover during pregnancy?

Nail polish remover isn’t thought to be unsafe during pregnancy, Dr. Wu says. But the smell can be unpleasant, and Dr. Zeichner recommends opening a window when using acetone nail polish remover to avoid inhaling the chemical for long periods of time. Acetone can also be irritating to the skin, so you might choose to wash your hands or feet after using it. Another option is to look for (or ask your salon) acetone-free remover, Dr. Thosani says.

Any tips on how I can chose the right nail polish?

As mentioned, you really don’t have to stress much about the type of polish that you choose. But “non-toxic” in this case typically means free of ingredients like formaldehyde. This is simply a term for certain ingredients that the polish does not have. Here’s a breakdown of labels you might encounter while shopping:

“3-Free” formulas: These do not contain formaldehyde, toluene (a less-common solvent) or DBP, which are considered the most problematic ingredients, says Dr. Garshick.

“5-free” formulas: Like a 3-free formula, these do not contain formaldehyde, toluene, and DBP. They also lack formaldehyde resin and camphor, which may cause allergic contact dermatitis in some people, notes Dr. Weitz.

“7-Free” formulas (and up): In addition to being free of everything in a 5-free formula, these formulas also typically lack ethyl tosylamide (which can cause allergic reactions in some people) and xylene (which can irritate the eyes and throat when inhaled in large amounts). “8-free,” “10-free,” and other such formulas will also lack other potentially irritating/harmful ingredients, depending on the product.

Vegan: If a product has a certified vegan logo , that means it doesn’t contain any animal-derived ingredients or animal by-products, nor was it tested on animals. (Certain common nail polish ingredients, like shellac, come from animal secretions , while some pigments like carmine are made from insects.) Don’t conflate this label with “plant based,” which simply means that there are ingredients derived from plants in the product. (And cruelty-free means the product was not tested on animals.)

Non-toxic: Usually, brands use this to mean that their product doesn’t include ingredients that are believed to be potentially harmful. (For nail polish, brands will often pair this with “3-free” or “5-free” messaging.) But remember, this is primarily a marketing claim without a standard legal definition, so take these claims with a grain of salt.

Can I still go to the salon while pregnant?

For starters, Dr. Weitz says you should go to a high-quality place that you know properly sanitizes its tools to reduce your risk of infection. This is always true, but especially important during pregnancy because your body might be less able to fight off infections (or have more severe symptoms) while you’re pregnant. Don’t let your manicurist cut your cuticles either, she adds, because it could also cause an infection. And if you’re getting a pedicure, opt for portable foot baths over the kind built into spa chairs, as the latter is a potential source of bacterial infection.

Choosing salons with a well-ventilated area “reduces inhalation of chemical fumes,” Dr. Gaither notes. You can also consider wearing a mask at the salon for extra protection, she adds.

If you’re being extra choosy about what type of nail polish you use during pregnancy, you’ll want to inquire about what nail polish the salon stocks, and if necessary, bring your own. Ideally, you’d also be keeping your treatment simple, Dr. Weitz says. “The more involved the manicure, such as with acrylics and gels, the longer the duration and the potential for greater exposures through fumes and potential risk for infection,” she says.

American Academy of Dermatology Association, Manicure and Pedicure Safety . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Formaldehyde — Reproductive Health , November 2019. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, NIOSH Science Blog, Researching Risk of Birth Defects Among Pregnant Nail Salon Workers and Hairdressers , November 2021. Food and Drug Administration, Nail Care Products , August 2020. Frontiers in Immunology, Maternal Immunological Adaptation During Normal Pregnancy , October 2020. National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Endocrine Disruptors , July 2021. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Changes in Cosmetics Use During Pregnancy and Risk Perception by Women , April 2016. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Phthalate and Organophosphate Plasticizers in Nail Polish: Evaluation of Labels and Ingredients , November 2018. National Library of Medicine, Contact Dermatitis Associated With Nail Care Products: Retrospective Analysis of North American Contact Dermatitis Group Data, 2001-2016 , May 2020. National Library of Medicine, Exposure to BTEX in Beauty Salons: Biomonitoring, Urinary Excretion, Clinical Symptoms, and Health Risk Assessments , April 2019. University of California Los Angeles, UCLA Labor Center, Nail Files: A Study of Nail Salon Workers and Industry in the United States , November 2018. Marisa Garshick, MD , Clinical Assistant Professor of Dermatology, New York Presbyterian-Cornell, New York, NY. Jeriel Weitz, DO , Dermatologist, Schweiger Dermatology Group, New York, NY.

Your Next Read

Manicures and Pedicures During Pregnancy: Simple Do’s, Don’ts, and Smart Picks Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Best Pregnancy-Safe Hair Dye Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Surprising Ways Pregnancy Can Change Your Nails Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

17 Gender Reveal Nail Ideas for a Polished Party Look Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The Best Home Cleaning Products to Use During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Roots Showing? Expert Tips For Safe Hair Coloring in Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

11 Holiday Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy and Safe Alternatives to Enjoy Instead Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Unsafe Foods to Avoid at Restaurants While You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Pregnant and Craving a Glass of Wine? Why It’s Best to Skip It (for Now) Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Do You Really Need to Avoid Antibacterial Products During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Medications During Pregnancy: What’s Safe and What’s Not? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window