The Best Baby Deals: Early Mother's Day Sales For Easy Gifting

Best baby deals of the week collage featuring Beyond yoga leggings, baby brezza bottle washer, mint & lily bracelet, diapers, and needed prenatal powder

Score early Mother's Day deals on clothes, skincare, and other mom treats.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

As nice as it is to save on baby gear, you can’t always hold out for Prime Day or Black Friday . After all, your baby needs diapers now. But after a decade covering sales, I can tell you there is almost always a baby deal — you just have to know where to look.

With Mother's Day approaching this weekend, plenty of brands are helping out the procrasinators, offering discounts on mom-loved clothes, skincare, and more. This way, you can grab a last-minute Mother's Day gift that looks thoughtful and doesn't break the bank. And if you're trying to save on those baby care essentials, don't worry. Amazon, Target, and Walmart has deals on the items you reach for daily.

Here, I’ve rounded up the best baby deals for parents. Whether you are buying ahead, replacing something that did not work out, or trying something an influencer recommended, using these curated discounts can save you money.

Bookmark this page and check back often for new price drops and noteworthy baby sales.

Mother's Day Gift Deals

Mint & Lily : Stumped on gift ideas? This WTE-loved brand creates quality, customizable jewelry that doesn’t cost a fortune. Right now, use code WTE25 to save 25% on Mint & Lily orders.

Alo : A mom can't have too many leggings, and right now you can save 30% on leggings (and more) from Alo durring the Aloversary Sale.

Athleta : Need more legging options or just some additional athliesure? Athleta is offering 40% off summer must-haves.

Birkenstocks : Ready to swap your boots for sandals? Select Birkenstock styles, including the three-strapped Florida Sandal and the classic Arizona Droplet Buckle Slide , are up to 35% off at Nordstrom.

Caraa : Totes? Crossbodies? Diaper bags? Whatever your need, Caara is offering 20% off a curated collection of stylish bags.

The Baby Baby Deals: May 6, 2026

Diapers: Target's popular diaper deal is back! Get a $15 gift card when you spend $75 on diapers and wipes from Huggies, Pampers, and other favorite brands.

Pregnancy- and Kid-Safe Sunscreen : Amazon's Summer Beauty Event is the perfect time to stock up on SPF so you're not scrambling come beach day. Right now, you can save up to 40% on sunscreen from Sun Bum , EltaMD , Coola , and more.

Bodily : Save up to 40% on Bodily's line of super comfy (and super supportive) nursing bras and postpartum clothing.

Baby Brezza : Save 22% on Baby Brezza's innovative gear that takes the elbow grease out of cleaning, sterilizing, and warming bottles.

Motif : Shopping for a primary pump or wearable option? Motif has plenty of hospital-grade options — all up to 20% off right now.

Skechers : If bending down is already getting tricky, these easy slip-ons moms-to-be in the WTE community swear by (plus lots of cute toddler styles) are BOGO 50% off right now.

Your Next Read

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Memorial Day Sales Are a Dime a Dozen — But These 14 Baby Deals Are Worth Shopping By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Most-Bought Prime Day Baby Deals: Sunscreen, Stroller Fans, and More Summer Essentials By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Amazon Who? 10 Prime Day Alternative Sales That Give You More Chances to Save By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Last-Call Prime Day Baby Deals I'm Snagging As a Mom of Two — and How I'm Saving Even More Before Midnight By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Free Baby Samples? Yes, Please! How to Score Diapers, Formula and More By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Overwhelmed by Baby Gear? Here's What You Really Need (and What You Don't) Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

14 Ways to Save Money on Diapers Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

10 DIY Baby Shower Gifts Moms-to-Be Will Actually Use Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Creating a Nursery on a Budget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window