Best Products for Postpartum Stretch Marks

Best Products for Postpartum Stretch Marks

It’s no secret that pregnancy changes your body in countless ways, and stretch marks are one very common pregnancy symptom. If you develop these streaks — which can be pink, red, brown or sometimes purplish — you’re in good company, as they’re estimated to affect anywhere between 50 and 90 percent of women .

Stretch marks are mostly due to genetics, and can pop up during pregnancy or postpartum, usually on the belly, buttocks, breasts or thighs. They’re a normal reaction to the major changes your body has just undergone — your skin just stretched a lot to create and accommodate your little bundle of joy, after all!

Postpartum stretch marks are something to feel proud of and embrace as a sign of the life you created. But some new moms prefer to try to minimize their appearance, which is okay, too. While no one should feel like they need to do anything to get rid of these marks, which are certainly nothing to be ashamed of, it’s also understandable if you’d like to try treatments to diminish them.

Sometimes, stretch marks fade or even disappear over time. But keep in mind that like other scars, these marks are often are permanent. Topical treatments may help make them less noticeable or ease any itchy skin surrounding them, but creams and lotions usually won’t erase stretch marks entirely, according to the American Academy of Dermatology Association (AAD).

That said, if you feel like you’d like to treat your postpartum stretch marks to try and make them go away faster, you can try a cream, lotion or oil that is meant to diminish their appearance.

How we chose the best products for postpartum stretch marks

Here’s what we considered in our search for the best postpartum stretch mark products:

We reviewed guidance from the AAD and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) on treating stretch marks. We also consulted three dermatologists: Emily de Golian , M.D., a board-certified dermatologist and micrographic dermatologic surgeon based in Atlanta, Georgia; Reshmi Kapoor , M.D., F.A.A.D., a board-certified dermatologist at Brooklyn Dermatology in New York City; and Anna H. Chacon , M.D., a board-certified dermatologist from Miami, Florida.

We checked AAD guidelines and asked the three dermatologists for additional context on the specific skin care ingredients that have the most research to support their benefits for stretch marks, keeping in mind that no topical ingredients are likely to fully erase these marks. Following their guidance, all of the products on the list contain at least one of the following ingredients:

We pored through the forums in our What To Expect community to see what stretch mark products members are raving about. Every item on this list received overwhelmingly positive reviews for effectively targeting and treating stretch marks, as well as:

Postpartum stretch mark product features to consider

There are a lot of products on the market that promise to erase stretch marks, and they’re not all created equal. Here are a few things to keep in mind as you shop:

Product type : Most postpartum stretch mark products are either a thick cream (such as a body butter), a slightly thinner lotion or an oil. If you’re looking for something that quickly absorbs into the skin, a lighter lotion might be your best bet. Oils are hydrating but can also be, well, oily, and some take a while to absorb, and the same goes for heavier creams. It might help to think about when you’ll be applying this product (morning or night?) to determine what makes the most sense for your lifestyle.

Scent : This really comes down to personal preference. If you like fragranced skin care products, some of the postpartum stretch mark creams on this list will smell great to you. Other people are sensitive to scent and should opt for one of the fragrance-free formulas on this list instead.

Ingredients : Always check the ingredient list to make sure there’s nothing you’re allergic to, and if you have sensitive skin, you may want your dermatologist to review the ingredients, too. While most topical products are okay to use if you’re breastfeeding , topical tretinoin hasn’t been studied in nursing moms, so some experts recommend using an alternative to be safe. “The use of [tretinoin, retinol and vitamin A products] during breastfeeding should be discussed with your physician,” says Dr. Kapoor.

Price : Stretch cream products can range in price, with some budget-friendly formulas starting around $10 and others approaching $100. Remember that price does not always determine efficacy, so determine your budget and shop within that.

What are stretch marks?

Stretch marks are actually tiny tears in the supporting layers of tissue under your skin. They usually develop when skin stretches or shrinks quickly, which is why they’re more likely to appear during pregnancy, a time in which your body grows rapidly. By the third trimester, it’s very common to have these marks somewhere on your body, usually on the abdomen, buttocks, breasts or thighs.

Genetics and fluctuating hormone levels seem to also play a big role in whether or not you’ll develop postpartum stretch marks, according to the AAD. “Knowing your family history may inform your own experience with stretch marks in pregnancy,” says Dr. de Golian.

Can you avoid stretch marks during pregnancy?

Stretch marks usually start developing during pregnancy, even if you don’t notice them until after the baby has arrived. Although there are a lot of products on the market that claim to help you prevent stretch marks during pregnancy, there isn’t proof that any of them really work, according to ACOG. And the AAD notes that research hasn’t supported claims that certain ingredients (such as cocoa butter or vitamin E) can prevent stretch marks from forming.

However, it doesn’t hurt to use a pregnancy-safe moisturizer to keep your skin hydrated during this time. “Although there is limited evidence for stretch mark prevention cream, hydrating the skin as it is stretching will help keep it moisturized and prevent itch, which can be common as pregnant bellies grow,” says Dr. Kapoor. (If you’re looking for a pregnancy-safe belly cream , these are some of our top picks.)

Do postpartum stretch marks go away?

Like other types of scars, stretch marks are often permanent, the AAD says. Topical treatments might make them less noticeable, but there’s no magic solution to making them disappear forever. Using stretch mark creams, butters and oils are more about fading these marks then making them go away, says Dr. Kapoor.

“When they first appear, they tend to be raised and can range in color from pink and red to purple and brown,” she says. “[Over time], the color fades and they can become hypopigmented and depressed into the skin.”

How to treat stretch marks

According to the AAD and the experts we spoke to, the below strategies might help to minimize the appearance of stretch marks over time.

Try stretch mark creams, lotions and oils. Although there’s no research to support any topical product as a magic fix, moisturizing your skin certainly won’t hurt and there are plenty of people who say that certain products have helped lighten their stretch marks. If you’d like to try a stretch mark cream, the AAD says that the best way to ensure effectiveness is to use them as soon as you notice the stretch marks, massage the product directly into the affected area and apply it every day for several weeks.

Ask your dermatologist about prescription topicals. The AAD notes that prescription creams or gels containing hyaluronic acid or tretinoin may help lessen the appearance of postpartum stretch marks.

Try laser therapy and other professional therapies. If topical treatments don’t make a difference and your stretch marks are really bothering you, ask your dermatologist whether you’re a good candidate for professional therapies such as lasers, microdermabrasion or chemical peels. “Lasers targeting vasculature help fade red-purple color more rapidly, while devices like ablative laser, radiofrequency microneedling, and to a lesser degree, microneedling may improve the appearance of newer stretch marks,” Dr. de Golian says.

You might also want to try more than one treatment method, as Dr. de Golian says this can be the most effective way to make stretch marks less noticeable.

Best Postpartum Stretch Mark Cream

Cerave Moisturizing Cream

Fragrance-free

versatile

widely available

Large container

Why We Love It

While not marketed towards stretch marks specifically, this CeraVe cream is made with hyaluronic acid, which is one of the few ingredients the AAD notes may lessen the appearance of stretch marks over time. It’s also fragrance-free, making it ideal for sensitive skin. And with over 112,000 positive reviews on Amazon, it’s safe to say that this is a very popular option.

CeraVe is a brand often recommended by derms, and Dr. de Golian notes that this one is a favorite of hers because it contains multiple ceramides in the formula. “Ceramides are a natural part of a healthy skin barrier, and one that we make less of as we get older,” she says. “Giving the skin back exactly what it likes and needs for that healthy barrier helps prevent water loss through the skin surface and keeps skin healthy.”

Although this moisturizer feels luxuriously thick and smooth, it actually has a lightweight feel that absorbs easily into skin. It comes in a large container and still costs less than $20, so it’s affordable and easy to find. Customers rave that this cream helped restore their skin and felt amazing. Between the great reviews, accessibility and dermatologist recommendations, this is definitely at the top of the list.

Type : Cream lotion

Amount : 19 oz.

Key Ingredients : Hyaluronic acid, ceramides

Community Reviews

catamountviking “I think CeraVe works best. I have both the cream and lotion.”

discoflowerbaby "So I have been using only Cerave hydrating cleanser on my belly and no other type of soap, and I massage Cerave moisturizing cream into my belly every night for 10 minutes. They both have hyaluronic acid in them. I had a small stretch mark appear at 28 weeks and I can’t find it at all now at 30 weeks. I will probably get more because my sister got a lot, but so far it seems to be helping!"

Best Belly Oil for Postpartum Stretch Marks

Bio-Oil

Lightweight

not greasy

Scent may be overwhelming

Why We Love It

Another go-to postpartum stretch mark product is Bio-Oil, a bestseller on Amazon with over 43,000 five-star ratings and tons of glowing reviews in the What to Expect community. This is a non-comedogenic oil made with soothing ingredients like chamomile, lavender oil and vitamin E. The formula is meant to help repair scars and hydrate skin. I have used this oil and like how lightweight it is and that it doesn’t have an oily feeling you might expect. And although it’s on the pricier side, in my experience a few drops go a long way.

“It’s lightweight, spreads easily and dries completely on the skin,” Dr. Chacon says. “It also contains relaxing botanical extracts, vitamins and emollient oils that support healthy skin cell function by promoting the production of healthy collagen and maintaining skin hydration levels.”

One possible downside is that some reviewers say the scent can be a little overpowering. Keep in mind, too, that Bio-Oil contains vitamin A, which is part of the same family of skin care ingredients as tretinoin . Your doctor may avoid waiting to use this formula if you’re pregnant or breastfeeding to be safe.

Type : Oil

Amount : 4.2 oz.

Key Ingredients : Vitamin E, vitamin A, chamomile oil, lavender oil

Community Reviews

“[My postpartum stretch marks] lightened up from Bio-Oil.”

“Bio-Oil! No joke. It’s a little spendy, but so worth it.”

“Bio-Oil works great...I have been using it for two weeks and have noticed improvement.”

“I’ve tried Bio-Oil for a couple days and I’m already seeing a difference!”

Best Belly Butter for Postpartum Stretch Marks

Pipette Belly Butter

Made with hyaluronic acid

good for sensitive skin

Runs out quickly

Why We Love It

Designed to be used during pregnancy and after giving birth, Pipette Belly Butter is a great option at an affordable price point. This cream contains a unique blend of ingredients, such as the brand’s proprietary sugar-cane derived version of squalene called squalane, which is safe for pregnancy and breastfeeding. It’s also one of the few belly butters we found that’s made with hyaluronic acid, which the AAD calls out as one of the ingredients that may actually lighten the appearance of stretch marks.

Dr. Kapoor highly recommends this belly butter, noting that it’s hypoallergenic and great for sensitive skin, as well as being fragrance-free. “The thick butter vehicle incorporates star hydrating ingredients, like squalene, panthenol, ceramides and hyaluronic acid,” she says.

One complaint some reviewers note? They run out of it way too quickly.

Type : Body butter

Amount : 4 oz.

Key Ingredients : Shea butter, squalane, hyaluronic acid

Community Reviews

bm-2022 “In the mornings I do Pipette Belly Oil first and then Belly Butter after. I put it on my back … and then all over the bump and all over the breasts as those are the areas most prone to stretch marks during pregnancy. So far I haven’t ever had to deal with the itchy belly that’s common during the second and third trimester.”

feelthebeat “I love the Pipette Belly Oil and Pipette Belly Butter. They're fragrance-free and non-toxic, so you shouldn't have any problems. Their products are fantastic on the skin (for both mom and baby).”

Best Retinol Treatment for Postpartum Stretch Marks

Paula’s Choice Retinol Skin-Smoothing Body Treatment

Not too heavy

Scent may be off-putting

Why We Love It

While this Paula’s Choice product is not specifically made for postpartum stretch marks, it’s still a great treatment to try. Made with vitamins C and E, shea butter, plaint oils and star ingredient retinol, this hydrating anti-aging body treatment may also help reduce the appearance of stretch marks: The AAD notes that retinol is one ingredient that might help, and this product is a good way to get that in the form of a body moisturizer without a prescription.

“Topical retinoids, such as tretinoin and adapalene, are vitamin A derivatives that increase cell turnover and increase collagen production,” Dr. Kapoor explains. “They can be used on early stretch marks to help them fade and be less noticeable.”

Just keep in mind that the formula may not contain enough retinol to make a huge difference. “This is a good over-the-counter option, but you’ll get much more efficacy out of a prescription-grade retinoid like tretinoin,” Dr. de Golian says. “The strongest tretinoin formula, 0.1%, has the best evidence of the retinoids for stretch marks but requires a prescription.”

Still, if you can’t get a prescription treatment or simply prefer a body moisturizer, this is a great option — not to mention it can also help even out skin tone overall.

Type : Lotion

Amount : 4 oz.

Key Ingredients : Retinol, shea butter, vitamins C and E

Best Organic Postpartum Stretch Mark Cream

Eminence Organics Strawberry Rhubarb Hyaluronic Body Lotion

Not too greasy

doesn't leave stains

Sweet scent may be off-putting

Why We Love It

If you’re looking for an organic cream that may help ease stretch marks, Eminence body lotion is an excellent option for both new and expecting mothers. It’s not easy to find organic lotions that are made with hyaluronic acid, but this one is a good source of the ingredient. It’s also formulated with panthenol to protect and hydrate skin, and aloe to soothe and repair. This all-star ingredient list also makes this Eminence cream a great pick for anyone with dry skin.

Eminence has great reviews and customers love that this cream doesn’t feel greasy. However, keep in mind that it does have a very sweet scent, thanks to the strawberry and rhubarb extracts. This might be a little off-putting for those who are sensitive to smells. It’s also on the pricier side.

Type : Cream

Amount : 5 fl oz.

Key Ingredients : Hyaluronic acid, panthenol, thioctic acid

Community Reviews

“I use Eminence Organic Skin Care. They are really good with [a] pleasant smell. Bit costly, but worth it.”

“Check out Eminence organic products. Way better, safe for pregnancy and they nourish the skin!”

“I adore all Eminence products. They always leave my skin soft and bright.”

Most Affordable Postpartum Stretch Mark Cream

Neutrogena Hydro Boost Body Gel Cream

Lightweight

absorbs quickly

cooling

Some say there is a light scent

Why We Love It

Hyaluronic acid is one of the ingredients that the AAD calls out for stretch mark relief, and this Neutrogena cream is a high-quality but affordable option that contains the key ingredient. Not only does this formula keep your skin smooth and moisturized, but the gel cream has a lightweight feel that absorbs quickly into skin. It’s free of fragrances, oils, dyes and alcohol, so it’s a great choice for pregnancy and beyond.

I’ve personally used this Neutrogena pick, and I love how the gel cream has a slightly cool feeling to it. It’s so light and leaves no residue behind, and you can put clothes on immediately after applying it. And you can’t beat the price — $10 gets you a large bottle that will last a long time.

Type : Gel cream

Amount : 16 oz.

Key Ingredients : Hyaluronic acid

Community Reviews

Creating-The-A-Team “Keep your skin hydrated [for stretch marks], I like Neutrogena Hydro Boost gel cream.” —

Best Postpartum Stretch Mark Serum

8 Sheep Organics True Belly Serum

Easy to apply

not greasy

Expensive

Why We Love It

This True Belly Serum is lighter than a thick cream but not as oily as an oil, making it a great in-between choice. Even better, it’s made with two of the ingredients the AAD notes may help stretch marks: hyaluronic acid and centella asiatica. It’s designed to moisturize skin and support scar recovery (such as stretch marks).

The dropper style is a bit different, but it does make it easier to apply this to specific areas — plus, a little goes a long way. It also comes with a 100-day guarantee, so if you’re not happy with it, you can get your money back.

Reviewers rave about this formula, calling it the “best thing ever” and noting how it never feels greasy and is easy to apply. However, it’s worth mentioning that it’s not as easy to find as some other options on this list and is also on the expensive side.

Type : Serum

Amount : 4 oz.

Key Ingredients : Hyaluronic acid, centella asiatica

Community Reviews

KMJP27 “I've been using 8 Sheep Organics Stretch Mark Serum. You can also pair it with a belly balm. My skin looks amazing!”

Jenna9009 "I just got the 8 sheep belly serum! it's nice. no scent and rubs in well. they claim its one of the best things for stretch marks."

Best Fragrance-Free Postpartum Stretch Mark Cream

Nécessaire The Body Serum

Super hydrating

easy to apply

won't leave skin sticky

Expensive

Why We Love It

Some people find overly fragrant lotions bothersome, especially when they’re all over your body, and they’re not always the best option for those with sensitive skin. If you’re looking for a good fragrance-free option, this Nécessaire pick is a winner. Made with intensely hydrating ingredients and a noncomedogenic formula, this serum is a luxurious-feeling gel that never leaves skin sticky.

This is another product that contains hyaluronic acid, as well as niacinamide to strengthen skin and ceramides to boost moisture. The pump bottle makes it really easy to use.

This one also gets approval from the National Eczema Association, so you know it’s good for sensitive skin. It has great reviews online, with customers raving about how soft it makes their skin feel. The downside? At $45 a pop, it’s a little expensive, and it’s not something you’ll find in your local drugstore.

Type: Serum

Amount : 5.1 fl oz

Key Ingredients : Hyaluronic acid, niacinamide, ceramide NP

Community Reviews

mkellii “I’ve started using the Nécessaire The Body Serum … [it] has helped me tremendously.”

maashurst “I’ve still got a bottle of the Nécessaire The Body Serum with hyaluronic acid from pre-pregnancy and I’m bathing in it currently!”

Cleveland Clinic, "Stretch Marks," May 2022. https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/articles/10785-stretch-marks American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, "Skin Conditions During Pregnancy," July 2022. https://www.acog.org/womens-health/faqs/skin-conditions-during-pregnancy American Academy of Dermatology Association, "Stretch Marks: Why They Appear and How to Get Rid of Them," https://www.aad.org/public/cosmetic/scars-stretch-marks/stretch-marks-why-appear , 2023. National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, "Tretinoin," March 2023. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501419/

Your Next Read

6 Stretch Mark Creams Moms-to-Be Can’t Stop Buying (and Derms Approve, Too) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Are Pregnancy Stretch Marks Making an Appearance? Here's Why and What You Can Do Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

Postpartum Skin Care Guide Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Best Products for Pregnancy Hemorrhoids Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Postpartum Belly: What Will Your Stomach Look Like After Giving Birth? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Products to Make Postpartum Sex More Comfortable Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Pregnancy Acne: Why It Happens and Safe Ways to Treat It Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Diastasis Recti After Pregnancy: What It Is and How to Heal Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Why Your Pregnant Belly Itches (and What Actually Helps) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Can Leave Your Skin Feeling Parched Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

What is Melasma (aka Pregnancy Mask)? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

How to Relieve Itchy Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window