The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them

best postpartum belly bands and wraps

Every new mom adapts to her post-pregnancy body differently. In the early days after birth, some women may feel their best in loose, lightweight clothing. Others may feel more comfortable and supported in postpartum shapewear such as postpartum belly bands.

Postpartum belly bands, also known as postpartum belly wraps and postpartum shapewear, are meant to be worn around the waist and are designed to support your body after childbirth. They're usually made of adjustable elastic materials that cover your torso from ribs to hips.

The point of a postpartum wrap isn't to the shape of your body (you just made a baby, after all!). Rather, they're designed to support you and make you feel more comfortable after pregnancy, which can strain your abdominal muscles and possibly contribute to postpartum back pain .

You may also be dealing with lingering symptoms of symphysis pubis dysfunction (SPD) — also called pelvic girdle pain (PGP) — a condition that occurs when the ligaments that keep your bones aligned become too relaxed during pregnancy, destabilizing the pelvic joint and possibly triggering pain.

This is where a postpartum belly band or wrap might be helpful, as these garments may provide extra support to reduce pain. While there’s not much research-based evidence that wearing a belly band offers significant medical benefits for women postpartum, “many women with back pain and pubic symphysis pain report that they find the bands comfortable after pregnancy,” says Susan Lareau, M.D., an OB-GYN at UPMC-Magee Women’s Hospital in Pittsburgh. “But,” she adds, “it’s very dependent on the woman and her body if she will find it comfortable.”

In addition to potentially helping reduce pain, some new moms also turn to postpartum belly bands and wraps to better support and align their abdomen, provide light compression or take the pressure off a healing cesarean incision. Indeed, a small 2019 study published in the The Eurasian Journal of Medicine found that women who wore wraps or binders after getting C-sections were able to walk longer distances and had less pain than those who did not wear those products in the first 48 hours post-operation. However, you should wait 2-4 weeks after a C-section (and get your doctor’s signoff) before wearing a postpartum belly band to avoid irritating your healing incision. Be careful when putting on and removing your belly band, too.

Other moms also appreciate that postpartum shapewear products can have a smoothing effect that might make it a little easier to fit into non-maternity clothes.

Still, there is no clear evidence that postpartum belly bands or wraps can help you lose any weight you gained during pregnancy, or reshape your stomach or hips. So take many of these products’ claims with a healthy dose of skepticism. It's also very important to avoid any postpartum shapewear product that constricts your movement or breathing.

Types of postpartum belly bands

Postpartum belly bands (also called postpartum wraps or even postpartum shapewear) come in a few different varieties, so it may require some trial and error to find what feels most comfortable for you. Here are a few of the most popular styles:

Wraps: These belly bands can wrap around your entire midsection, from your hips to your lower rib cage.

Belts: These belly bands tend to be thinner than other types of wraps, and fit around your hips and belly.

Multi-part bands: Some belly bands feature two or more bands, which can be adjusted to provide that just-the-right-amount of compression.

Many of these postpartum bands are made of soft, stretchy materials such as spandex, viscose and nylon.

How to choose the best postpartum belly band

Look for a product that's adjustable and made of soft, comfortable materials.

Make sure that the postpartum belly band or wrap fits you properly and isn't too restrictive. “Any band that is so constricting as to be uncomfortable should be avoided,” says Dr. Lareau.

Avoid waist trainers, cinchers or corsets, which are made of stiffer materials and are usually less about healing and more about appearance.

You should not wear a postpartum belly band or wrap all day, every day. Some experts say that relying on the support for too long will cause your core muscles to weaken even further, which could then worsen your back and hip pain.

How we made our picks for the best belly bands, wraps and shapewear products

We started by scouting out the most popular belly bands on the market, including What to Expect readers’ favorites, and narrowed down our picks to the best rated and reviewed products. Then we selected bands with unique features (machine-washable fabric, pockets for hot/cold packs, extra compression, etc) designed to help new moms.

Here, our top picks for the best postpartum belly bands, postpartum belly wraps and postpartum shapewear products to keep you more comfortable and supported after childbirth.

Best Postpartum Belly Band Overall

Ingrid & Isabel Bellaband

Moms love that the material holds its shape well

Some moms noted that the bottom of the band can occasionally ride up

Why We Love It

This belly band can take you comfortably from pregnancy to postpartum. Like a tube top for your lower half, the Bellaband fits snuggly under your clothes — and over the top of your unbuttoned pre-pregnancy pants. Made of nylon and Spandex, it stays anchored to your body with silicone bands and can help support your belly. Breastfeeding moms will appreciate the added layer of coverage that the band provides. Moms everywhere will appreciate that, unlike many other belly bands on the market, this one is machine washable.

Sizes : 1-4 range calculated based on a person’s pre-pregnancy pant sizes (0-24+)

Community Reviews

haleybee101918 I purchased the Ingrid & Isabel Bellaband online last week and it’s been a game changer!

Best Postpartum Belly Band for C-section Recovery

Belly Bandit Postpartum Luxe Belly Wrap

Great support

comfortable even for C-section recovery

Expensive

Why We Love It

If you’re recovering from a C-section, you might appreciate the extra support and compression offered by the Belly Bandit Postpartum Luxe Belly Wrap . The best-selling product is made of a silky-soft nylon/Spandex combo that compresses and supports your core muscles without causing any discomfort — an especially attractive feature for those recovering from a C-section. (Just remember not to wear it until at least 2 weeks after your C-section, and with your doctor's sign off.)

The Velcro fasteners ensure that you can continue adjusting the band’s fit as your body changes postpartum. The band also comes in a regular size and petite size to ensure that people of all heights can get full stomach and back coverage from the band. However, it’s the most costly postpartum belly band on this list, and some folks might balk at shelling out that much money for something that’s only worn for a few months at a time.

Sizes : XS through XL, to fit postpartum stomach sizes up to 57 inches. All sizes come in a regular fit (with a front height of 11 inches and back height of 12 inches) or petite (front height of 9 inches and back height of 10 inches).

Community Reviews

TwinMamaLove I very much prefer the Luxe even only being 5’2”. More comfortable, doesn’t ride up, and doesn’t make me look like I have back fat. I had 4 cm diastasis recti after and an abdominal binder was recommended to me while I was in PT. I felt a lot more comfortable with it on.

Best Adjustable Postpartum Belly Band

Belly Bandit B.F.F. Belly Wrap

Specifically designed to be worn postpartum

including for moms who’ve had a C-section

Some moms found it too tight and uncomfortable

Why We Love It

Some belly bands are loved for their simplicity — but the Belly Bandit B.F.F. Belly Wrap is versatility at its best. Made with six support panels — including two customizable compression panels — the wrap hugs you just like a “best friend forever.” It also has up to 9 inches of adjustable fabric so you can continue to adjust the fit as your body changes postpartum.

Sizes : XS through XL, to fit postpartum stomach sizes up to 57 inches

Community Reviews

cbpeterson I loved my belly bandit...I really liked the back support. My low back was in pain after birth so that helped a lot.

Best Postpartum Belly Band with Adjustable Compression

TiRain 3-in-1 Postpartum Belly Support

More affordable than other options on the market

Some users say that it’s a little bulky under clothing

Why We Love It

New moms rave about the TiRain 3-in-1 Postpartum Support Belt , which comes with three bands that can be adjusted with Velcro straps to provide just the right amount of compression — more than most options on the market. While bulkier than some of the other styles (the belly band wraps around your stomach, the waist belt fits around your waistline and the pelvis belt sits on your hips), there’s no denying that, unlike some wraps, the TiRain 3-in-1 will stay put.

Sizes : Size F fits stomachs that are 26-36.7 inches, waistlines that are 26-39 inches, and hips that are 32.7-42 inches. Size Plus is designed for stomachs that are 35-40 inches, waists that are 38-44 inches, and hips that are 40-46 inches.

Community Reviews

BLDJ This time around, I ordered the TiRain 3-in-1 postpartum support [belt]. I'm sure it will be much easier than trying to wrap an ace bandage and re-adjust all day long.

Best Postpartum Belly Band for Back and Hip Support

Belly Bandit 2-in-1 Hip Bandit

Users say it helps relieve hip and lower back pain

Some users say that the fabric can curl a little after wearing it consistently

Why We Love It

Dealing with postpartum back and hip pain? The Belly Bandit 2-in-1 Bandit comes in two parts: a long band and a short band. Simply wrap the long band around your hips and layer the short band over it for extra compression. You can adjust the position of the bands to sit higher or lower on your hips — whatever feels best for you. (If you're still pregnant, it also doubles as a maternity band that wraps underneath your bump for extra support.) We also like how it’s less bulky and more discreet than some of the other options.

Sizes : XS-M (fits sizes 0-8) and L-XL (fits sizes 10-18)

Community Reviews

sarahortiz427 I used it and loved it. It’s also really good after baby too. I used the bands around my hips.

National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Influence of Abdominal Binder Useage After Cesarean Delivery on Postoperative Mobilization, Pain and Distress : A Randomized Controlled Trial, October 2019. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Pregnancy-related Symphysis Pubis Dysfunction Management and Postpartum Rehabilitation: Two Case Reports , June 2012. Susan Lareau, M.D. , OB-GYN, UPMC-Magee Women’s Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA.

Your Next Read

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

When to Buy and Start Wearing Maternity Clothes Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

How to Manage Pregnancy Back Pain, from Belly Bands to Ice Packs Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Your Postpartum Belly: What Will Your Stomach Look Like After Giving Birth? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Best Products for Postpartum Stretch Marks Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Products to Make Postpartum Sex More Comfortable Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

What to Expect After a C-Section: Real-Mom Tips for Healing and Newborn Care By Heidi Murkoff

5 Things I Wish Other Moms Told Me About Postpartum Body Image Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Postpartum Pelvic Pain Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Postpartum Pelvic Floor Exercises Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Postpartum Symptoms You Might Experience After Giving Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Losing the Baby Weight: The Truth About Postpartum Weight Loss Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Most Uncomfortable Part of Birth Might Come Afterwards Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window