Best Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials

Breast Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials

If you've decided to pump — whether you're exclusively pumping , traveling without your baby or preparing to go back to work — you'll need a breast pump. Fortunately, there are a variety of pumps to choose from, including double-electric, hands-free, manual and more.

The many options on the market these days certainly make the pumping process a little bit easier. But as a pumping mom, a good breast pump is usually just the beginning of what you'll need.

More often than not, it’s the accessories (what you pack your pump in, what you store your milk in and what you use to clean everything up) that ensure your experience is as seamless as possible.

The good news? With a little bit of prep, you can put together a pumping essentials package that will make both at-home and on-the-go pumping sessions a breeze. Here are some pointers to keep in mind:

How to prepare for pumping and storing breast milk

Do your research ahead of time. Since no one wants to be on the hunt for a pump room or a place to store your milk, foresight can pay off in spades. Before you leave the house (if possible) do some digging on where the pump rooms at your workplace are located, for example, and what resources the space provides.

Practice. It can be helpful to start pumping before you need to so you can get the hang of it and your baby can get used to taking a bottle.

Consider an extra pump . If you’re going back to a full-time job and hope to feed your baby only (or mostly) breast milk, a double-electric pump is usually most efficient. But some moms prefer handheld pumps, especially if they won't be pumping every day, while others invest in wireless models they can use hands-free. Depending on when and where you'll be pumping, you may want more than one.

Keep cleaning in mind. Does washing your pump parts in a communal sink make you nervous? You might want to be prepared with your own wipes, microwave sterilizing bags and extra pump parts. Knowing yourself as well as your environment can help you figure out the additional products you’ll need.

Remember to relax! Easier said than done, we know, but in order to trigger letdown to release milk, it helps to be relaxed. Letdown naturally occurs in the presence of your baby, but it’s possible to recreate the sensation with photos or videos of your little one, for example. Knowing this can help you in the moment when you’re ready to start pumping away from baby.

Milk storage matters. Whether you pump directly into bottles or bags, it’s important to store your milk at the right temperature .

Here, all the products you need to get from session to session, no matter where your pumping journey takes you.

Electric Breast Pump

Medela Pump in Style Breast Pump

Great for travel

very efficient

Not the quietest pump

no way to change suction patterns

Why We Love It

The Medela Pump in Style Breast Pump is a beloved breast pump for good reason. It’s a double-electric model (read: you can use it on one or both breasts) and it’s designed to mimic a baby’s natural sucking pattern, helping with both comfort and milk production. It's also a closed system pump, which prevents milk from entering the tubing and makes for much easier cleans. The included portable battery pack, cooler bag and carrying tote make the Medela stand out from competitors. A solid, reliable breast pump that can also be used hands-free and easily stored? Say no more.

Weight: 1.18 pounds

Dimensions: 13.14 x 6.12 x 9.08 inches

Community Reviews

amandapanda6669 "I got the Medela based on strong recommendations from two of my friends who gave birth this year. The Max Flow is the newer model (and the one I got) and it comes with a wall plug or a battery adapter."

Manual Breast Pump

Haakaa Generation 1 Silicone Breast Pump

Useful for relieving engorgement and collecting letdown

easy to store

Doesn't produce as much milk as other models

Why We Love It

While it won't produce nearly as much milk as a double-electric, many moms find having a silicone breast pump like the top-rated Haakaa to be incredibly helpful in certain situations. When you attach it to your breast, the tubeless pump creates suction that can help relieve engorgement. You can also use it to express some milk before feeding your baby (helpful for moms with a fast letdown or oversupply), or use as an on-the-go pump.

The one-piece design makes it easy to both use and clean, and it’s small enough to easily fit in your bag. Don’t worry, the pump has a stopper designed to prevent spills.

Dimensions: 1.91 x 1.91 x 6.95 inches (4 ounces or 100 milliliters)

Weight: 3.98 ounces

Community Reviews

"All one piece. No parts to fuss with when you need to move around a lot and change positions. Can grab with one hand and go."

"It collects the letdown that otherwise would get wasted in a breast pad! Love that I can save the milk!"

"Best thing ever. Was using this more than my electric pump before going back to work. [It] is great for relieving engorgement at night."

Wireless Breast Pump

Elvie Double Electric Wearable Smart Breast Pump

Lightweight

quiet and completely hands-free

Expensive

Why We Love It

You certainly don’t need three different breast pumps, especially if your everyday option is easy to use on the go. But if you’re interested in a wireless option , the high-tech Elvie Pump is a great choice. It's easy to use, weighs a mere 8 ounces and makes a discreet, whisper-like sound. While it's not completely inconspicuous, the Elvie can also fit in your nursing bra so you can use it hands-free, and it has an app that lets you monitor your milk supply in real time.

Dimensions: 5 x 4.3 x 2.7 inches (for single pump)

Weight: 7.9 ounces (for single pump)

Community Reviews

"Fits into any bra, can pump comfortably while feeding on the other side, [has an] app to track."

"No cables or tubes, and definitely more discreet when driving. I don’t feel like I’m on display to the world and can commute safely while also pumping."

"It is 100 percent hands-free. I would not have been able to continue pumping when I returned to work had I not bought this breast pump."

Insulated Bottle Bag

Nanobébé Baby Bottle Travel Bag

Fits more than one bottle

machine washable

Ice pack provided is on the smaller side

Why We Love It

Simply finding a quiet place to pump while out and about is often a challenge. Keeping that pumped milk fresh and cool? That can be just as challenging. Luckily, Nanobébé’s insulated bottle bag boasts three layers of insulation, which can keep pumped milk cool for hours. It's roomy enough to hold up to three bottles at a time (along with other items like pacifiers, nipples or pump parts). Even better, the entire bag is machine washable.

Dimensions: 6 x 5.1 inches Weight: 0.25 pounds

Community Reviews

"I like that it fits more than one bottle."

Pumping Bag

Momigo Breast Pump Backpack

Compact

insulated

fits necessities

No ice packs included

Why We Love It

If you're pumping on the go, you'll need something to carry your breast pump, accessories and pumped milk in. Pumping bags don’t have to be pricey — they just have to do the job. This backpack will fit most pumps and accessories, and it has a bottom insulated layer to keep milk cool for up to 15 hours. Bonus features like a USB charging port and a sturdy, stylish design will make you want to use it even when you’re not traveling with your pump.

Dimensions (of package): 15 x 13.9 x 1.7 inches Weight: 1.55 pounds

Community Reviews

"It's compact. Happy it holds my breast pump as well. Insulated well, so formula is kept well."

Bottle Set

Dr. Brown's Original Baby Bottle Newborn Feeding Set

Helps prevent gas

spit-up and burping; trustworthy brand

Some parents say the extra parts can be tough to clean

Why We Love It

If you're planning on pumping, you'll need plenty of bottles on hand. Dr. Brown's bottles , a perennial favorite among parents are a safe and solid choice. The tubed venting system is designed to push air into the base of the bottle so baby doesn't take in extra air during feedings. The slow-flow nipple also helps prevent spit-up and burps. This starter kit includes five bottles and a few brushes for cleaning.

What's included: Three 8-ounce bottles, two 4-ounce bottles, two silicone nipples, two storage caps and three cleaning brushes Total weight: 1 pound

Community Reviews

"Dr. Brown bottles have been used by all [my] family members’ little ones! Really helps with colic."

"No gassy babies here. Feeding twins can be a challenge in itself. Dr. Brown’s have been amazing to have my babes go from bottle to breast effortlessly."

Pumping Bra

Kindred Bravely Sublime Hands-Free Pumping & Nursing Bra

Flanges fit well

can easily wear to work

Multiple layers make it difficult to nurse in

Why We Love It

Give your hands and arms a break without having to worry about spilled milk. Keeping everything in place while pumping (and having use of your hands!) is a luxury every pumping mama deserves, and this bra from Kindred Bravely truly delivers. There's no uncomfortable underwire, it's made of super soft material and, most importantly, it securely holds pump flanges from big-name brands like Medela, Spectra, Lansinoh and others.

Plus, you may want to keep this bra on all day — it’s that comfy. Available in 10 different sizes, from small to XXL.

Community Reviews

anabolina "It's just so easy to use. I could wear it to work with no weird lines under my clothes, and it was super easy and held the flanges really well."

Morgan_Em "I LOVE it. It’s so easy to pump and nurse with one bra."

Cleaning Wipes

Medela Quick Clean Breast Pump and Accessory Wipes

Great occasional cleaning solution for when you're at work or on the go

Doesn't replace a deep cleaning in soapy water

Why We Love It

You likely don’t give a disinfecting wipe much thought — until you realize you don’t have soap and water on hand. While you should ideally submerge your pump parts in hot, soapy water after each use, wipes can work in a pinch. These Medela wipes are unscented, bleach-free and breast pump-friendly when you need to sterilize on the go.

Community Reviews

musikc These wipes are perfect for when you're in a rush and don’t have access to water and soap (or don’t want to use the sink at work).

Breast Milk Storage Bags

Lansinoh Breastmilk Storage Bags

Keeps milk secure and protected

can pump directly into them

Some parents experience leaking if the bags are too full

Why We Love It

You can’t freeze breast milk in just anything, and it’s best to not learn that lesson the hard way. Lansinoh bags are strong, pre-sterilized, have a double zipper and are reinforced with double-sealed side seams. If you’re short on time (or want to save on washing), you can even pump directly into a bag.

Dimensions: 5.10 x 3.00 x 9.60 inches

Community Reviews

ABCT Lansinoh breast milk storage bags are thick, and I trust them not to just collapse or accidentally open before or during freezing.

Breast Milk Travel Container

Ceres Chill Breastmilk Chiller

Super versatile (you can pump directly into it)

portable

Expensive

Why We Love It

When transferring milk to bottles or bags sounds like a headache, the Ceres Chill Breastmilk Chiller — a double-walled stainless steel storage container that keeps breast milk cool for 20-plus hours — comes in handy. The outer chamber has containers you can pump directly into, and it doubles as a bottle bottom if you just want to feed baby directly from there later. What's more, it fits right in your bag.

Capacity: Holds up to 34 ounces (without inner chamber)

Breast Pads

Lansinoh Stay Dry Disposable Nursing Pads

Trusted brand

slim silhouette

long-lasting

Not environmentally friendly

Why We Love It

Hospitals give out these handy, comfortable, stay-dry accessories in maternity wards across the country, and moms love to stock up on 'em, too. They’re disposable, thin enough to stay hidden under anything you’re wearing and absorbent enough to keep you dry for a few hours at a time (the longest break you’re really going to be getting as a new mom, right?). Keep them in place with the built-in adhesive strips that stick to your bra.

Nipple Cream

Evereden Multi-Purpose Healing Balm

Soothing on sensitive skin

great for winter months especially

On the pricier side

Why We Love It

Any product that does double duty is a win in our book, and this healing balm fits the bill. Prepare for it to do wonders on chafed nipples, chapped lips, dry hands or even scars. It’s made with a blend of five organic oils (so you can ensure what you’re putting on your skin is safe) and works well as a replacement for petrolatum-based products.

Specs: 1 fluid ounce

Microwave Sterilizer

Philips Avent Microwave Steam Sterilizer

Super quick

gives peace of mind but doesn't burn fingers

Doesn't dry your bottles

Why We Love It

No one wants to spend precious time sterilizing , but it’s a must to prevent bacteria buildup in your pump parts (the CDC recommends doing so once a day in the first few months of baby's life, then once a week when she's older and healthy). This contraption cleans up to four bottles in two minutes (and can also be used for pump parts). The handles stay cool, so you can easily pop it out of the microwave without having to worry about burning your skin.

Dimensions: 11 x 11 x 6.5 inches Weight: 2 pounds

Microwave Sterilizer Bags

Dr. Brown's Microwave Steam Sterilizer Bags

Easy to use

fits all of the essentials

Super hot coming out of the microwave

Why We Love It

A large microwave sterilizer works well when you're in your own kitchen, but if you're on the go, you may want to have sterilizer bags on hand. Just place everything you need to sterilize in the bag with about 2 ounces of water and microwave for about 90 seconds. The bags are hospital-safe, travel-friendly and let you sterilize baby bottles , pump parts and pacifiers with ease. Plus, you can use each bag up to 20 times before replacing it.

Dimensions: 6.75 x 3 x 9.5 inches

Weight: 0.8 ounces

Your Next Read

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

7 Best Wearable Breast Pumps That Let You Pump While Doing (Literally) Anything Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Clean Your Breast Pump Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Haakaa Silicone Breast Pump Review By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

Your Guide to Pumping at Work Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Pumping Breast Milk Guide and Tips for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Ultimate Guide to Traveling While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Common Pumping Problems and Solutions Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Moms Who Exclusively Pump Reveal How They Make It Work Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Exclusive Pumping Guide Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

7 Best Nipple Shields to Help With Latching and Minimize Pain Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Breastfeeding Trick That Saved My Sanity With a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Finding the Right Power Pumping Schedule for You Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Stop Pumping Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Pumping Breast Milk for Twins Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window