The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms

best bottles for breastfed babies

Quick Summary

The best bottle for breastfed babies is the Nuk Simply Natural Baby Bottles, as it mimics the flow of breasts, has a flat nipple edge for easier latching, and a SafeTemp indicator. When choosing a bottle for a breastfed baby, experts and parents say it's important to look for bottles with slow flow nipples.

I exclusively breastfed each of my sons for about nine months, so I was a little nervous when it came time to introduce a bottle . After all, introducing your baby to a bottle is a big transition. What if they refused to eat from this new device? How would they get the nutrients they needed to grow and thrive?

It turns out my worries were mostly unwarranted. After some trial and error, I eventually found a bottle they accepted as easily as the breast. (Of course, it ended up being a different bottle for each child — proof that every baby is different!) And in finding a bottle that my baby felt comfortable drinking from, others were able to help with feedings, giving me some much-needed time for myself.

While it might not be smooth sailing right off the bat, with the right bottle and a bit of know-how, your little one will get the hang of it in no time.

How I Chose the Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies

To better understand the different features to consider when choosing the best bottles for breastfed babies, I spoke with several lactation consultants, pediatricians and pediatric nurses, including:

Suzanne Chan , D.N.P., C.L.C., a board-certified pediatric nurse practitioner working in the Infant Cardiac NICU at NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital in New York City

Yines Garcia-Taylor , B.S.N., R.N., I.B.C.L.C., a registered nurse and a certified lactation consultant in Jersey City, New Jersey

Kyle W. Monk , M.D., a pediatrician at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Beverly Hills, California

Leslie Owens , R.N.-I.B.C.L.C., a certified lactation consultant based in Douglasville, Georgia

Micah Resnick , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician in Cincinnati, Ohio, with TriHealth

Chrisie Rosenthal , I.B.C.L.C. a lactation consultant based in Los Angeles, California.

Through these conversations, I learned about the ideal nipple flow (slow flow is best for a breastfed baby, experts say), nipple shape (flat-topped nipples often more closely resemble a mother’s breast), and bottle neck width for breastfed babies. I also referenced guidelines from leading expert groups, including the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Through these conversations, I learned about the ideal nipple flow (slow flow is best for a breastfed baby, experts say), nipple shape (flat-topped nipples often more closely resemble a mother’s breast), and bottle neck width for breastfed babies. I also referenced guidelines from leading expert groups, including the

I also leaned on my own experience, and spoke to seven mothers on the What to Expect editorial team; all breast- and bottle-fed their little ones and have tested more than 20 bottles between them, so they have a lot of opinions about which brands are best. I also considered the bottles I personally tested and used.

Finally, I turned to our community. I scoured our online message boards to compile feedback from What to Expect Community members who combo-fed their babies to ensure that each of the bottles recommended have been tested and vetted by parents to make transitioning between breast and bottle easier.

Based on feedback from parents and our experts, I narrowed down the list of 20-plus products to the seven best bottles for breastfed babies that are featured below, ensuring that all of our picks have:

A slow-flow nipple option

A design that helps mimic the breast

Positive reviews from parents whose babies both breast- and bottle-fed

Phthalate- and BPA-free nipples

Best Bottle for Breastfed Babies

Nuk Simply Natural Baby Bottles

Nipple design is very breastfeeding-friendly

Some parents don’t like the packaging

Material: Plastic

Available bottle sizes: 5 oz. and 9 oz.

Available nipple flow: Slow, Medium and Fast

Why We Love It

If you’re trying to introduce a bottle to a breastfed baby, Nuk Simply Natural bottles are one of the first brands you should try. These bottles have a number of features that seem to help babies to switch back and forth between bottle-feeding and breastfeeding, and countless parents in the What to Expect community say they’ve been successful with this brand.

The biggest feature that seems to work well for breastfed babies is the nipple, which has multiple holes to help the flow of milk feel more like breastfeeding, as well as a flat edge. (Start with the brand’s Slow Flow nipples at first.) This is a wide-neck bottle, so the nipple is plenty big enough to feel comfortable to a breastfed baby, too.

The biggest feature that seems to work well for breastfed babies is the nipple, which has multiple holes to help the flow of milk feel more like breastfeeding, as well as a flat edge. (Start with the brand’s

at first.) This is a wide-neck bottle, so the nipple is plenty big enough to feel comfortable to a breastfed baby, too.

“My daughter took to the Nuk bottle easily,” says Leah Rocketto , What to Expect’s Associate Commerce Director, who tried several other bottles before settling on Nuk. “If anything, I had a bigger learning curve, remembering to give her the bottle with the flat edge of the nipple facing down.”

Leah particularly liked that the bottles were wide enough for easy cleaning, but not so wide that storing was a pain. The shape also made it easy for her to pack them in a diaper bag or breast milk cooler.

Also good: These bottles have a SafeTemp indicator, which changes color when milk is too hot, and they are relatively easy to store and incredibly easy to clean, parents say. They also are a good choice for little ones who may be suffering from gas or colic, thanks to an anti-colic air vent and gently curved bottle design.

Some parents do say that the packaging on Nuk bottles doesn’t feel as high-end as other brands, but for about $6 per bottle, you can’t beat the value.

Community Reviews

“We use the Nuk Simply Natural; it’s the only type my little one likes.”

“Only tried Nuk Simply Natural. … My baby 100 percent accepted Nuk and I would tell any breastfeeding mom to try it.”

“I went through [bottle refusal] with my son, even having to go to the pediatrician for possible dehydration. Then I bought these bottles and he instantly took the bottle! It’s the Nuk Simply Natural bottle. Best bottle ever!”

“We use the Nuk Simply Natural; it’s the only type my LO likes.”

“My baby 100% accepted Nuk and I would tell any breastfeeding mom to try it.”

“Nuk were the only ones both my kids would take.”

Best Bottle For Breastfed Infants

Mam Easy Start Anti-Colic Baby Bottle

Incredibly popular bottle at an excellent price point

Nipple not as wide as some others on our list

Material : Silicone and plastic

Available bottle sizes : 5 oz., 9 oz. and 11 oz.

: 5 oz., 9 oz. and 11 oz.

Available nipple flow : Extra Slow Flow, Slow Flow, Medium Flow, Fast Flow and Extra Fast Flow

Why We Love It

Mam Easy Start Anti-Colic bottles claim to have a 94 percent success rate in helping babies make the transition from breast to bottle. And if the countless rave reviews in our What to Expect community are any indication, those numbers may be right.

These bottles, which are vented and made of a mix of plastic and silicone, are incredibly popular among little ones who breastfeed. Although the nipple isn’t as wide as some others on our list, many parents say their babies had no issues and latched very easily. In fact , Sarah Darby , Associate Director, SEO Content Strategist and mom of two, found that her daughter took to them very easily from an early age.

These bottles, which are vented and made of a mix of plastic and silicone, are incredibly popular among little ones who breastfeed. Although the nipple isn’t as wide as some others on our list, many parents say their babies had no issues and latched very easily. In fact

“She latched right on — no issues going back and forth between breast and bottle, or even between different bottles and MAM,” Sarah says.

Also good: There’s an anti-colic venting system to reduce the amount of air baby swallows. Sarah does note, however, that these bottles can be tough to clean, despite the wide-neck design.

“The nipple is flat, which can be tricky, and it’s not as easy to clean compared to bottles that consist of just the bottle, collar, nipple and cap,” she says.

If you’re planning on pumping, one thing to keep in mind with Mam bottles is that they’re generally not compatible with the most popular electric pumps. So you may need to invest in another set of bottles to use with your pump.

Community Reviews

“My baby would only take Mam bottles. The nipple is flat and easier for her to latch.”

“The Mam bottles are the only ones my son took as a baby and now my daughter only takes them as well. Tried every brand with my son and he rejected them ALL until the Mam bottles.”

“Mam bottles. Tried literally everything under the sun, spent way too much money and she only took to Mam.”

“My baby did great with Mam bottles from the start! Make sure you have a slow enough nipple too, and that you’re feeding relatively upright and paced. It can be a big adjustment to the bottle!”

Best Bottle for Breastfed Baby Refusing Bottle

Lansinoh Feeding Bottles with Natural Wave Nipple

Designed to reduce nipple confusion

reduces the amount of air that goes into bottle

The nipples are finicky for some moms

Material: Plastic

Available bottle sizes : 5 oz. and 8 oz.

Available nipple flows : Slow, Medium, Fast

Why We Love It

A number of parents in the What to Expect community say Lansinoh's bottles were one of just a few (if not the only brand) their breastfed babies would take. That includes Christine Mattheis , What’s to Expect’s VP, Content, whose pediatrician and lactation consultant both recommended the brand.

“We tried every bottle known to man, and eventually our daughter took the Lansinoh bottle the day before I went back to work,” Christine says of her 10-week journey to find a bottle. “Ultimately I really liked the Lansinoh bottles not only because Rose would take them, but because they were cheap and very easy to clean.”

In addition to their affordability and ease of use, the Lansinoh bottles have a lot of features to help baby transition from breast to bottle. To start, it is designed so babies can use the same sucking motion that they would during breastfeeding. Also good: These bottles have an air ventilation system that reduces the amount of air your baby swallows, which may make them a good choice for little ones suffering from gas or colic.

Sarah, whose son preferred Lansinoh bottles, says “I noticed that he seemed more comfortable while drinking from Lansinoh and had much less spit-up.”

Parents also appreciate that Lansinoh bottles are so easy to clean, thanks to their wide neck and gently curved base.

But a word to the wise: Several parents, including Sarah, found the nipple collapses with aggressive sucking, causing major frustration. Sarah discovered that loosening the bottle collar helped significantly.

Community Reviews

“We introduced bottles to my LO around 5 weeks old and used the Lansinoh Momma after receiving it as a sample from the pediatrician. We love them and we had no nipple confusion at all. He can go back and forth between breast and bottle without any issues.”

“We tried seven bottles and this was our winner. She is not 100 percent with it but this is the only one she'd ever take.”

“I tried nine bottles and these are the only ones my LO will take. I'm so glad we have them and they are super easy to use and clean!”

“I did a lot of research and use Lansinoh. My son had been bottle fed since 3 weeks during the days and breast fed at night. He has no problem transitioning even if I breastfeed him during the day.”

“My baby only takes Lansinoh. You can try giving your LO the bottle when she is sleepy and tired. That is what worked for us.”

“Currently using Lansinoh and baby likes that one the best. The nipple is slow flow so he doesn’t eat too fast (hoping it helps when my baby is nursing on the breast) and my LC thinks the Lansinoh is a good choice too.”

Best Bottle for Breastfed Baby with Gas Tommee

Tommee Tippee Advanced Anti-Colic Newborn Baby Bottle Feeding Gift Set

Special venting system

temperature monitor

Some parents experienced leaking issues

Material: Plastic

Available nipple flow: Slow Flow, Medium Flow, Fast Flow

Why We Love It

With a wide, breast-like silicone nipple and base that’s very easy for little fingers to grip, Tommee Tippee Advanced Anti-Colic bottles are consistently referenced as a good choice for breastfed babies. But they also boast a number of excellent features for little ones who may be suffering from gas or colic.

These bottles have a dramatic curved design, which Dr. Resnick recommends to reduce the amount of air that’s swallowed during feedings. The brand’s three-piece anti-colic venting system also helps remove air from milk, while a distinctive star valve keeps milk from traveling up the tube. Many parents say this venting system seems to have helped their babies’ gas and discomfort. Also cool: The anti-colic venting tube also has a built-in heat sensing feature to alert you if your baby’s milk is too hot.

Of course, the downside of any venting system is that there are more pieces to clean. Some parents also find it a little frustrating that the nipples on these bottles can’t be used with the Tommee Tippee’s standard Closer to Nature bottle nipples — so keep in mind while shopping that you can’t mix-and-match the pieces on the brand’s bottles.

This newborn feeding set comes with everything you’d need to get started with your bottle-feeding journey: two 5-oz. and three 9-oz. bottles with slow flow nipples, a travel bottle warmer, a bottle brush, two medium-flow nipples, two formula dispensers, a set of removable handles, two pacifiers and two valve cleaning brushes. If you know your little one likes the Tommee Tippee nipple, you’ll be all set with this kit.

Community Reviews

“My LO prefers me at night as well but has done alright with bottle-feeding. We tried about five kinds before he settled on the Tommee Tippee.”

“There are so many different options out there, some babies just prefer one over another. My breastfed baby likes the Tommy Tippee and we offer the bottle once a day right now.”

“As an infant teacher, I’ve always preferred Tommee Tippee. My LO took to Tommee Tippee right away with no issues!”

“Tommee Tippee were the ones that worked best for our little one. I found it replicated the same pace of nursing which is helpful.”

“We only reach for the Tommee Tippee now and probably will stick with those for a long time.”

Best Bottle for Breastfed Baby w/ a Shallow Latch

Dr. Brown’s Natural Flow Anti-Colic Options+ Bottle

Slim design is easy to store and hold

Vent system reduces gas and colic

A lot of parts to clean

Material : Plastic

Available bottle sizes : 4 oz. and 8 oz.

Available nipples flows : Slowest, Slow, Medium, Medium-Fast, Fast, Fast/Thick Liquid

Why We Love It

Some babies have a shallow latch, meaning they don’t take enough breast tissue into their mouth when nursing. In that case, you’ll want to look for a bottle with narrow, pyramid-shaped nipples. Dr. Brown’s Natural Flow Anti-Colic Options+ bottles check those boxes — and more.

The nipples on this Dr. Brown bottle mimic a breast shape, but with much less surface area. This makes it easier for your baby to latch and suck, getting the right amount of milk at the right speed.

Melissa Bykofsy , Executive Editor and mom of two, says her son really struggled to latch when nursing, but took to Dr. Brown’s bottles with ease. She also appreciated the brand's unique (and, dare we say, famous) anti-colic internal vent system, which is designed to preserve milk nutrients and aid in smoother digestion. Although skeptical at first, Melissa did notice changes in both her son and daughter once they started using Dr. Brown’s bottles.

“We had a lot of issues getting my son to burp after bottle feeding, specifically before a nap or bed, and my daughter had crazy reflux at the beginning,” Melissa recalls. “But I definitely saw improvement the more we used Dr. Browns’ bottles.”

Unfortunately, the multi-part vent system adds to the cleaning process. Melissa, and hundreds of What to Expect community members say it’s well worth it. Plus, all the parts are top-rack dishwasher and sterilizer safe, making cleaning easier.

Community Reviews

"I used Dr Brown's with my son, I exclusively breastfed and pumped for a year. The NICU at our hospital uses all Dr Brown's, and the IBCLC recommended them when she came for our post partum consult."

"we use Dr. Brown because originally got the Philips Avent but the baby couldn't get anything out of the bottles no matter how long he would suck on them and try, but the second we switched and tried Dr. Brown he was able to drink 2oz in just 20 minutes so we decided just to use Dr. Brown from now on."

"My ebf baby uses narrow neck Dr browns. The lactation consultant I saw recommended the narrow over the wide."

Best Bottle for Breastfed Baby w/ a Wide Latch

Evenflo Feeding Balance + Wide

Nipple design promotes proper lip placement for wide latches

Slow nipple flow prevent gas and fussiness

Easy to clean

Some say the measurements are hard to read

Material : Plastic

Available nipple flows : Slow, Medium and Fast

Why We Love It

Liz Buxton , Director of Commerce Content Strategy and mom of one, tried several bottles with her daughter but kept encountering the same issue: the nipples were too small, causing her daughter to “chomp down too far and constantly pop [the nipples] off when trying to feed.”

Enter the Evenflo Feeding Balance + Wide bottles . Many moms in the WTE community say their lactation consultants recommended these bottles after noticing their child had a particularly wide latch. The nipple is not only an ideal size for babies with wide latches (wider than Dr. Brown’s but narrower and deeper than Philips Avent, according to Liz), but it’s also naturally sloped to better mimic an actual breast.

Other impressive features include the slow flow rate and a ventilation system, both of which encourage paced feeding.

“My 4-month-old is a voracious feeder prone to chugging. These bottles were the only ones that slowed her down without frustrating her during feeding,” Liz says, adding that she noticed fewer spit-up incidents when her daughter used the Evenflo bottles.

And here’s great news for moms who exclusively pump: You can purchase Balance + Pump Adapters to express milk directly into the bottles, minimizing steps and cleanup.

Community Reviews

"

I use Evenflo wide with the slowest flow (there’s a narrow version too) and really like it. I used Avent Natural with my first one, but decided to switch with this baby after Avent changed their nipple style and it got too frustrating to figure out the right flow.

Anyways, I do really like the shape of the nipple on the Evenflo, I feel like it helps baby make the right shape with his mouth, the way he should be latching. I nurse half the time and he gets bottles half the time and it’s easy for him to go back and forth."

"I love the Evenflo bottles! I wanted to use them because I read they were better for breast feeding babies and promote better mouth muscle development. My lactation consultant agreed. I got the lansinoh bottles as well because the shape looked similar and we needed more 5oz size bottles. The lactation consultant recommended changing the nipple to pigeon because the lansinoh flow is very fast. I put water in the different bottles and squeezed the nipple and sure enough the lansinoh nipples poured out when pressure is applied. Hope this helps."

"We used the wide Evenflo Balance with our first and I plan to again for this baby. My daughter has a slight lip tie and they were the only nipples that positioned her lips correctly."

Best Glass Bottle for Breastfed Babies

Pigeon Nursing Bottle

Cleverly designed nipple encourages a perfect latch

On the pricey side

measurements in U.K. ounces

Material: Glass

Available bottle sizes: 5.8 oz., 8.1 oz. and 11.2 oz.

Available nipple flows: Newborn, 1+/3+ Months, 6+/9+ Months, 15+ months

Why We Love It

Pigeon Nursing bottles are made from borosilicate glass, which is highly durable and heat-resistant. Parents say these bottles hold up well over time and feel very substantial. It has a wide neck and gently curved body, which makes it easy for babies to hold and even easier for caregivers to clean.

are made from borosilicate glass, which is highly durable and heat-resistant. Parents say these bottles hold up well over time and feel very substantial. It has a wide neck and gently curved body, which makes it easy for babies to hold and even easier for caregivers to clean.

In addition to its high-quality material, the Pigeon Nursing bottle has an innovative nipple that’s designed to make it easier for breastfed babies to feed comfortably. Made from supersoft, flexible silicone, the nipple includes a latch-on line to help guide your baby into an optimal latching position. In fact, a number of What to Expect parents report that they originally heard about these bottles from their lactation consultants.

It also has an anti-colic venting system, which is particularly great for gassy babies..

Pigeon bottles are a little on the pricey side, although the brand’s plastic bottles are more affordable. Something else to keep in mind: the measurement scale on the side of the bottle uses U.K. ounces — which doesn’t matter too much if you’re offering baby pumped breast milk, but if you use these bottles to formula-feed, too, you’ll need to convert the ounces to make sure you’re measuring out the correct amount of formula.

Community Reviews

“We are using the Pigeon bottles. These were highly recommended by the lactation consultant as they have a similar flow and shape to the breast. My bub is primarily breastfed and has no issues with the Pigeon bottles.”

“I had the exact same issues [baby not taking a bottle], I was over buying different bottles with no success. But I tried the Pigeon bottles and they worked a treat!”

“I use the Pigeon bottles and haven’t had any issues with them. I used them with my first as well. The LCs where I live recommend them.”

“The Pigeon glass bottles clean very well and last much longer than plastic.”

Best Bottle for Breast Milk

Comotomo Baby Bottles

Babies love to touch the soft silicone base

The round design makes them trickier to store

Material: Silicone

Available nipple flows: Slow, Medium and Fast

Why We Love It

There’s just something about Comotomo bottles that’s comforting to babies. Made of soft, squishy silicone, older babies in particular love touching these bottles during feedings.

“My daughter fought bottles at daycare really hard until they suggested using the Comotomo bottle because it has a round, soft shape that makes it more breast-like,” says Jeanne Beacom, Sr. Campaign Manager and mom of two.

The nipple on Comotomo bottles is also very well-designed for breastfed babies. It’s soft and wide, and countless What to Expect parents say their breastfed baby has done very well on it. "I think my son liked the shape of the nipple — it's more similar to a breast than on most other bottles," says Robin Hillmantel, Senior Director of Editorial Strategy & Growth at What to Expect. The dual anti-colic vents at the top of the nipples also help release air outside instead of going into your little one’s belly.

The nipple on Comotomo bottles is also very well-designed for breastfed babies. It’s soft and wide, and countless What to Expect parents say their breastfed baby has done very well on it. "I think my son liked the shape of the nipple — it's more similar to a breast than on most other bottles," says Robin Hillmantel, Senior Director of Editorial Strategy & Growth at What to Expect.

I used these bottles with my second baby, and my favorite thing about them was how easy they were to clean. They have a wide mouth and collapsible sides, there are only three parts to disassemble and clean, and all parts are microwave-, dishwasher- and sterilizer-safe. The bottles themselves are also easy to put together and take apart, so you're spending less time making baby's bottle.

At $14 each, Comotomo bottles are definitely on the pricier side. But many parents report that since they’re so easy to clean, you actually need fewer of them. That’s especially true if you’re planning on bottle-feeding occasionally while also continuing to breastfeed.

Comotomo bottles don’t have many downsides, but they’re not the easiest to store, thanks to their very wide neck and round design.

Community Reviews

"We use Comotomo and my baby uses both the bottle and boob interchangeably. The bottle itself is even squishy like a boob. They’re a bit pricey but worth every penny.”

“We have tried EVERYTHING and she finally likes Comotomo bottles!”

“I 95 percent breastfeed and sometimes give a bottle here also. My little guy does great with Comotomo bottles! I have had zero issue with it at all.”

“My lactation consultant recommended Comotomo bottles. I got them from Target and I LOVE THEM.”

“It’s the only bottle our girl took. I used them because she hated the skinny nipple/small bottle and seemed to want a more breast-like latch. She likes them and doesn’t have any issues with spit up or reflux in fact she barely spits up. We just have 3, I wash them constantly and they seem to work really well. The price is a bit high, but as long as baby girl is eating and happy.”

“Love these!! We made the switch and my LO loves them! Just be mindful when putting the nipple in that it’s sealed all the way around. I also think they are so much easier to clean!”

FAQs

What bottles are best for breastfed babies?

The best bottle for your breastfed baby is ultimately whichever one he’ll take. But if you’re introducing a bottle for the first time, there are a few features that might increase your odds of success, experts say. “To avoid breast rejection, we want a system that best mimics feeding at the breast,” explains Dr. Resnick. To find that perfect system, consider the following:

Bottle neck width: Even among experts, there’s some disagreement about the best bottle width for a breastfed baby. In the past, many experts believed that a wider bottle base was best to encourage a wide latch. Now, however, many lactation consultants and pediatricians recommend a bottle with a gradual slope and longer nipple. “This encourages a deeper latch and proper tongue placement,” explains Owens. While some babies may do very well with a wider bottle, others may benefit from a gradual slope nipple on a narrower bottle.

Nipple type and size: “Another factor is finding a nipple that best mimics the baby's mother's breast shape and size,” says Chan. Bottle nipples can come in a few different shapes, including:

Traditional nipples: These are the bell-shaped nipples that you’ll find in most baby bottles.

Orthodontic nipples: With a bulbous top and flatter base, these nipples are designed to protect baby’s palate.

Flat-topped nipples: These have a bigger base bulb and flatter top, and are meant to feel more like a mother’s breast.

Nipple flow: The experts I spoke to all agree that a slow flow nipple is best for a breastfed baby. “Using a slow-flow nipple will mimic the slow flow of milk from the breast and help prevent nipple confusion,” Chan says. As with bottle width, you may have to experiment with a few different brands to find one that works best for your baby.

Anti-gas attributes: Dr. Resnick recommends looking for a curved bottle: This type is known to reduce how much air your little one swallows, which may in turn cut down on gas and fussiness. In addition to shape, bottles can have other features that may help prevent gas, such as an anti-vacuum nipple. Some even have special anti-gas and -colic tubing or venting systems that help draw air away from the milk.

When should I start my breastfed baby on a bottle?

Experts say that the sweet spot for introducing a bottle to a breastfed baby is about three weeks. By waiting a few weeks, you give your milk supply time to get established and let your baby get comfortable with breastfeeding. When in doubt, though, check with your pediatrician or lactation consultant to see what they recommend. Dr. Resnick suggests offering a bottle when your baby has just woken up and is not overly hungry or fussy, and having someone other than the breastfeeding mom do the feeding.

How to buy a bottle for a breastfed baby?

When buying bottles specifically for breastfed babies, you may want to consider the following features:

Material : Plastic baby bottles are popular because they’re lightweight, affordable and generally very sturdy. But they can be more difficult to clean, since the AAP says the safest way to use plastic baby bottles is to avoid heating them up, which includes not putting them in the microwave or dishwasher. Glass baby bottles have risen in popularity for being microwave- and dishwasher-safe. But they can be very heavy, and it is possible for them to break (though you can purchase silicone sleeves to protect them). Another popular option is silicone bottles, which are soft and flexible but often more expensive.

Nipple size : "A wider nipple may allow for a larger surface area of the breast to be in contact with the baby's mouth, which can be helpful for babies with a larger latch," Chan explains. "On the other hand, a narrower nipple may allow for a more precise latch and better control over the flow of milk." In other words, you may have to try a few different types before landing on the right fit.

Similarly, you may need to try a few different types of bottles before you find the right one. Some babies simply prefer certain bottles, and many parents end up buying a few before settling on the perfect fit.

What nipple type is best for a breastfed baby?

For a breastfed baby, Dr. Resnick says its best to look for nipples that are a wider design. Because of that, flat-topped nipples may be worth trying first; they have a bigger base bulb and smoother top, and are meant to feel more like a mother’s breast. Your little one, however, may also do well on one of the other types:

Traditional nipples: These are the bell-shaped nipples that you’ll find in most baby bottles.

Orthodontic nipples: With a bulbous top and flatter base, these nipples are designed to protect baby’s palate.

Anti-vacuum nipples: These help limit the amount of air your baby takes in and may help ease gas and colic.

Multi-flow nipples: Generally, bottle nipples are sold in stage-specific flows, but multi-flow nipples can provide multiple stage flows (Stage 1 and 2, for example) in the same nipple. To control the flow, you adjust the position of the bottle.

Disposable nipples: These are sterile and individually wrapped nipples — you might be given them at the hospital, for example. They come in handy for easy clean up, but must be tossed after a single use.

What nipple flow is best for a breastfed baby?

When you first introduce a bottle to your breastfed baby, opt for a slow-flow (sometimes called a Stage 1) nipple. A nipple with a slower flow more closely resembles the experience of breastfeeding, Dr. Resnick says.

What size baby bottle do I need?

Baby bottle brands usually sell bottles in a smaller and larger size, typically a 4- or 5-ounce and an 8- or 9-ounce. The smaller size is better for bottle-feeding a newborn, since at that age your little one will drink up to 4 ounces in a single feeding. As your baby grows, he’ll start drinking 8-ounce or larger bottles. However, parents who would prefer to buy fewer bottles can simply fill a bigger bottle with less milk in the beginning.

How many baby bottles do I need?

The decision about how many baby bottles to get comes down to how frequently you want to clean your baby bottles as well as how often you expect you’ll bottle-feed. When your baby is a newborn, he’ll eat about every three to four hours, six to eight times a day — so parents who are exclusively bottle-feeding may want at least that many bottles in the house. But if you’re only planning on bottle-feeding occasionally, such as a few times a day while also breastfeeding, you may not need quite so many.

WhatToExpect.com, How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby , May 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Bottle-Feeding Basics , May 2012. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Baby Bottles and Bisphenol A (BPA) , February 2012. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), How to Clean, Sanitize, and Store Infant Feeding Items , February 2023. Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T., a board-certified pediatric nurse practitioner working in the Infant Cardiac NICU at NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital in New York City who is also a certified lactation consultant and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. Micah Resnick, M.D., a board-certified pediatrician in Cincinnati, Ohio, with TriHealth and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. Yines Garcia Taylor, R.N., I.B.C.L.C., Founder, Prenatal Yini, Jersey City, New Jersey. Andrea Tran, R.N., I.B.C.L.C., Founder, Breastfeeding Confidential, Denver, Colorado. Kyle W. Monk, M.D., Pediatrician, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Beverly HIlls, California.

Your Next Read

Best Bottles for Preemie Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Best Nipple Creams to Help You Find Relief While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

7 Best Nipple Shields to Help With Latching and Minimize Pain Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Best Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

Switching Between Breast and Bottle? Here’s How to Avoid Nipple Confusion Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfed Baby Won't Take a Bottle By Heidi Murkoff

How to Do Paced Bottle-Feeding With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

5 Best Formula Dispensers That You Can Safely Stash in Your Diaper Bag Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Tips for Breastfeeding a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Stop Pumping Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Help Me, Heidi! How Do I Get Baby to Latch After Bottle-Feeding? By Heidi Murkoff

Benefits of Breastfeeding for Mom and Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window