8 Best Maternity Belly Bands to Support Your Bump and Relieve Pregnancy Pain

Best Pregnancy Belly Support Bands Featuring Tester Images

QUICK SUMMARY

The best pregnancy belly band is Azmed Maternity Belly Band , according to testers from the What to Expect staff and user community. It scores rave reviews for its ease of use, comfortable material and supportive fit.

By the time I waddled into my second trimester, my sweet little bump was making a big impression — especially on my round ligaments and lower back . That’s when my OB/GYN gently nudged me toward trying a pregnancy belly band, and let’s just say…game-changer.

If you're wondering what a belly band actually does, you're not alone. “Belly bands can help support the uterus and, if worn lower on the abdomen, can help pull the baby off the pelvis,” says April Dunmyre, D.O. , an orthopedist and assistant director at UPMC Magee-Womens Hospital Womancare Associates in Pittsburgh. Translation? Less pressure, more comfort — especially in the second and third trimesters when every step can feel like a stretch.

Doctor’s Note: “Not only are pregnancy bands safe, but they are a wonderful tool to use in order to improve patient comfort,” says Shannon Smith , M.D., board-certified OB/GYN and What to Expect Medical Review Board member.

Unlike pant extenders (which help your jeans stay buttoned a little longer), belly bands are designed to wrap around your lower back and abdomen. Think of them as a gentle hug for your bump — easing round ligament pain , improving posture, and making it a little easier to stay on your feet all day.

How I Chose the Best Pregnancy Belly Bands

Finding the best belly band isn’t one-size-fits-all — and trust me, I tried. Here’s exactly how I narrowed down the most comfortable, supportive, and mom-approved picks:

I started with the research I did during my own pregnancy — comparing dozens of belly bands based on comfort, adjustability, materials, and effectiveness.

I spoke to three doctors to better understand how maternity bands work and the features you might want to look for when buying one. In addition to Dr. Dunmyre and Dr. Smith, I spoke to:

These experts shared how belly bands can relieve round ligament pain, support the uterus, and even improve alignment.

I reviewed recommendations and guidelines from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) on how maternity support bands can help during pregnancy.

I spoke to four moms on the What to Expect staff who wore belly bands during their six pregnancies. They shared what symptoms they were trying to ease — and which bands actually helped.

I combed through What to Expect’s community forums and message boards for belly band reviews and recommendations, paying close attention to feedback on material, comfort, support, and pain relief.

Based on parent input, expert guidance, and research, every belly band on this list meets the following criteria:

Supportive: Helps ease common aches like round ligament pain, lower back strain, and pelvic pressure

Comfortable: Made with breathable, stretchy materials that move with you — not against you

User-friendly: Easy to put on and take off (because struggling with Velcro at 30+ weeks isn’t the vibe)

Best Pregnancy Belly Band for Everyday Relief

Azmed Maternity Belly Band

Easy to get on and off

Easy to adjust

Supportive fit

Breathable material

One size may not work for everyone

Sizing: One size

Material: Elastic

Care instructions: Hand wash

Why We Love It

No pregnancy belly band gets name-dropped in the What to Expect community quite as often as theAzmed Maternity Belly Band. Moms-to-be say this is a classic wraparound belly band (available in both beige and black) offers superior all-day support for lower back and hip pain.

offers superior all-day support for lower back and hip pain.

"It provided instant relief — it’s actually kind of amazing how well it works," says Christine Mattheis , mom of two and What to Expect's VP of Content & Brand Solutions.

, mom of two and What to Expect's VP of Content & Brand Solutions.

The beauty of the Azmed belt is how easy it is to use. I appreciated there is just one closure, making it easy to take off when it’s time to sit. And that the Velcro straps fasten at your lower back — not the belly, which means less fabric against your more sensitive bump.

Doctor’s Note:Fix the issue before it worsens. “Start using a belly band when you start noticing symptoms so things don't get more and more irritated. And don't be surprised if you need that support a little earlier for subsequent pregnancies,” Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T., specializing in pelvic floor and obstetric physical therapy.

Start using a belly band when you start noticing symptoms so things don't get more and more irritated. And don't be surprised if you need that support a little earlier for subsequent pregnancies,”

, P.T., D.P.T., specializing in pelvic floor and obstetric physical therapy.

Speaking of the fabric, it’s a soft, breathable elastic, and surprisingly lightweight. Not only is that crucial when dealing with pregnancy sweats, but it makes it a little less bulky under clothing.

Tested by Kathleen Felton , mom of two and What to Expect contributing writer:

“Even the best pregnancy belly bands aren’t super comfortable to wear when sitting down. But because the Azmed belt is so uncomplicated to get on and off, it’s excellent for daily use — you won’t be overly annoyed to have to put it back on again later.”

Community Reviews

“I have this one, it really really helps with my hip pain.”

“Azmed maternity belt. I work a desk job so I don't wear it during work but if I'm at home doing things I will. It makes a huge difference.”

“I second the Azmed! I only feel like I need it when I go on walks or if I'm out and about running errands, not so much for everyday to/from work. It's immediate relief from pressure and some pain.”

Best Pregnancy Belly Band for Back Pain

Belly Bandit Upsie

Soft material

Easy to adjust

Has an ice/heat pack

On the expensive side

Only goes up to size XL

Some say it runs small

Sizing: S to XL

Material: 96 percent viscose from bamboo, 4 percent spandex

Care instructions: Machine wash cold and lay flat to dry (do not bleach, iron or dry clean)

Why We Love It

The Belly Bandit Upsie receives rave reviews among What to Expect community members for its adjustability, efficiency of relieving lower back pain, and high-quality materials (it’s made from super soft bamboo viscose with a little Spandex for stretch). The latter makes it pricier than most maternity belts, but moms-to-be say it’s worth every penny.

Liz Buxton , What to Expect’s Shopping Director and mom of one, says this option came up a lot when researching belly bands for back pain relief. But she was sold when her physical therapist recommended it.

, What to Expect’s Shopping Director and mom of one, says this option came up a lot when researching belly bands for back pain relief. But she was sold when her physical therapist recommended it.

There are a few key features that make it ideal for relieving back pain. First, it’s not a straight piece of fabric like most bands. This allows it to better mold to your body, which helps redistribute your belly’s weight and reduce strain. There's also more structured fabric in the back for additional support. Oh, and did I mention it has a back pocket where you can insert a hot/cold pack?

Bonus: The Belly Bandit Upsie is better looking (and more discreet) than most other options, especially when worn under clothing.

Tested by Liz Buxton , What to Expect’s Shopping Director and mom of one :

"I had serious lower back pain throughout my pregnancy and saw a pelvic PT who actually recommended this band for whenever I went on my daily walks. It really made a huge difference in the distance I was able to cover before feeling fatigued and sore!

Community Reviews

“I used the Upsie belly support band from Belly Bandit during pregnancy and it helped me immensely with easing the back pain and gives excellent support!”

“I used the Upsie belly band from Belly Bandit. It’s awesome!”

“I got the Belly Bandit Upsie. I’m also carrying very low and some days my back is just killing me. It helps a lot, plus it has a heat/cold pack you can put in it. Also had helped a ton with round ligament pain. The only downfall is it’s really uncomfortable to sit in so you have to readjust accordingly.

Best Pregnancy Belly Band for Round Ligament Pain

The Serola Belt

Easy to adjust size and pressure

Comes with an extender for additional sizes

Can be worn while sitting and sleeping

Designed by doctors

Heavier than other maternity belly bands

Cumbersome

Sizing: S to XL

Material: Open-cell urethane foam and elastic

Care instructions: Hand wash in hot or cold water, rinse, and let air dry.

Why We Love It

Leah Rocketto, What to Expect's Associate Shopping Director and soon-to-be mom of two, also saw a pelvic floor therapist to help with round ligament pain. In addition to pelvic floor exercises , her PT also prescribed her the Serola Belt .

Leah Rocketto, What to Expect's Associate Shopping Director and soon-to-be mom of two, also saw a pelvic floor therapist to help with round ligament pain. In addition to

“Game-changer,” Leah says of the easy-to-use belly band. “I couldn’t walk some days because of the pain, and the Serola provided almost instant relief.”

Designed by a medical professional, this belt works overtime to relieve round ligament pain. As Leah’s PT explained, the belt puts welcomed pressure on your sacroiliac joints (SI joints), which are located where the spine and pelvis connect. This extra pressure stabilizes your pelvis, which better distributes the weight, provides more support, and reduces the swelling that leads to round ligament pain.

How does one belt do all of that? The secret is in the dual layers. The bottom layer ensures the belt is properly seated and fitted on your hips. The second layer allows you to adjust the pressure.

This extra layer and pressure does add a little more weight to the belt, but Leah only found that to be an issue as she moved further into her summer pregnancy. It also makes it slightly more annoying to put on and take off, but it's worth it for the relief.

Tested by Leah Rocketto , soon-to-be mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Shopping Director:

“Even though the dual layers add a little extra weight, the added pressure helped stabilize my hips and made walking a lot less painful.”

Best Pregnancy Belly Band for Support During Workouts

Gabrialla Maternity Support Belt

Designed for exercise

Includes a hot and cold pack

Good size range

Material is on the thick side

Sizing: S to XXL

Material: 80 percent polyester, 20 percent Lycra

Care instructions: Hand wash

Why We Love It

If pregnancy pains are keeping you from your fave workout, you may want to consider trying the Gabrialla belly band . Designed specifically for active moms-to-be, this maternity belt sits securely around your hips and lower back to cradle your growing bump.

“It’s light enough that it doesn’t add extra weight or heat during workouts, but has a lot of structure that I felt supported during my HIIT classes,” says Leah , who used the Gabrialla before her round ligament pain set in.

, who used the Gabrialla before her round ligament pain set in.

Doctor Recommended: “I recommend this to patients and even wore it myself. this one. It's affordable, compresses the SIJ a little, and also lifts belly, taking pressure off the round ligaments,” says Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T. specializing in pelvic floor and obstetric physical therapy.

I recommend this to patients and even wore it myself. this one. It's affordable, compresses the SIJ a little, and also lifts belly, taking pressure off the round ligaments,” says

, P.T., D.P.T. specializing in pelvic floor and obstetric physical therapy.

There’s a higher-than-average back panel (6 inches) and two bands that can be adjusted to regulate the amount of tension. What to Expect moms, including Leah, also appreciate that it features a pocket that can hold a hot/cold gel pack — ideal for soothing back pain.

This belly band is available in sizes small to XXL, but make sure to measure yourself and reference Gabrialla’s sizing chart: The brand notes that your pre-pregnancy size doesn’t always correspond exactly.

"It's light and easy to put on, like the Azmed, but applies the right amount of pressure to your body so you feel supported and stable while exercising."

Community Reviews

“I bought the Gabrialla band. It’s comfortable and [has] higher support, but I generally only wear it when I’m being active.”

“I use the Gabrialla support belt but only when I run. I used it my first pregnancy and started using it again a few weeks ago when I was getting sore after my runs. It seems a little thick so I'm not sure how it would lay under everyday clothes. I couldn't care less how it looks when I'm out running!”

“I’m still running three times a week, 3 to 5 miles per run. Definitely not the lengths or paces I used to, but still trying! I got the Gabrialla belly band and it’s been a lifesaver! Has helped relieve pressure and keep me up straight.”

Best Pregnancy Belly Band for Running

FitSplint

Easy to adjust. Lightweight

Stays in place

Expensive

Sizing : S to L

Material: Silicone, nylon and breathable neoprene

Care instructions : Machine wash cold on gentle cycle, tumble dry low

Why We Love It

For more intense exercises — particularly cardio — you might need a little extra support. For that, What to Expect's Deputy Editor and new mom , Caroline Picard , swears by the Fit Splint .

Caroline, a seasoned marathoner, wanted to continue running as long as possible during her pregnancy. She turned to her friend — a running coach and mom — who recommended this two-strap neoprene nylon band. The Fit Splint can be worn in three different ways: under the belly to lift and relieve bladder pressure, low on the hips for added pelvic support to ease sciatica pain, or with one strap above and one below the belly for greater stability. Caroline, who has also used the band during HIIT-style workouts, says it checks all the boxes.

First, it stays in place without feeling too tight. Second, it doesn’t add much extra weight, which not only improves running performance but also minimizes additional sweating. Although she’s only used it in winter so far, Caroline notes she hasn’t overheated while running indoors on a treadmill. ("And when I’m running outside in the winter, the extra layer is much appreciated," she adds.)

Finally, the Fit Splint is super easy to clean, which is a big plus after long runs. Simply toss it in the washing machine on a cool, regular cycle, and tumble dry on low.

Tested by Caroline Picard , What to Expect's Deputy Editor and new mom:

"I’ve run 6-plus miles with the Fit Splint and haven’t had an issue. It’s also easy to quickly adjust the tightness or positioning if I want the support a little lower or higher."

Community Reviews

CO_TrailRunner "I’m still running between 25-35 miles per week. I STRONGLY recommend the Maternity FITsplint by ReCore fitness. It’s the one that Gwen Jorgensen, American Olympic Gold Medalist in triathlon, used up until the day she delivered. This belt is far superior to the two I tried before it and at 25 weeks I’m still running comfortably."

Best Plus-Size Pregnancy Belly Band

Belevation Maternity Band

Good size range

Easy fit

Stretchy

Comfortable fabric

Machine-washable

Doesn’t have adjustable features

Sizing: S to XXL (0 to 26)

Material: Nylon and spandex

Care instructions: Machine-wash warm, gentle cycle with like colors. Use non-chlorine bleach only, tumble dry low

Why We Love It

What to Expect’s Plus-Size Moms and Moms-to-Be group frequently recommends the Belevation Maternity Band for a little extra support. Not only does this pregnancy belly band offer a better size range than most on the market (from small to XXL, up to size 26), but the stretchy fabric and pull-up design means it also offers more coverage, so it’s less likely to pinch in an uncomfortable place. Moms-to-be describe the support as gentle to medium, and say it helps to relieve abdominal, lower back and hip pressure all at once.

Doctor’s Note: “There are bands that have a strap going over each shoulder and it is used to purely lift the belly up and support it. It looks cumbersome, but maybe something for people having twins, etc, or really needing something to just give support. A quick test is to just slightly lift your own belly and see if the pain goes away,” says Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T., specializing in pelvic floor and obstetric physical therapy.

There are bands that have a strap going over each shoulder and it is used to purely lift the belly up and support it. It looks cumbersome, but maybe something for people having twins, etc, or really needing something to just give support. A quick test is to just slightly lift your own belly and see if the pain goes away,” says

And unlike wrap-around styles, which tend to have overlapping straps and Velcro, the Belevation band delivers a smooth look under clothes, which many moms appreciate. The fabric is a seamless, breathable mesh to help you stay cool.

The downside to this style is that you don’t have as many adjustability options. If you’d prefer an adjustable belly band, the Gabrialla and NeoTech belts are also both solid options for plus-size moms-to-be (and were close runner-ups for this title).

Community Reviews

“Belevation belly band was a blessing for me!”

“Belevation belly bands on Amazon are a MIRACLE!”

“I was 353 when I got pregnant and am 369 now at 23 weeks. I use the Bellevation belly band for support.”

Best Adjustable Pregnancy Belly Band

NeoTech Care Belly Band

Decent size range

Very adjustable

Excellent back support

Some moms dislike the feeling of the top strap

Sizing: S-2XL

Material: 64 percent polyester, 21 percent elastodiene, 15 percent nylon

Care instructions: Hand wash

Why We Love It

Moms-to-be love the NeoTech Care Maternity Belt , and it’s easy to see why. The customizable abdominal pad attaches to a lower back support band, which helps ease strain on your lower back. Because this style wraps around the belly and waist, it’s a great choice for anyone suffering from both lower back and abdominal pressure, as the design helps to gently redistribute weight.

, and it’s easy to see why. The customizable abdominal pad attaches to a lower back support band, which helps ease strain on your lower back. Because this style wraps around the belly and waist, it’s a great choice for anyone suffering from both lower back and abdominal pressure, as the design helps to gently redistribute weight.

The band can accommodate bumps up to 60.5 inches, which is more than many of the other products on the market, making this another great option for plus-size moms-to-be. Bonus points go to the super-stretchy fabric (a polyester, elastodiene and nylon blend), which hugs your body with just the right amount of compression.

While many moms-to-be are thrilled with the additional abdominal support the NeoTech belt offers, this style isn’t for everyone. If you don’t love the feeling of lots of fabric and straps on your bump, this may not be the best pregnancy belly band for you.

Community Reviews

“I swear by this thing. It does most of the heavy support that your back/belly would otherwise do. It saved me the last few weeks of my last pregnancy and I'm already noticing a difference wearing it this time around.”

“I've used it daily to help with back/hip pain. Definitely been a lifesaver for this pregnancy!”

“I use that belt and it works great!”

Best Pregnancy Belly Band Tape

Kinesio Taping Kinesiology Tape Tex Gold

Offers a customized fit

No sizes

Comfortable on skin

Seamless under clothes

Not as easy to apply as a belly band

Some moms say it hurts to remove

Sizing: N/A

Material: 100 percent cotton

Care instructions: Can be worn for 3-5 days

Why We Love It

Pregnancy belly bands are the most popular option, but some moms prefer to use kinesiology tape to gently lift and support their bumps. This method involves applying “K tape,” as it’s often called — flexible, water-resistant elastic bands — facing upward on your belly. (There are a number of tutorials on how to do this online, but always consult your practitioner for guidance.)

to gently lift and support their bumps. This method involves applying “K tape,” as it’s often called — flexible, water-resistant elastic bands — facing upward on your belly. (There are a number of tutorials on how to do this online, but always consult your practitioner for guidance.)

The benefit of using K tape instead of belly bands is that it offers endless adjustment options, it’s completely seamless under clothing and it’s blissfully lightweight (many moms-to-be note that K tape feels amazing in the summer, while even the most most minimalist belly bands can feel bulky and restricting under clothing on a hot day).

In a small 2017 study , researchers applied K tape to pregnant women and found that low back pain decreased significantly compared to placebo. While K tape tends to be pretty similar from brand to brand, the researchers in that study used Kinesio Taping Kinesiology Tape Tex Gold on study participants.

, researchers applied K tape to pregnant women and found that low back pain decreased significantly compared to placebo. While K tape tends to be pretty similar from brand to brand, the researchers in that study used Kinesio Taping Kinesiology Tape Tex Gold on study participants.

But while kinesiology tape can help ensure a perfect fit, it’s definitely not as intuitive to use as belly bands and requires some trial and error to get the hang of. Some moms note that it can be a little painful to remove the tape, too. And while one box of tape is relatively affordable at $15, you’re likely to go through quite a lot of it, so it may become more expensive than a pregnancy belly band over time.

Community Reviews

“K tape is the only thing that helped my belly. There’s lots of ways you can use it and it’s so comfortable.”

“I found KT tape to be better for longer-term wear under clothes, although it can be irritating to the skin when you take it off.”

“What I really like the kinesiology tape for was belly support in the summer months when it was too hot to wear my belt outside while working out or hiking. I have had bad round ligament pain with both my babies.”

Best Postpartum Belly Band

Belly Bandit B.F.F. Postpartum Belly Wrap

Great support

Comfortable even if you’ve had a C-section

Expensive

Sizing: XS to XL

Material: 57 percent modal, 38 percent Tencel lyocell, 5 percent spandex

Care instructions: Hand wash, dry flat

Why We Love It

Postpartum belly bands are similar to pregnancy belts, but they usually come up higher on your belly and offer a greater level of compression than would be safe or comfortable during pregnancy.

are similar to pregnancy belts, but they usually come up higher on your belly and offer a greater level of compression than would be safe or comfortable during pregnancy.

New moms love that the Belly Bandit B.F.F. Belly Wrap offers tons of versatility. It has six support panels — including two customizable compression panels — and the wrap hugs you with firm but gentle compression. It also has up to 9 inches of adjustable fabric so you can continue to adjust the fit as your body changes postpartum. Also good: It’s comfortable even if you’ve had a C-section, and won’t irritate your incision area.

offers tons of versatility. It has six support panels — including two customizable compression panels — and the wrap hugs you with firm but gentle compression. It also has up to 9 inches of adjustable fabric so you can continue to adjust the fit as your body changes postpartum. Also good: It’s comfortable even if you’ve had a C-section, and won’t irritate your incision area.

What to Look for in a Pregnancy Belly Band

Based on expert advice, as well my experience and feedback from moms in the What to Expect community, these are the most important features to consider when shopping for a pregnancy belly band:

Sizing: Although some pregnancy belly bands are available in only one size, most come in sizes from small to extra large (and occasionally up to XXL). Look for maternity belts with a wide range of sizes or one-size bands with adjustable features to help ensure a comfortable fit. It’s also important to mention that many manufacturers recommend measuring yourself according to the brand’s size chart, as moms-to-be often aren’t their typical pre-pregnancy size when it comes to belly bands.

Material: Ideally, you’ll want to look for a belly band that’s made of soft, easily adjustable fabric that can expand along with your growing bump. Make sure that the belt isn’t uncomfortable or too restrictive. “If you find them chafing or annoying, abandon them,” says Dr. Wu. And avoid awkward seams or tags that dig into already-sensitive skin!

Support: Belly bands for pregnancy generally come in the same shape: a belt-shaped band of fabric that sits under your bump. Some also feature an additional strap that goes above your bump for extra support. Belly bands should be supportive enough to gently lift and cradle your bump without being overly tight or restricting. Dr. Smith prefers products that have Velcro straps. “[You can] adjust the tension to the level of support that feels adequate,” she says.

Care: Because they’re often made from stretchy materials, most pregnancy belly bands need to be hand-washed, though some can go in the washing machine on a gentle cycle. It’s important to prioritize a comfortable, supportive fit over ease of care, but looking for a machine-washable band might be a top priority as well.

FAQs

When should I start wearing a pregnancy belly band?

Whether or not to use a pregnancy belly band is a personal decision, and there’s no right or wrong time to start. But most pregnant women choose to wear one once they develop round ligament pain. This symptom usually starts after week 14, so many women start considering belly bands during the second trimester when they’re looking for a little extra support and hoping to relieve these sharp, shooting pains.

Note that many pregnancy belly bands are eligible for reimbursement from health insurance companies and your FSA (Flexible Spending Account) or HSA (Health Savings Account).

How long can I wear a pregnancy belly band for?

In theory, you can wear most pregnancy belly bands 24/7. To be safe, however, doctors recommend removing the band every one to three hours for one hour to make sure you’re giving yourself a break. Some experts worry that overuse of belly bands might make your muscles too dependent on these support garments to function.

Some research indicates that the pain-relieving benefits of belly bands apply only to pregnant women who wear the product regularly for short periods at a time. And a 2009 study from the Journal of Clinical Nursing found that support bands could potentially cause skin irritation and discomfort in some people.

To be safe, make sure the product you buy is supportive but doesn’t cut off circulation or restrict your movement. And if you have pelvic pain or back pain that worsens or isn’t improved by a pregnancy support belt, talk to your OB/GYN ASAP for help.

Are pregnancy belly bands safe during the third trimester?

Yes, belly bands can be worn throughout the entire pregnancy. If, however, your pelvic pain or back pain worsen, talk to your OB/GYN ASAP for help.

“Not only are pregnancy bands safe, but they are a wonderful tool to use in order to improve patient comfort,” says Dr. Smith.

To be on the safe side, some experts recommend removing the band every 1 to 3 hours for 1 hour. And look for a product that’s supportive but not too tight.

Do pregnancy belly bands work?

A small 2017 study in the Journal of Clinical Nursing found that women who wore pelvic belts for short periods of time had reduced pelvic girdle pain and could more easily do everyday tasks.

Pregnant women are most likely to feel round ligament pain when they change positions — for example, when sitting up and starting to walk or after engaging in physical activity, Dr. Dunmyre explains — so maternity belts can be especially helpful for on-the-go moms-to-be. Per the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), pregnancy bands can also help make exercise more comfortable during the later stages of pregnancy. ACOG says that belly bands may also help support the back and prevent pregnancy-induced back pain.

Many pregnancy belly band manufacturers also claim that their products help prevent stretch marks. However, the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) notes that many stretch mark prevention remedies don’t actually work. So be skeptical of these claims and remember that stretch marks are a normal, expected part of pregnancy — and nothing to be ashamed of!

Can I use a pregnancy belly band during postpartum recovery?

If your pregnancy belly band still feels comfortable on your stomach after you’ve given birth, there’s no reason why you can’t wear it for extra support. (If you’ve had a C-section, you’ll want to be mindful that it doesn’t irritate the incision area, however.)

Many moms also choose to invest in a postpartum belly band for this period. Like a pregnancy belly band, these products are meant to be worn around the waist to help support your body, but they tend to have a little more compression.

What’s the difference between under-belly vs over-belly bands?

In addition to where they’re placed on the belly, under-belly and over-belly maternity bands differ in the support they provide. Under-belly bands, which are typically wrapped around the hips, help to stabilize the hips, pelvis, and lower back. Over-the-bump bands provide extra, full-back support.

Can you exercise with a pregnancy support belt?

You can wear pregnancy belly bands when exercising, though you may want to look for a band designed to support you during your preferred workout.

What to Expect When You’re Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com , Round Ligament Pain During Pregnancy , May 2023. American Academy of Dermatology, Stretch Marks: Why They Appear and How to Get Rid of Them , 2024. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Exercise During Pregnancy , March 2022. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Back Pain During Pregnancy , December 2021. Cleveland Clinic, Round Ligament Pain , March 2024. Mayo Clinic, Stretch Marks , January 2023. Journal of Clinical Nursing , Pregnancy and pelvic girdle pain: Analysis of pelvic belt on pain , May 2017. Journal of Clinical Nursing, Effectiveness of maternity support belts in reducing low back pain during pregnancy: a review , 2009. April Dunmyre, D.O., UPMC Magee-Womens Hospital Womancare Associates, Pittsburgh, PA. Jennifer Wu, M.D., OB/GYN, Lenox Hill Hospital, New York, NY. Shannon Smith, M.D., a board-certified OB/GYN and partner at Brigham Faulkner Ob/Gyn Associates in Boston, Massachusetts and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board.

Your Next Read

The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Manage Pregnancy Back Pain, from Belly Bands to Ice Packs Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

Products to Make Pregnancy Sex More Comfortable Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

When to Buy and Start Wearing Maternity Clothes Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The Best Pregnancy Shoes for Swollen Feet, Backed by Podiatrists and Moms Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Strengthen Your Core Safely With These Pregnancy-Friendly Ab Workouts Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Stretching During Pregnancy: 9 Feel-Good Moves Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises That Keep You (and Baby!) Feeling Great Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Relieve Rib Pain During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Is Back Pain a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

These Pregnancy-Safe Leg and Booty Moves Boost Stability And Ease Aches Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is It Safe to Keep a Belly Button Piercing During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window