The Best Fertility Trackers, According to a Mom Who Tested 10 Over the Past 5 Years

Best Fertility Trackers collage of apps and wearables including Natural Cycles, Mira and Tempdrop

Quick Summary

The best fertility trackers provide data that empowers you to better understand your fertile window. Of all the fertility monitors I’ve tried over the last five years, the Mira Max Fertility Starter Kit comes out on top for convenience, accuracy, and in-depth insights.

Even before I started trying to conceive my first baby, I was fascinated by the idea of understanding my menstrual cycle. But while predicting when my period would arrive felt relatively straightforward, pinpointing ovulation was a whole different ballgame. At the time, I was shocked by how many methods and technologies promised to help. Fast forward to today, and there are even more options on the market.

Overwhelmed? I know the feeling. Over the last five years, I’ve tried 10 different fertility trackers (when I wasn’t pregnant with my two babies), ranging from sophisticated wearables and smart thermometers to classic test strips. Each provided me with useful data and insights to keep tabs on my cycle and better understand my fertile window . Together, they helped me plan two pregnancies and even troubleshoot a few fertility issues along the way.

How I Tested the Best Fertility Trackers

Over the past five years, I put 10 different fertility trackers to the test — not just for a week or two, but across multiple menstrual cycles to see how they performed through both predictable ovulation patterns and the surprise curveballs our bodies like to throw. Here’s the specifics on how I evaluated each option:

After all that testing (and lots of BBT charting ), I narrowed my initial findings down to just eight trackers I’d personally vouch for and recommend. These are the products that stood out to me for their accuracy, usability, and versatility.

But because no two pregnancy journeys are the same and everyone’s body is different, I also tapped into the What to Expect Community and our editors on staff to gather additional feedback from fellow moms who’ve put these devices (and others!) through the wringer, too. In doing so, I increased the final list to the 10 best fertility trackers, below.

A Doctor's Note on Fertility Trackers

“Fertility awareness is important, and apps and tools are a positive thing,” says Dr. Levine. “But remember: They’re just guides. The best assessment is seeing a fertility doctor and having an ultrasound and blood work.”

According to Dr. Jain, beginners should start with BBT thermometers or ovulation predictor kits to first understand their cycles. For those in need of more detailed data, he shares, “Wearables can be a good investment, especially if you prefer not to manually track symptoms.” Both, he adds, can benefit those with irregular cycle patterns.

However, there are a number of factors that can influence accuracy. “Consistency is key for accurate readings, especially with BBT and wearable devices. Track at the same time each day and in similar conditions,” Dr. Jain explains. “Health factors like stress, illness, medication, sleep patterns, and lifestyle habits can impact readings.”

Best Overall Fertility Tracker

Mira Fertility Max Starter Kit

Detects multiple hormones

Predicts and confirms ovulation

Links with app for easy tracking

High upfront cost (replacement wands are also expensive)

Takes 20 minutes to read results

Why We Love It

The Mira fertility tracker is a high-tech device that’s able to predict and confirm ovulation in 20 minutes or less. All you have to do is collect a urine sample each day, dip a provided test wand into the sample, and insert the wand into the digital monitor. The monitor then produces a detailed report in the app, charting estrogen, LH, and progesterone levels to guesstimate how fertile you are. For an even clearer picture of your overall fertility, you can invest in wands that test for FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone) or start with the Max Kit bundle .

The Mira fertility tracker is a high-tech device that’s able to predict and confirm ovulation in 20 minutes or less. All you have to do is collect a urine sample each day, dip a provided test wand into the sample, and insert the wand into the digital monitor. The monitor then produces a detailed report in the app, charting estrogen, LH, and progesterone levels to guesstimate how fertile you are. For an even clearer picture of your overall fertility, you can invest in

(follicle-stimulating hormone) or start with the Max Kit bundle .

I’ve been blown away by the accuracy and in-depth insights (according to the brand, its Smart AI features track over 8.5 million data points!), which makes it that much easier to assess any changes.

Because Mira collects data on multiple hormones, it’s also earned a reputation among the What to Expect community as the best fertility tracker for irregular cycles, including those with PCOS . It also senses the beginning of your fertile window, which others say has given them more time to conceive.

It can be a bit confusing to understand at first, but I found my community members were more than willing to help compare and analyze charts. There are pages of community forums where people can share and compare charts.

The only drawbacks are the cost of the test wands (close to $100 for a one- to two-month supply) and the length of time you have to wait for results each time you test (roughly 20 minutes). Still, for me, these are small prices to pay for the sheer volume and quality of insights Mira provides.

Tested by Karla Martin , mom of one and What to Expect's Senior Photo Manager:

"I used Mira. I loved seeing real numbers instead of squinting at test lines on other ovulation strips. No more "is it a shadow?" moments or self-gaslighting. The sticks aren't cheap, but the accuracy felt worth it."

Community Reviews

“The Mira is my BEST FRIEND! I’m PCOS so I ovulate randomly and have super long cycles.”

“TLDR: Is it worth it yes but just bc your results look within normal ranges doesn’t mean there’s not an issue. Don’t let those result stop additional testing. On a positive note I know someone who was struggling with baby #2 pregnant by month 3 using Mira.”

“I use the Mira. Back in June I got pregnant with it. Got high LH on June 8th & we BD. Got a positive test on June 18th but it ended in miscarriage. but it works!!!!!! I recommend it.”

Best Wearable Fertility Tracker

Tempdrop 2.0 Advanced Fertility Monitor and Ovulation Tracker

Comfortable

User-friendly

One time cost

Long-lasting battery life

Pricey

No returns for used device without upgrade

Why We Love It

Tempdrop is another highly popular wearable fertility tracker, and for good reason. Unlike a similar overnight wearable, the Ava bracelet , this sleek device isn’t worn on the wrist, making it ideal for light sleepers like me. Simply put it on your upper arm before bed, and the device collects your basal body temperature (BBT) while you sleep.

Plus, syncing your data with the compatible smartphone app couldn’t be easier: after rising, remove the device, place it near your smartphone, and it’ll automatically download the information.

This is especially helpful if you like temperature-based fertility tracking methods, but have trouble remembering to take your temperature first thing in the morning... or wake frequently during the night (looking at you, new moms).

Community Reviews

gato22 “I love the Tempdrop! Super stable temps overnight. I have whatever version they were selling in 2021, lol, and it still works great, just had to replace the battery once (it doesn’t have a charger, just a button battery). I haven’t slept through the night since my Dec 2020 baby was born, but track bbt all the time (for avoiding and getting pregnant) well with it!”

erinV0417 “I used Tempdrop and I loved it.”

Best Affordable Fertility Tracker

Clearblue Fertility Monitor

Easy to use

Tracks two fertility hormones

Identifies fertile window

Readily available at drug stores

Does not sync with app

Short test window

Why We Love It

When I first started tracking my fertility, I used the Clearblue Fertility Monitor , and I still stand by it as a budget-friendly, straightforward buy for beginners. It tracks both estrogen and LH, giving you a good picture of your fertile window and ovulation date to increase the chances you will conceive.

I simply collected a urine sample, dipped a test stick, and then the tracker told me whether my fertility was low, high, or peak. The digital device provides a lookback on up to six cycles, which is key because there is no app connection. Despite its appearance giving the grandmother of all fertility trackers, it has remained popular for being affordable, accurate, and easy to use.

The only caveat: You have to test within the same six-hour window each day. Depending on how often you need to test, you also have to consider the ongoing cost of fertility sticks, which are about $60 every two or three cycles.

Community Reviews

jesspineapplebaby I use the Mira. Back in June I got pregnant with it. Got high LH on June 8th & we BD. Got a positive test on June 18th but it ended in miscarriage. but it works!!!!!! I recommend it.

Best Fertility Tracker App

Natural Cycles

App that integrates with wearable tech

lower upfront and ongoing costs

easy to use

Accuracy depends on regular sleep and temperature recordings

not ideal for irregular cycles

Why We Love It

I was using Natural Cycles when I got pregnant with my first baby, so naturally , I’m a fan! This app tracks your BBT data and uses it to predict your fertile days each month. Natural Cycles has settings to both plan and prevent pregnancies and actually has FDA approval as a form of birth control . However, like all fertility awareness methods of birth control, there is significant room for error, so proceed with caution.

, I’m a fan! This app tracks your BBT data and uses it to predict your fertile days each month. Natural Cycles has settings to both plan and prevent pregnancies and actually has

. However, like all fertility awareness methods of birth control, there is significant room for error, so proceed with caution.

When I used it, you just measured your temperature each morning with the Natural Cycles’ provided basal body thermometer and manually input it to the app. Now, Natural Cycles is compatible with a number of Bluetooth thermometers, smartwatches, and even fitness rings, eliminating the need to manually record your temperature. (If you do use a thermometer instead of a wearable, then you need to remember to take your temperature before getting out of bed in the morning.)

I love that the Natural Cycles algorithm takes a lot of the confusing guesswork out of calculating your fertile window. You can add additional data points, too, like LH tests and symptoms.

In my opinion, the Natural Cycles annual subscription cost is relatively low compared to other hormone monitors and testing strips, and it’s easy to use (especially if you have a smartwatch or Oura Ring — but more on that below ).

Pro Tip: Since the app relies on data from previous cycles to calculate your fertile window, it likely isn’t the best option if you have irregular cycles.

Community Reviews

I absolutely love Daysy. She has been very easy to use and has taken away the fear and human error risk when it comes the fertility awareness method. $300 is a hefty price tag, but 100% work it.

Best Basal Body Thermometer

Easy@Home Basal Body Thermometer

Very affordable

Temperature recall

Accurate

Basic

Manual tracking required

Why We Love It

There are some pretty fancy basal body thermometers out there — What to Expect moms are also fans of the Daysy Fertility Monitor — but I’ve had perfectly good luck with the basic Easy@Home option . If you just want to track your basal body temperature, this thermometer is easy to use, accurate, and will recall your last reading if you want to take your temperature in the morning and go right back to sleep. It's essential to your BBT chart .

— but I’ve had perfectly good luck with the basic Easy@Home option . If you just want to track your basal body temperature, this thermometer is easy to use, accurate, and will recall your last reading if you want to take your temperature in the morning and go right back to sleep. It's essential to your BBT chart .

If you’re going to track your temperature changes manually or are curious about temperature tracking in general, a basal body thermometer does the job without breaking the bank.

Community Reviews

cgh1988 “the easy@home thermometer off Amazon, was inexpensive yet works great! I originally bought one from Target and it would give me the same temperatures often...fishy. And it was not backlit, and it wouldn't save the temps well. Definitely recommend the easy@home! It even comes with a hard case to carry it in if you travel!”

Best Ovulation Predictor Kit

Clearblue Advanced Digital Ovulation Test

Quickly identifies your fertile window

Easy to read

Tracks two key fertility hormones

Widely available

Less expensive option

Manual cycle tracking is required

Can only test with first morning urine

Why We Love It

If you want to track your fertility hormones, but the cost of a full-blown fertility tracker and the accompanying test sticks is outside your budget, Clearblue makes a digital ovulation predictor kit (OPK) that will help you identify both high fertility days, as well as your peak fertility. It is easy to use and less expensive than other hormone monitors on this list. Plus, it’s widely available so you should be able to grab it at your local pharmacy without any issues. It also tracks two key fertility hormones, estrogen and LH. A flashing smile indicates high fertility and a static smile equates to peak fertility. A plain circle, on the other hand, symbolizes a low fertility reading.

My only hang-up with the Clearblue OPK is the fact that you’ll have to manually keep track of results and stay on top of your cycle to know when you should start testing. But, as with the regular basal body thermometer, if you’re willing to do the manual work, it will save you a ton of money.

Community Reviews

hayeongj “i got pregnant with my second child after i started using Clearblue Advanced Digital Ovulation Test Kit for about 3 months, and we have been trying unsuccessfully for 6 months prior to that. so I would say the kit is pretty useful.”

Best Fertility Tracker for Irregular Cycles

Kegg Fertility Tracker and Free Fertility App

Only two minutes to track each day

Able to assess fertility in irregular cycles

One year money back guarantee

Connects to app for tracking

Expensive upfront

Small testing window

Affected by changes in vaginal environment

Why We Love It

Unlike most fertility trackers, which track changes in hormones, the Kegg monitor tests for changes in cervical mucus. You simply place the tracker in your vagina for two minutes each day. The device then connects to an app to help you chart your cervical mucus, which changes as ovulation approaches.

Kegg is a hefty one-time expense, but if you aren’t pregnant within one year of using the device, you can get your money back.

Other than the high price point, you may want to consider that Kegg does require you to test within the same two-hour window every day and the accuracy can be influenced by other factors in the vaginal biome, like semen, lubricants and infections.

Best Fertility Tracker to Confirm Ovulation

Proov PdG Test

Convenient

easy to use

may be less expensive than lab

Must track ovulation to use

ongoing cost each cycle

Why We Love It

I went through a period where I wasn’t ovulating regularly, and Proov helped me monitor ovulation by testing for the metabolite of progesterone over a 24-hour period. I found that the Proov tests were accurate, easy to use and more convenient than shuttling to and from the lab.

At $40 for 10 strips, Proov is pricey for only testing one hormone, but it’s only one of a few options for testing progesterone at home. And, compared to getting a blood test or investing in a fertility tracker like Mira, it’s the less expensive route to take for this particular fertility pain point.

One consideration is you do need to know when you ovulated in order to properly use the Proov tests. I tested for my LH rise (indicating ovulation was about to occur) with ovulation test strips , then used Proov to track a progesterone rise exactly seven days later and for four additional days.

One consideration is you do need to know when you ovulated in order to properly use the Proov tests. I tested for my LH rise (indicating ovulation was about to occur) with

, then used Proov to track a progesterone rise exactly seven days later and for four additional days.

Community Reviews

fizz-ttc “Proov has been a game changer for me. I got pregnant with all negative PDG tests but lost the pregnancy. My doctor told me it was due to low progesterone so next cycle she started me on progesterone supplements and I got pregnant. That was my rainbow baby. I'm now TTC #2 and have been using their new Complete test. If you are confused about your results, you should join their FB group. Lots of great advice and help in there.”

Best Versatile Fertility Tracker

Oura Ring 4

Stress-free tracking

HSA/FSA Doubles as jewlery

integrates with popular menstrual cycle and fertility tracking apps

Transitions seamlessly from TTC to pregnancy support

Overall health and fitness insights

HSA/FSA ellgible

Pricey upfront cost and membership fees

Need to wear 24/7

Regularly needs recharging

Why We Love It

Oura rings have long been heralded as a versatile health and wellness tracker. Not only does it analyze your sleep patterns and heart rates, but it also uses body temperature to provide insights into your menstrual cycle and fertile window, especially when paired with an integrated app like Natural Cycles, Clue, or Flo.

While relatively new technology, most moms in the What to Expect community swear by this particular wearable device, referring to their little ones as "Oura babies."

The biggest differentiator from other fertility trackers featured here is the fact that it fits in seamlessly with your lifestyle, doubling as a part of your jewelry collection (choose between a range of metallic finishes, including gold, silver, and rose gold). It's also as hands-off as it comes. As you go about your day and sleep through the night, it’ll pull biometrics like skin temperature, heart rate, and sleep patterns to predict your period and ovulation dates — no pee cup required. It's our personal favorite, but it's worth noting that there are a few competing rings entering the fertility space, such as UltraHuman , both of which are HSA/FSA eligible.

Bonus: Once you are expecting, Oura now provides additional pregnancy-related insights to help you better understand the changes your body may experience.

Tested by Oliva DeLong , mom of one and What to Expect’s Senior Health Editor:

“I've had it for a little over a year now and, prior to that, I had the Apple Watch for 4 years. In comparison, I find it’s spot on when it comes to counting steps, monitoring restful sleep, and tracking my cycle. I find it fascinating that the temperature measurements are so accurate! I usually know a day or two before my period will begin thanks to Oura alerts based on temperature tracking."

“I've had it for a little over a year now and, prior to that, I had the Apple Watch for 4 years. In comparison, I find it’s spot on when it comes to counting steps, monitoring restful sleep,

tracking my cycle. I find it fascinating that the temperature measurements are so accurate! I usually know a day or two before my period will begin thanks to Oura alerts based on temperature tracking."

Community Reviews

“get the natural cycles app for it to connect to! I tracked BBT TTC #1 with a thermometer and natural cycles. Got the oura ring so I no longer had to manually take it.”

“My Oura ring is extremely accurate. It does take a couple months to really show an accurate trend. I didn’t use Natural Cycles. Oura ring temps caught my O day to a T. My temp changes also alerted me of early miscarriages twice when I noticed drops.”

“Update, after trying for 14 months and 1 chemical I finally got a bfp after the first full cycle with my Oura ring and natural cycles app. HIGHLY recommend the combo.”

“So far I’m trusting my Oura ring more than Premom w/OPK.”

Best Fertility Tracker Test Strips

Pregmate Ovulation Test Strips

Budget-friendly

widely available

straightforward results and testing methods

Messy

Some moms say they don’t track line progression or pick up hCG as well as First Response

Why We Love It

Sometimes the simplest tools are the most reliable. That’s why Pregmate Ovulation Test Strips have become a tried-and-true favorite for so many moms in the What to Expect community trying to conceive. These urine-based, ovulation test strips pair perfectly with the brand’s accompanying app, helping you spot your fertile window with clarity and confidence. They’re relatively sensitive, too.

They’re best for those who prefer a low-cost, low-tech approach — All you have to do is dip the test strip into your pee for five seconds, lay it flat, and wait five minutes for the final reading to see whether or not you're ovulating.

Pro tip: Pair it with Frida Mom’s $9 pee cup for even greater usability!

Tested by Maeve Wood , mom of two and contributing writer for What to Expect:

“Using ovulation strips gave me peace of mind that I was trying at the right time instead of playing a guessing game. I was able to conceive relatively quickly with both of my kids using the Pregmate strips. I found them very easy to read, but if you're ever questioning or confused by the results, there are a million apps out there to help you read them correctly.”

Community Reviews

milsmama “I got my positive with my daughter with those at 12 dpo.”

Types of Fertility Monitors

Some women can track their fertile window by simply analyzing changes in their cervical mucus or charting their basal body temperature. But many benefit from analyzing other forms of biometric data via a fertility tracker, notes Dr. Jain . The emerging market of sophisticated fertility monitors can make it rather difficult to decide whether you want a wearable, app, or hormone monitor.

or charting their basal body temperature. But many benefit from analyzing other forms of biometric data via a fertility tracker, notes Dr. Jain . The

emerging market of sophisticated fertility monitors can make it rather difficult to decide whether you want a wearable, app, or hormone monitor.

Below, I've outlined the main types of fertility trackers based on expert insights:

Hormone Monitors: These fertility monitors calculate hormone levels on a digital device and aim to identify your fertile window and ovulation date. These devices typically collect a urine sample, which calculates hormone levels like estrogen, luteinizing hormone (LH), and progesterone. Some hormone monitors link with an app to chart your data.

Thermometers: During the menstrual cycle, your body’s temperature at rest — or basal body temperature (BBT) — rises after ovulation. By tracking your temperature, you can confirm that ovulation has occurred and get a sense of when your ovulation typically occurs each month if your cycles are fairly regular. Some thermometers link with an app to help you track your cycle. However, Dr. Jain warns that accuracy can easily be thwarted by illness, sleep disturbances, alcohol, or inconsistent measurement times.

Wearables: Wearable fertility monitors are designed to catch your body’s lowest temperature, typically overnight, and are worn on your wrist, arm or fingers. Some fertility monitors collect additional data, like heart rate and sleep patterns. Another type of wearable fertility monitor goes in the vagina and assesses changes in cervical mucus texture and consistency that indicate fertility.

Test Strips: A low-tech but trusted way to track your own fertility is with ovulation test strips or progesterone test strips. These test for LH, which peaks 24 to 48 hours before ovulation occurs, or progesterone, which rises after ovulation to indicate ovulation has occurred. You have to read and track changes in the strips yourself, but there are apps to help! There’s no smart functionality here (you simply urinate on them), but it’s a relatively affordable and a basic, yet effective option.

Saliva Monitors: Saliva can change in consistency during fertile windows due to estrogen. These are typically reusable and non-invasive, but can be tricky to interpret correctly, Dr. Jain points out.

Brigitt Earley originally contributed to this article, which was previously medically reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Fertility Trackers FAQs

What are fertility trackers?

Fertility trackers are devices that help you to identify your fertile window and ovulation date. If you are trying to conceive, fertility trackers can help you identify the best days to try to get pregnant. Fertility trackers can also help you understand your cycle and fertility.

How accurate are fertility trackers?

It is hard to assess the accuracy of fertility trackers as a whole, as they all function differently, but most devices have been proven to increase your chances of getting pregnant. Depending on your specific body, certain fertility trackers may be better than others for accurately predicting ovulation.

“The most fertile period is the five days leading up to ovulation and the day of ovulation itself,” Dr. Jain says.

How do fertility trackers work?

Fertility trackers work in three main ways: tracking hormone level changes, tracking body temperature changes and tracking cervical mucus changes. Fertility trackers that detect hormone levels typically track the rise of estrogen and/or LH, which indicates ovulation is coming. Temperature trackers look for a rise of BBT above baseline, which occurs after ovulation as progesterone rises. Cervical trackers look for changes in cervical fluid that occur during the fertile window.

How long do I need to track before expecting results and when should I consider seeing a fertility specialist?

For those under the age of 35, Dr. Jain recommends seeing a specialist after 12 months of trying. Those who are older should consider seeing a specialist after 6 months, but adds, “Immediate evaluation is recommended if there are known fertility issues (e.g., irregular periods, endometriosis, history of pelvic infections).”

Your Next Read

Pinpoint Your Fertile Window: How to Track Ovulation and Boost Your Chances of Getting Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Best Pregnancy Tests Fact Checked by Haley Jena, Contributing Writer

Ovulation Calculator Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Fertility Fact Check: What Can Help You Conceive (and What's Just Hype) Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

The Exact Time of Day to Use Ovulation Tests If You're Trying to Conceive This Month Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

When Is the Best Time to Have Sex to Get Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Do Basal Body Temperature Charts Really Work for Ovulation Tracking? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Trying to Conceive? A Guide to Fertility Drugs That Can Help You Ovulate Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Are At-Home Fetal Heart Monitors Actually Accurate? Medically Reviewed by Beth McAvey, M.D.

How to Boost Your Chances of Getting Pregnant (Starting Today) Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Ovulation Symptoms: 10 Signs of Ovulation to Know Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Ready to Conceive at 35 (or Older)? These Tips Can Help You Feel Confident and Prepared Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

The Top Fertility Treatments Used by Couples Who Need Help Conceiving Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

A Dozen Tips for Getting Pregnant Fast Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

How Long Does Getting Pregnant Usually Take — and What Affects Your Timing? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window