Best Baby Toothpastes to Keep Little Teeth Clean

Best Baby Toothpastes

Quick Summary

The best baby toothpaste is Tom's of Maine Children's Fluoride Toothpaste, according to dentists and testers from the What to Expect staff and user community. When choosing a baby toothpaste, dentists advise choosing a tube with fluoride, while parents suggest looking for flavors that are well-tolerated by their children.

When your baby is all gums, it’s perfectly okay to use a damp cloth to clean her mouth. Once that first tooth breaks through the surface, however, it’s time to upgrade your teeth-cleaning gear. Of course, you’ll want to have the right baby toothbrush , but you’ll also want to make sure you’re equipped with the best baby toothpaste to keep her new pearly whites clean.

Toothpaste for babies, just like those made for adults, are designed to help remove plaque and bacteria from teeth and protect against cavities, explains LaQuia Vinson , DDS, MPH, a pediatric dentist with Riley Hospital for Children at Indiana University Health. But, before brushing baby’s teeth, you should know about some of the ways that your baby’s toothpaste may be different from your own.

How We Chose the Best Baby Toothpastes

According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the American Academy of Pediatric Dentists (AAPD), the best baby toothpastes contain fluoride. That being said, you also want to find a toothpaste your baby will tolerate. To help narrow down your search, experts and What to Expect staff and community members say to consider the following factors when choosing the best baby toothpaste:

Age-appropriateness: When shopping for a baby toothpaste, the most important rule is to look for child-friendly toothpaste bearing the American Dental Academy (ADA) Seal of Acceptance , even if the toothpaste's label says that the product is for kids aged 2 and up, Dr. Vinson says. In fact, many toothpastes marketed towards babies (often called "training toothpastes") aren't actually the best choice because they don't contain fluoride, which is important for keeping baby’s teeth strong and cavity-free.

Flavor: Most tots tend to prefer fruity or bubble gum flavors, as many find mint-based flavors to be “spicy” or too strong. But if your munchkin happens to gravitate towards mint, there are a handful of kid-approved options out there that aren't as intense as mint flavors for adults.

Each of the baby toothpaste on our list contains fluoride, is deemed safe for babies, and has received overwhelmingly positive reviews for baby tolerance among What to Expect staff and community members.

Best Overall Baby Toothpaste

Tom's of Maine Children's Fluoride Toothpaste

Large tube

recyclable tube

not tested on animals

Not as flavorful as some other options

Why We Love It

A go-to choice among parents in the What to Expect community, Tom's of Maine's children's toothpaste checks all the boxes. It’s free of artificial colors, flavors and preservatives, and comes in several yummy flavors. (Many What to Expect parents say their tots are big fans of the strawberry flavor, in particular.)

Joyce Slaton, Commerce Editor at What to Expect, used Tom’s strawberry kids toothpaste and found that the flavor was a hit. “My child was very sensitive to flavors, and complained that any mint we tried tasted ‘spicy,’” she says. “We were so happy when we found this toothpaste, the flavor was mild and tasted like real strawberry. She stopped complaining about getting her teeth brushed when we tried Tom's.”

Joyce Slaton, Commerce Editor at What to Expect, used Tom’s strawberry kids toothpaste and found that the flavor was a hit. “

My child was very sensitive to flavors, and complained that any mint we tried tasted ‘spicy,’” she says. “We were so happy when we found this toothpaste, the flavor was mild and tasted like real strawberry. She stopped complaining about getting her teeth brushed when we tried Tom's.”

Shelley Gingrich, Executive Director of Brand Solutions at What to Expect, also found Tom’s toothpaste to be a hit. “My son loves the flavor so it makes brushing easy and resistance-free,” she says. “He will literally use no other toothpaste but this one.”

Although it’s a natural option, Tom’s toothpaste is still an ADA-approved option that providing fluoride to keep baby’s new teeth strong, Something Shelley and other parents appreciate.

Size: 5.1 ounces

Flavors available: Silly Strawberry, Blueberry, Watermelon

Community Reviews

catmom5 “We use Tom’s of Maine. The kids like the strawberry flavor. Our ped said a very small amount, but they recommend fluoride.”

L18564 “We use a rice grain sized amount of fluoride toothpaste per the ADA and AAP. I bought Tom's of Maine children's toothpaste in the strawberry flavor. I typically hold him while I brush and tilt him slightly so all the drool and excess toothpaste goes into the sink. No issues.”

Best All-Natural Baby Toothpaste

Burt's Bees for Kids Fluoride Toothpaste

Free of SLS

recyclable tube and carton

not tested on animals

Can be hard to find

Why We Love It

Some toothpastes are made with sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS), which can be irritating for some gums and lead to canker sores . Burt’s Bees kids’ toothpaste , however, is free from SLS, as well as parabens, artificial flavors, dyes and preservatives. We’re not surprised that Burt’s Bees takes the spot for the best natural option, because the brand is often a go-to in the What to Expect community for organic products. Parents report that the sweet strawberry flavor is a hit among kids, even those who are picky, with many finding that teeth brushing was no longer much of a struggle once they started using it.

. Burt’s Bees kids’ toothpaste , however, is free from SLS, as well as parabens, artificial flavors, dyes and preservatives. We’re not surprised that Burt’s Bees takes the spot for the best natural option, because the brand is often a go-to in the What to Expect community for organic products. Parents report that the sweet strawberry flavor is a hit among kids, even those who are picky, with many finding that teeth brushing was no longer much of a struggle once they started using it.

Size: 4.7 ounces

Flavors available: Strawberry Splash

Community Reviews

Chanely2020 “I’ve been using it twice a day for the past year and he doesn’t spit it out. But again I use a very small amount (rice grain) I like the Burt’s bees for kids toothpaste.”

Best Mint-Flavored Baby Toothpaste

AquaFresh Kids Cavity Protection

Pump is easy to use

low price

readily available

large size

Contains dyes

Why We Love It

If your little one isn't a fan of fruity toothpastes and you'd prefer to steer clear of strong candy flavors, theAquaFresh Kids Bubble Mint toothpaste might be a winner. Unlike straight mint toothpastes, which can be a tough sell for some tots, who often complain that the cool flavor is "spicy,” this one is tempered with a hint of bubblegum. Parents also like that the stand pump is easy for small hands to dispense the paste, which is perfect if your little one is going through the “I can do it” phase.

Size: 6.07 ounces

Flavors available: Bubble Mint

Community Reviews

Mayerscarolyn2 “We use kids aquafresh, just a tiny bit on the brush twice a day.”

Best Bubble Gum-Flavored Baby Toothpaste

Crest Kid's Cavity Protection Sparkle Fun Toothpaste

Low price for multi-pack

readily available

Not a flip cap

Why We Love It

If you’re struggling to get your little one to enjoy teeth-brushing time, Crest Kid's sparkling toothpaste mightbe a good option to try. Several What to Expect community members say their little ones are big fans of the bubblegum flavor. But even though it has a sweet taste, you can rest assured that there’s no added sugar.

be a good option to try. Several What to Expect community members say their little ones are big fans of the bubblegum flavor. But even though it has a sweet taste, you can rest assured that there’s no added sugar.

Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor at What to Expect, says her son likes the toothpaste so much, he asks for it by name. “He likes the flavor and that it’s blue,” she points out. “The dentist gave me the OK to use this brand so I feel good about it.”

Size: 4.6 ounces

Flavors available: Sparkle Fun (Bubblegum)

Community Reviews

“Both our pediatrician and dentist have had us start using fluoride toothpaste at a year. It is just a thin smear, which isn’t too much for them to swallow. We use regular Crest kids toothpaste.”

“I’ve always used the oralB, Colgate and Crest children’s toothpastes for my kids.”

“I use crest kids. Perfectly safe, approved ingredients, recommended by many many dentists. Very clean!”

“Now he loves getting his teeth brushed because we switched to the Kid's Crest bubblegum flavor! He's obsessed. Apparently he's not into Tom's strawberry flavor.”

Best Fruit-Flavored Baby Toothpaste

Hello Fluoride Toothpaste for Kids

SLS-free

vegan

not tested on animals

readily available

Pricey

tubes on the smaller side

Why We Love It

Parents appreciate thatHello Fluoride Toothpaste for Kids is free of parabens, dyes, SLS, gluten, preservatives and artificial flavors. But they especially like that the toothpaste comes in comes in fun fruity flavors like, Dragon Raspberry and Unicorn Bumble Gum, which some What to Expect community members say are good enough to get some reluctant brushers on board.

is free of parabens, dyes, SLS, gluten, preservatives and artificial flavors. But they especially like that the toothpaste comes in comes in fun fruity flavors like, Dragon Raspberry and Unicorn Bumble Gum, which some What to Expect community members say are good enough to get some reluctant brushers on board.

Several What to Expect staff members agree.

Several What to Expect staff members agree.

Karen Sly, Finance Manager at What to Expect, found the grape flavor and found it to be a winner. “My daughter loves it. We've tried other flavors and she always comes back to grape,” she says. “Toothbrushing was a big battle with my daughter for a while, and this flavor has made it considerably easier.” For Sarah Darby, What to Expect’s Senior SEO Content Strategist, her baby likes the grape flavor so much that he tries to suck the toothpaste off before he can start brushing!

Sarah also appreciates the design of the bottle, which makes prepping the toothbrush easy for her. “I like that it has a really tiny opening, which makes it easy to put only a tiny amount of toothpaste on the brush, which is very important to me because of the fluoride,” she also notes. “His teeth have been healthy every time they get checked, so it seems to be doing its job as well.”

Size: 4.2 ounces

Flavors available: Wild Strawberry, Juicy Grape, Dragon Dazzle Blue Raspberry, Orange Dreamsicle, Strawberry

Our Research

We spoke to LaQuia Vinson , DDS, MPH, a pediatric dentist with Riley Hospital for Children at Indiana University Health.

Additionally, we consulted several What to Expect staff members, including:

Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor, mom of a 2-year-old

Sarah Darby, Senior SEO Content Strategist, mom of a 1-year-old

Shelley Gingrich, Executive Director, Brand Solutions, mom of 4-year-old and 1-year-old

Joyce Slaton, mom of a teenager

Karen Sly, Director of Finance, mom of two girls ages 2 and 5 months

Finally, we canvassed What to Expect’s community boards to learn which baby toothpastes parents liked best.

FAQs

Do babies need fluoride toothpaste?

Baby toothpaste should contain fluoride, per recommendations from the AAP and AAPD. Toothpaste that contains this mineral can help prevent cavities, rebuild tooth enamel and make sure teeth are as strong as possible, even in young mouths. If, however, you’re concerned about using fluoride, you can speak with your pediatrician or pediatric dentist to see what they recommend for your child.

When should I start using toothpaste for my baby?

Start brushing your baby's pearly whites with toothpaste as soon as her first tooth erupts, says the AAP. Brushing as early as possible gives your little one maximum protection against cavities and sets the stage for a lifetime of good oral health habits.

What toothpaste is safe for babies?

You may wonder if it’s okay to use your go-to formula when cleaning your little one's mouth. The answer: No. Babies need toothpaste designed specifically for young children, as “adult” formulas often have added ingredients such as whiteners and brighteners. Not only are these not safe for kids, but Dr. Vinson says they can be abrasive on your baby's gums. Plus, these formulas usually contain a high dose of fluoride that could actually damage your baby’s teeth or give them upset stomachs.

One important thing to note is that most kids’ fluoride toothpastes are labeled for ages 2 and up. But it's still safe — and in fact, recommended — to use these products for your baby, Dr. Vinson says.

So why the age discrepancy? Product labels haven't yet caught up with the latest research . "In the past, the recommendation for children under age 3 was fluoride-free toothpaste," she explains. Now, studies show that the benefits of fluoride are important for children of all ages, and major medical organizations including the AAP and the AAPD say that infants and toddlers under 2 should use fluoride toothpastes.

How do I brush my baby's teeth?

You should brush your baby's teeth twice a day, preferably after breakfast and before bedtime.

Use an infant toothbrush with soft or silicone bristles that will feel more comfortable in baby's mouth. You may be able to get the best leverage by sitting your baby on your lap facing away from you. Gently hold your baby's head with one hand, stabilizing the chin, and brush with the other hand.

Then, gently brush in tiny circles for about two minutes total. (Singing a song can help the time pass faster!) Brush her tongue too — just don't go too far back, since it can trigger gagging.

The AAP advises using a smear of toothpaste that’s about the size of a grain of rice. Move up to a pea-sized amount when your child is around age 3 and capable of spitting out the toothpaste after brushing. Although toothpaste isn’t supposed to be swallowed, even baby-safe toothpaste, it shouldn’t be something to worry about as long as you’re using the recommended amount — it’s so small for this reason!

WhatToExpect.com, Brushing Baby's Teeth , June 2022. American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, Policy on Early Childhood Caries (ECC): Consequences and Preventive Strategies , 2021. American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, Policy on Use of Fluoride , 2018. American Academy of Pediatrics, Good Oral Health Starts Early: AAP Policy Explained , December 2022. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline Plus, Brushing Your Child's Teeth , May 2021.

Your Next Read

Do Babies and Toddlers Need Fluoride? Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Brushing Baby's Teeth Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

How to Brush and Floss Your Toddler's Teeth Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

When Should Baby Visit the Dentist for the First Time? Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Why Your Toddler Hates Brushing His Teeth — and How to Make It Easier Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

Is Your Toddler Teething? Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

When Will My Baby's Teeth Come In? Check Our Baby Teeth Chart Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

Brushing Your Toddler's Hair Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Why Babies Put Everything in Their Mouths Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

When Do Babies Start Teething? Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

When Do Kids Start Losing Teeth? Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Thumb-Sucking Baby: Is It Okay for Newborns to Suck Their Thumbs? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window