10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them

The Best Sippy Cups in 2025 include Olababy, EzPc, Philips, HoneyBear, Munchkin and More on colorful square background

QUICK SUMMARY

The best sippy cup is the Munchkin Miracle 360 Trainer Cup , according to testers from the What to Expect staff and user community. When choosing a sippy cup, experts and parents say the most important factors to consider are type, age range and ease of cleaning.

As a mom of two, I can tell you the journey from bottles to open cups isn't always a smooth one. Both of my boys eventually made the switch, and sippy cups were an incredibly helpful stepping stone during that time. Not only are they easier for most babies and toddlers to drink from and hold independently, but they’re also typically less messy (weighted bottoms and covered tops prevent most puddles from appearing on your floor). Sippy cups are also more portable, allowing you to easily pack them in a bag for on-the-go activities like play dates and daycare.

But how do you know when is the right time to introduce your little one to a sippy cup? The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) now recommends starting to wean off bottles somewhere between 6 and 9 months. Understandably, there is quite a learning curve at this stage. While some experts recommend going straight to open containers from the breast or bottle, most families (mine included) found that the best sippy cups can help bridge this gap .

How I Chose the Best Sippy Cups

To learn about must-have features and any safety considerations when using training cups before ensuring every recommendation was backed by both experience and expertise, I combined firsthand parenting know-how with insights from trusted professionals and organizations:

Interviewed pediatric and dental experts: I spoke to Lauren Crosby , M.D., a pediatrician at La Peer Pediatrics in Beverly Hills, California, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board; and Michelle Kelman , D.D.S., a pediatric dentist in Los Angeles, California, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board.

Priotized parent-tested picks: As both a mom and former parenting editor, I have tested many sippy cups to find ones that work for my two sons, so I made note of the products that I’ve personally found most helpful and easiest to use. Next, I spoke to What to Expect staff members with four kids between them and then canvassed the What to Expect community boards to learn which sippy cups parents felt were easiest to clean, and for babies to hold and drink from.

Reviewed feedback from previous award results: For the 2024 What to Expect Feeding Awards , where hundreds of parents voted for their favorite baby products, sippy cups were included.

By blending expert guidance with parent reviews, this list spotlights the best sippy cups that are durable, easy to use, and (mostly) spill-proof — so you can focus more on your little one’s progress and less on mopping up messes.

A Doctor's Note on Sippy Cups

Dr. Kelman says she generally prefers that parents transition from a bottle directly to an open cup, but if you do go the sippy cup route, she suggests a spoutless model. “Although there have been some concerns regarding positioning of the tongue with [spoutless] cups, they aren’t as damaging to the teeth as traditional sippy cups,” she explains.

Best Sippy Cup Overall

Munchkin Miracle 360 Trainer Cup

Spill-proof

Durable

Comes in set of two

No spout (if that's a feature your baby prefers)

Capacity: 7 oz.

Material: BPA-free plastic

Recommended age: 6 months and older

Dishwasher safe: Yes

Why We Love It

One of the most popular sippy cups in the What to Expect community, the Munchkin Miracle 360 Trainer Cup is spoutless and frequently recommended by parents looking to help their babies make the transition from bottle to cup. It boasts a flat, 360-degree lid that makes the transition easier because little ones can drink from any angle. The “spout” on the rim seals automatically after your child is done drinking to prevent spills.

Made of supersoft BPA-free plastic, this sippy cup is comfortable for little hands to grip. It holds 7 ounces and is aimed at children 6 months and older.

While it takes some babies a little time to get the hang of it, most pick it up fairly quickly, parents say, especially after you demonstrate how it should be used. I’ve offered this cup to both of my sons when they were around 6 months, and they were able to figure out how to drink from it without too much trouble. I loved the soft, easy-to-grip exterior and how easy it was to clean, too, since there aren’t any straws.

It's self-sealing and virtually spill-proof, but keep in mind you do need to make sure the top is secure.

Tested by Shelley Gingrich, mom of two and What to Expect's Executive Director of Brand Solutions:

"The Munchkin 360 is great because it's a spill-free way to teach drinking out of an open cup. Also, not too many parts, and they can all be easily cleaned in the dishwasher."

Community Reviews

“We introduced this cup to LO at 6 months. At first she just sorta played around with it but after showing her multiple times how to drink from it she can do it all by herself (7.5 months now). Love these cups!”

“I gave my son the 360 at about 8 months. It took him a couple weeks to get it, but one day it just clicked and he loves it now. Initially I’d take the top off the cup and give him a little sip just so he knew what was in there. Then when he’d have it up to his mouth, I’d press on the rubbery top a little which helps the water come out. Pretty soon he got the hang of it.”

“I bought one for my daughter and she LOVES it! I just bought her two more today. It's super easy and they figure it out very quickly.”

"Our daughter will only drink out if the Munchkin 360 cup. We tried both the traditional sippy cup & a straw cup and she refused both. She loves the Munchkin 360 & already tries to drink out of regular cups since she knows how to hold it & tilt it up."

"The munchkin 360 is the only cup she’ll drink out of. She always drinks her water out of it. The straws are a no go for her, so I’m sticking to the 360, it’s spill proof and she likes it"

Best Sippy Cup for Breastfed Babies

TalkTools Honey Bear Drinking Cup

Helps teach baby to use a straw

Easy for little hands to hold

Straw is difficult to clean

Capacity: 5 oz.

Material: BPA-free food-grade plastic

Recommended age: 6 months and up

Dishwasher safe: Yes

Why We Love It

Many babies initially struggle to learn how to use a straw, especially if they’re exclusively breastfed and haven’t yet been introduced to bottles or cups of any kind. If that’s the case with your little one, you might consider offering her the TalkTools Honey Bear Drinking Cup , often simply called “the honey bear cup” by devoted customers.

Many babies initially struggle to learn how to use a straw, especially if they’re exclusively breastfed and haven’t yet been introduced to bottles or cups of any kind. If that’s the case with your little one, you might consider offering her the

, often simply called “the honey bear cup” by devoted customers.

Developed as a feeding therapy tool for occupational therapists, this cup disperses liquid very easily — the BPA-free plastic is thin and lightweight, and liquid squeezes up at the slightest bit of pressure. That, combined with the thinness of the straw and soft texture, seems to make the cup very manageable for babies to hold and use. There are countless stories within the What to Expect community from parents whose little ones finally learned how to drink from a straw after using this cup.

Heavily influenced by the many What to Expect parents who recommended it in my Birth Month Group, I purchased this cup for my youngest son when he was around 8 months. It had taken my older son a long time to figure out how to use a straw, and I was determined to help my younger son get the hang of it sooner this time around. To my surprise, he understood almost immediately how to drink from this cup. And while he’s now capable of using “regular”-sized straws, we still have the Honey Bear around for water use.

Just note that this is not the best sippy cup for milk. While it’s dishwasher-safe, the straw is incredibly thin, which makes it difficult to clean. For this reason, many parents prefer to use the Honey Bear cup solely as a tool to introduce straws and as a water cup thereafter.

Community Reviews

“After so long of failing trying other methods I finally purchased the honey bear straw cup and after a few short attempts LO is successfully sucking water through the straw. The other straw methods would just lead to him biting on the straw and using an open cup would lead to him dunking his hands and splashing away. I thought it would never happen!”

“I’m a pediatric OT who often works with babies on feeding skills. The honey bear straw cup is tried and true. I got some for my son and he learned to drink from a straw in about three days.”

“That’s what we’ve been using for the past two weeks (baby is 6 months, 3 weeks old) and it’s been amazing! She drinks so much water from it. And you can gently press the belly for the water to come up if your baby isn’t sucking from it. It’s been great.”

Best Sippy Cup to Transition from a Bottle

Philips Avent My Natural Trainer Cup

Comes with a nipple and spout

Ideal for babies who already drink from Philips Avent bottles

The nipple is fast flow

Capacity: 5 oz.

Material: BPA-free silicone

Recommended age: 4 months and up

Dishwasher safe: Yes

Why We Love It

Transitioning to a sippy cup can be difficult for children who’ve grown attached to their bottle as a comfort object. The no-spill Philips Avent My Natural Trainer Cup comes complete with both a nipple and a spout, making it one of the best sippy cups for reluctant little ones. You can offer the cup with the nipple top initially, then gradually switch to the silicone spout.

Transitioning to a sippy cup can be difficult for children who’ve grown attached to their bottle as a comfort object. The no-spill

for reluctant little ones. You can offer the cup with the nipple top initially, then gradually switch to the silicone spout.

Because the nipple is identical to the one that fits most Philips Avent bottles, this sippy cup will be especially comforting for babies who are already drinking from those bottles. But many parents whose little ones had been using other bottle brands say that the familiarity of the nipple also helped transition their babies over to a cup.

This cup is on the smaller side (it holds 5 ounces of liquid), so it's potentially easier for 6-month-olds to handle. (The company says it can be used for babies as young as 4 months, but that may vary depending on readiness.) Parents say these cups are easy for little hands to hold and that they’re sturdy, holding up well over time. A removable cover helps keep the spout clean between drinks.

This cup comes with a stage five Philips Avent nipple, which might be too fast a flow for some 6-month-olds. If you have Philips Avent bottles at home, you may be able to swap for a lower stage nipple.

Community Reviews

“These are the sippy cups we switched to. He had no problem drinking out of them. With the shape of the cup it makes it easy for him to hold with one hand while drinking.”

“Avent sippy cups have a good flow and liquid comes out only if baby sucks.”

“I switched my toddler to an Avent sippy before he was 1. These are not much different from a bottle. They are flat but soft silicone, and not very expensive.”

Best Anti-Gas Sippy Cup

Nuk Simply Natural Learner Cup

Anti-colic air vent

Wide spout

Handles

Some say it can leak

Capacity: 5 or 10 oz.

Material: BPA-free plastic

Recommended age: 6 months and up

Dishwasher safe: Yes

Why We Love It

Most babies with colic have improved by the 3-month-mark, but if your little one continues to struggle with gas as she enters the sippy cup stage, Nuk Simply Natural Learner Cup is a good option to start with.

is a good option to start with.

This (small!) 5-ounce sippy cup has big, wide removable handles, making it easy for a young baby to hold. And it also has an “anti-colic” vent, which is supposed to reduce the likelihood that your little one swallows air when sipping, and thus, help minimize gas. Plus, the spout is notably wide, which is designed to have a more natural feel and encourage sipping as little ones transition from the breast or bottle.

Many What to Expect parents whose babies struggled to transition to sippy cups say this Nuk cup was one of a few options their child would accept. One reason for this is likely the cup’s design, which is more bottle-like than many of the other sippy cups on this list. It’s dishwasher-safe and BPA-free, too. As your child grows, a 10-ounce version is also available.

Many What to Expect parents whose babies struggled to transition to sippy cups say this Nuk cup was one of a few options their child would accept. One reason for this is likely the cup’s design, which is more bottle-like than many of the other sippy cups on this list. It’s dishwasher-safe and BPA-free, too. As your child grows, a

Community Reviews

“Our son loves this cup (and this cup only!).”

“I have tried every single sippy/straw/spout cup I could get my hands on! The only thing that worked for us as well is this Nuk cup another mom posted above.”

“We tried [these] Nuk cups and she loves them.”

Best Spill-Proof Sippy Cup

Nuby 2-Handle Cup With No-Spill Super Spout

Very sturdy

Won’t leak when thrown

Affordable

No cover for mouthpiece

Capacity: 8 oz.

Material: BPA-free plastic

Recommended age: 4 months and older

Dishwasher safe: Yes

Why We Love It

If your baby or toddler tends to throw her cups, you’ll need a sippy that can withstand heavy use without spilling milk or water all over your home, stroller or car. True to its name, the Nuby 2-Handle Cup With No-Spill Super Spout is about as leak-proof as a sippy cup can get. The soft silicone spout is easy for little ones to drink from but won’t leak when shaken or thrown (a big bonus).

If your baby or toddler tends to throw her cups, you’ll need a sippy that can withstand heavy use without spilling milk or water all over your home, stroller or car. True to its name, the

is about as leak-proof as a sippy cup can get. The soft silicone spout is easy for little ones to drink from but won’t leak when shaken or thrown (a big bonus).

The parts of this sippy cup, which holds 8 ounces, are interchangeable with most other Nuby cups and bottles, and tend to be sturdier than other products on the market. They're available in a number of different color options. These are sold two to a pack and are just $5 per cup, making them one of the most affordable sippy cups on this list, too.

Community Reviews

erinb19 “With [this Nuby cup, [my baby] could bite the end and get juice to come out that didn’t leak otherwise. I think this one was more like the bottle ends with being all rubbery, and didn’t require tons of sucking to get some out.”

Best Stainless Steel Sippy Cup

Pura Kiki Stainless Steel Sippy Cup

Long-term use

Easy to clean

Indestructible

Expensive

Big

Capacity: 11 oz.

Material: Stainless steel and medical-grade silicone

Recommended age: 6 months and up

Dishwasher safe: Yes

Why We Love It

It may not be the first material you think of when shopping for sippy cups, but stainless steel has some undeniable benefits. It’s sustainable, does not come with any of the concerns about chemicals that can be found in plastic and is highly durable.

Pura’s stainless steel bottles , which have a hugely loyal following, are virtually indestructible, parents say. This brand specializes in stainless steel feeding products that will last for years. Each of their drinking vessels can be used from the newborn stage and beyond: First, as a bottle with a nipple top; as a sippy cup when you swap in the silicone sipper spout; as a straw cup with the straw top; and finally as a regular water bottle with the sport top. All of these tops are compatible with the same stainless steel base. In other words, while it’s undeniably an initial investment (the cups are $28 each), you won’t have to continuously replace them as your child gets older.

Although this sippy cup will last years, the one downside is that it may not be the most comfortable for a younger baby who is learning how to use a sippy cup. With its bigger, clunkier size and heavier weight (while relatively lightweight, it’s still stainless steel and weighs more than a plastic cup), the Pura is more like a water bottle, making it a little tricky for 6-month-olds to hold and manage themselves. In this case, you might want to try introducing a sippy cup with one of the other models on this list first.

Although this sippy cup will last years, the one downside is that it may not be the most comfortable for a younger baby who is learning how to use a sippy cup. With its bigger, clunkier size and heavier weight (while relatively lightweight, it’s still stainless steel and weighs more than a plastic cup), the Pura is more like a water bottle, making

it a little tricky for 6-month-olds to hold and manage themselves. In this case, you might want to try introducing a sippy cup with one of the other models on this list first.

Community Reviews

“Obsessed with the Pura stainless steel straw cups. Zero leaking, clean product!”

“Ok, hear me out. Pura stainless steel. They're expensive. Like, really expensive, but indestructible and easy to clean so you don't need as many (also helps with clutter). Also, several top options to graduate beyond sippy or even back to a nipple for another child.”

“Pura! They are stainless steel bottles and the tops are silicone. The best thing is that you can upgrade tops only when you kiddo is ready to.”

Best Eco-Friendly Sippy Cup

Re-Play No-Spill Sippy Cup

Eco-friendly

Holds a large amount of liquids

Easy-switch tops

Flow of liquids isn’t as fast as other options

Straws in the straw cups can be tricky to clean

Capacity: 10 oz.

Material: Recycled HDPE plastic (milk jugs) and silicone

Recommended age: 6 months and up (straw cups good for older kids)

Dishwasher safe: Yes

Why We Love It

Re-Play No-Spill Sippy Cups are super green: The brand’s products are made from recycled milk jugs! BPA-, phthalate- and PVC-free, these sippy cups are also 100 percent recyclable when your little one has grown out of them. They come in a pack of three, and you can opt for either a hard spout sippy cup or a straw cup .

are super green: The brand’s products are made from recycled milk jugs! BPA-, phthalate- and PVC-free, these sippy cups are also 100 percent recyclable when your little one has grown out of them. They come in a pack of three, and you can opt for either a

We have been using Re-Play cups for years. I first introduced my older son to them when he was about 1 year old. We started with the hard spout cup and eventually switched to the straws. Because he was already familiar with the look and feel of these cups, the transition to the straw top was a breeze.

I love how versatile and functional Re-Play cups are — the same base is compatible with both the sippy and straw tops, so you can easily mix and match, and you don’t have to replace your entire cup collection when you switch over to straws. (In fact, I’ve had many of the same base cups in our pantry for four years now—and they still look good as new.) The silicone valve on the sippy cup top is easy to clean, hard to leak through and the cups are super sturdy.

The only complaint I have about these cups is the straw, if you opt for that style. Although easier to clean than most, they have ridges and are bendy, so they do develop a bit of milk buildup over time. If your child tends to bite straws, as my sons do, know that they also get a little misshapen.

A Doctor's Note:

Finally, the sippy cup top on Re-Play cups is a hard spout; though many kids like drinking from this type of cup, Dr. Kelman points out that soft spouts have a lower chance of injury to the gums or teeth in case of trauma .

Community Reviews

mamat2my3 “We use the Re-Play sippy cups and our eldest loves his!”

Best Sippy Cup for 6-Month-Old

Olababy Silicone Training Cup with Straw Lid

Soft and sturdy straw

Easy for little hands to hold

More expensive than other models

Capacity: 5 or 9 oz.

Material: Silicone

Recommended age: 6 months and up

Dishwasher safe: Yes

Why We Love It

Any of the soft spout sippy cups on this list would be a good choice for a 6-month-old, as would the Honey Bear or Munchkin 360 cups. But many parents in the What to Expect community say the Olababy Silicone Training Cup with Straw Lid is another solid option for babies first learning how to use a cup of any kind.

Any of the soft spout sippy cups on this list would be a good choice for a 6-month-old, as would the Honey Bear or Munchkin 360 cups. But many parents in the What to Expect community say the

is another solid option for babies first learning how to use a cup of any kind.

This straw lid sippy cup is made of grippy silicone that’s manageable for even the littlest hands to hold. The straw is silicone, too, and soft enough to prevent injury, while the wide base is slightly weighted to prevent spills. Another nice feature: There are transparent indicators on the cup, which many parents find helpful to quickly see how much liquid is inside. (This is especially useful during the 6- to 12-month stage, when you’re likely still closely tracking your baby’s milk intake.)

Even though the entire thing is soft, parents say it’s highly durable and holds up well over time, even if your baby tends to bite the straw. Plus, in addition to being dishwasher-safe, parents appreciate that you can use it in the microwave or freezer.

Community Reviews

dneer “We have an Olababy straw cup. We got it when baby was much smaller to get him to learn how to use a straw but he still uses it at 21 months and it's great as a regular cup with no lid or straw as well. It's small though, 5 oz. I think, but he doesn't drink much at a time anyhow so it works perfectly for us. He's also chewed through his other cup's straw but this one has held up, super thick and sturdy.”

civvy “My son loves this cup too! It seems pretty indestructible (knock on wood) — it’s going one year strong! The straw isn’t punctured at all.”

Best Sippy Cup for 1-Year-Old

Ezpz Mini Cup and Straw Training System

Helps teach tots to use a straw and open cup

Lots of fun color choices

Versatile design

Not spill-proof

Less portable

Expensive

Capacity: 4 oz.

Material: Silicone

Recommended age: 9 months and up

Dishwasher safe: Yes

Why We Love It

Created by a pediatric feeding specialist, Ezpz mini straw cups are designed to help teach older babies and toddlers how to drink from an open cup and, eventually, a straw. The brand has both a regular open cup and a straw version of their popular Tiny Cup, but the straw is a great choice for 1-year-olds (you can simply remove the top when your child is ready to use a proper cup).

are designed to help teach older babies and toddlers how to drink from an open cup and, eventually, a straw. The brand has both a

and a straw version of their popular Tiny Cup, but the straw is a great choice for 1-year-olds (you can simply remove the top when your child is ready to use a proper cup).

Many What to Expect parents rave about this brand, saying Ezpz effectively taught their tots how to drink from a straw and manage a cup. It has a clever design; the cup itself is small and easy to hold, sensory bumps on the straw help activate lip rounding and the base is weighted to prevent it from easily tipping over. Parents also like the non-slip silicone, which is BPA-, BPS-, PVC-, latex- and phthalate-free, as well as dishwasher-safe.

While excellent for teaching kids how to use a straw and open cup, the Ezpz isn’t as leak-proof as some of the other options on this list. If you’re looking for a portable cup that won’t spill when thrown, for example, this may not be the best sippy cup for you.

Community Reviews

rookie0607 “I love the Ez Pz cup. It was perfect for introducing an open cup. It sounds silly but the size and shape really helped my son be successful on his own without me having to hold it with him.”

lindsayvano “Ez Pz sells one with a lid and straw, too. Our little one just started with those this weekend and got the hang of it pretty quickly!”

Most Versatile Sippy Cup Set

Moonkie Baby Straw Cup and Silicone Sippy Cup Set

3-in-1 design for every sipping stage

Also sold separately

Slow- and easy-flow straws

Boil-proof and dishwasher-safe

Cute look and colors

Pricey

Capacity: 4 and 5 oz.

Material: Silicone

Recommended age: 6 months and up

Dishwasher safe: Yes

Why We Love It

Trying to figure out which sippy cup your little one will actually take to can be tough. Plenty of parents in the What to Expect community have shared their experiences buying all sorts of popular styles, only for their babies to refuse them altogether. That’s what makes Moonkie a worthwhile investment. This dynamic duo can be used in a few different ways to satisfy even the most stubborn sippers with a soft spout, silicone straw, or open lid.

Both are constructed with 100% BPA-free and food-grade silicone that can be added to your dishwasher or boiled for easy cleaning and sterilization. Aside from the low-maintenance design, these aesthetically pleasing vessels are also drop- and spill-proof. As your little one gets older, they can upgrade from the smaller, two-handle cup that's easy to hold independently to the five-ounce tumbler (rivaling your own Stanley!). Plus, parents can quickly see how much has been consumed or know when it's time for a refill.

The latter version also comes with two straw stages to extend its usability: a slower flow for starting out and an open flow once your toddler becomes a pro with straws.

Don't want to buy both at once? No problem. The brand also sells each separately. The smaller baby sippy cups are $10 and the toddler-friendly straw cups are $13.

Community Reviews

junesolstice21 "I just found and purchased a brand called moonkie and they’re so nice. I ordered them from Amazon. I was impressed with the thought and quality."

mayaandbsmom "Mine has been loving this one ... it was a baby shower gift from an experienced mom lol"

What to Know Before Buying a Sippy Cup

Comfort: This is particularly important when shopping for a sippy cup for a younger baby. The littlest hands may prefer cups made from materials that are soft, such as silicone, as well as those that have a softer spout that more closely resembles a bottle nipple.

Design: First, you’ll want to consider what type of sippy cup you’d like—hard spout, soft spout, straw, or flat lid. Cups that are designed to be easy to manage and hold, such as models with handles or grippy material, are often easier for little hands to pick up. It’s also smart to look for a sippy cup designed to prevent leaks: After all, one of the biggest benefits of using a sippy cup is that they help prevent spills as your child learns to drink from a cup. Some models on the market are truly leak-proof, while others are more what we'd call leak-resistant.

Ease of cleaning: Straws and spouts are a perfect place for gunk to build up and germs to grow, which means ease of cleaning is incredibly important. The best sippy cups are those that come completely apart and can be washed in the dishwasher to avoid the possibility of mold.

FAQs

What kind of sippy cup is best?

There are four main types of sippy cups: Hard spout, soft spout, straw and flat lid. We’ve featured each of the four types on our list of the best sippy cups, but it can be difficult to decide which is best for your child. Soft spouts and straws are popular choices, as they more closely resemble nipples and are easier for tots to learn how to drink from. “Straws are better for oral motor development, but most babies can't figure out how to use them before they are 9 to 12 months old,” says Dr. Crosby.

Besides straw and spout, many experts also recommend flat lid or spoutless cups. “I always suggest a spoutless one as the first option,” says Dr. Kelman.

Do pediatricians recommend sippy cups?

You don’t have to offer your child a sippy cup (you can go straight from the bottle to an open cup — and in fact, some experts recommend this), but the AAP says sippy cups are just fine to use while transitioning baby from the bottle to a “real” cup, which you should ideally do by about age 2. But they recommend that sippies are only used while your child is learning to make this jump.

At what age should babies start using sippy cups?

Although you don’t have to give baby a sippy cup, many parents do choose to offer one to babies in their first year, especially because an open cup can be difficult and messy for young children.

“We recommend introducing a sippy cup around 6 months old so the child becomes familiar with it and proficient so that by their first birthday they can use them and start weaning off bottles,” says Dr. Crosby.

Your child can begin using a sippy cup as soon as she can sit in a high chair to eat solid foods. “A cue that your child is ready for a cup is that they are sitting upright on their own,” says Dr. Kelman.

What cup should an 18-month-old use?

As your toddler approaches her second birthday, give her more opportunities to sip from an open cup or straw cup (such as when she’s sitting in her high chair eating). The AAP recommends that children be weaned from sippy cups by age 2.

A good rule of thumb? Try to think of the sippy cup as a bridge to the real thing, and switch to a real cup once she gets the hang of holding it upright, rather than letting it become a comfort object. “Toddlers don't need to carry around a cup all day like a security blanket,” says Dr. Crosby. “That tends to encourage over-drinking which can fill them up so they don't eat their meals.”

What to Expect, How to Introduce a Sippy Cup , February 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), From Bottle to Cup: Helping Your Child Make a Healthy Transition , July 2023.

Your Next Read

How to Introduce a Sippy Cup Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Your Child Drink From an Open Cup Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Wean Your Baby Off the Bottle Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Best Bottles for Preemie Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

When Do Babies Hold Their Own Bottles? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

5 Best Formula Dispensers That You Can Safely Stash in Your Diaper Bag Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Preventing Mold in Sippy Cups, Baby Teethers, Bottles and Bath Toys Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Best Nipple Shields to Help With Latching and Minimize Pain Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

7 Pacifiers Small Enough to Soothe a Preemie Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

6 Best Standing Toys to Help Your Baby Meet a Milestone Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

The Breastfeeding Trick That Saved My Sanity With a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window