Best Activities for an 11-Month-Old Baby

best activities for 11-month-old babies

Help your almost-toddler build muscle and fine-tune burgeoning language skills with these engaging play ideas for 11-month-olds.

As your baby rounds out her first year (where does the time go?), chances are she’s becoming more and more active, and playtime is probably looking more deliberate and involved.

That’s because at 11 months old , your little one is getting closer to walking and talking — and she’s on the cusp of other exciting milestones, too. Her little mind is moving at warp speed, trying to figure out the world around her.

What skills is your child developing at 11 months?

Skills like mastering the pincer grasp , crawling and, later, standing without support and taking those first steps are called developmental milestones — things most babies can accomplish by a certain age.

But it's important to remember that these markers are fluid, and not all babies grow and develop at the same pace. So while the milestones below can help pediatricians and parents track a child’s progress in four important categories of development — social and emotional, language and communication, cognition, and gross and fine motor skills — they’re not a strict schedule. And if you’re ever concerned about your baby’s development, check in with your pediatrician for guidance.

In general, though, here’s what you can expect to see baby accomplishing around the 11-month mark:

Social and emotional skills

Clingy with familiar adults

Shows preference for favorite toys

Language and communication skills

Uses simple gestures to communicate, like shaking head “no”

Makes repetitive sounds like “mamamama” and “bababababa”

Copies sounds and gestures

Uses fingers to point

Cognitive skills

Watches the path of something as it falls

Moves things smoothly from one hand to the other

Develops the pincer grasp, picking things up between the thumb and index finger

Gross and fine motor skills

Pulls to standing

Cruises around furniture

Walks with two hands held by caregiver

Best activities for an 11-month-old baby

So what can you do to engage and encourage your baby as she learns and eventually masters these key emotional and physical skills? The following activities are great ways to play with your baby at 11 months.

Play “I spy”

While your 11-month-old won’t yet be able to answer all your questions in this classic game, you can still engage in a modified version. When you're reading a book, sitting on a play mat together or out for a walk, ask baby to find a familiar object. For example, you might say “Where’s the dog?”

Though she may not respond, give her the opportunity. If she succeeds, provide plenty of positive reinforcement. And if she doesn't respond, answer for her: “Oh, look! Here’s the puppy… woof woof!” or “Wow, look, here’s a blue car!”

This exercise is not only extremely beneficial for burgeoning language skills, but it also encourages baby to hone those cognitive critical thinking skills and even motor skills, like pointing.

“Clean up” the play area

At this age, babies are beginning to master receptive language — even if they haven’t yet uttered their own first words. Your little one likely understands simple commands, and may be able to respond to questions by shaking her head "yes" or "no."

To help baby master this important language and cognitive skill, give her plenty of spoken requests. For example, while sitting in her play area, narrate “clean up” time by asking her to pick up certain toys. For an even more enriching experience, you might say something like “Can you pick up the small red ball under the table?” Through these descriptive requests, your baby will learn more about language, like colors and even prepositions.

Build a farm

If you have age-appropriate animal figurines, now’s a good time to introduce them. But you don’t need physical toys to play this game — you could also use flash cards, a book or even printed out pictures.

One by one, point out each animal by name. Then, ask baby what sound that animal makes. If she answers correctly, provide plenty of praise. If not, say the animal’s name and the sound it makes. For example, you might say “This is a cow. A cow says moo ! Can you say moo ?”

Fill a basket with colorful socks

For a fun game that doesn’t require much parental interaction but supports gross and fine motor development, fill a box or basket with colorful socks. Let your baby dig around and explore.

Watch as she pulls socks in and out and begins to make observations about color and size. A little support can help encourage the latter — show baby which socks make a pair and comment on the colors, textures or prints as you go through each one.

Hide and find

During playtime, hide an object (such as a stuffed toy or soft ball) under a blanket, and let baby discover them as she moves about the room. You can also try hiding yourself — tuck yourself under a blanket or behind a larger piece of furniture, then pop out to surprise baby. Like peekaboo, this game further develops baby’s sense of object permanence.

No matter which activities you choose, the most important thing is to simply carve out time for play every day. Play helps babies bond with parents and peers, regulate emotions, develop math and language skills, improve planning and organizing skills, and even cope with stress. In fact, play is so important that physicians are often encouraged to give a “prescription for play” — placing it right up there with eating and sleeping.

Still, you shouldn't feel pressured to come up with tons of creative activities or invest in lots of gear. To babies, just about everything — including dropping something off of their high chair to see what happens — is a form of play. And research shows that simple actions like reading, singing and talking to baby are some of the most important activities a parent or caregiver can do with their child.