Best High-Fiber Foods for Toddlers and Kids

best high-fiber foods for kids

Fiber is incredibly important for your growing tot. Check out the best fiber-rich foods for toddlers and kids here, plus delicious ways to serve it up.

When you’re planning your toddler's meals , you probably pay close attention to the big three: fat, calories and sugar. But you should also consider dietary fiber — and not just because it will help keep your little one regular.

In children (and adults — so take note, parents!), fiber can help increase feelings of fullness, which can help kids maintain a healthy weight. A high-fiber diet can also help prevent heart disease and diabetes.

Still, despite the benefits of fiber, reports show that most kids in the United States aren’t getting enough. Here’s more on the benefits of fiber, plus the best high-fiber foods for tots.

What is fiber?

Fiber is a type of carbohydrate that’s found in fruits, vegetables and whole grains. There are two types of fiber:

Soluble fiber, which dissolves in water to form a gel-like substance, slowing digestion and helping to lower cholesterol levels and blood sugar levels.

Insoluble fiber, which bulks up your stool and helps regulate bowel movements.

Why do toddlers need fiber?

Research shows that when kids eat more fiber, they eat less fat and sugar. That’s because fiber-rich foods — those with at least 3 grams per serving — tend to be low in calories and take longer to digest. The upshot: Kids stay fuller, longer and are less likely to overeat.

Fiber can also help keep kids’ cholesterol levels in check and stabilize blood sugar levels. Specifically, fiber-rich carbohydrates take longer for the body to break down and are less likely to lead to a spike in blood sugar levels — a good thing. Simple carbohydrates like refined sugars, however, tend to be digested more quickly than complex carbohydrates, which can then cause a spike in blood sugar levels.

What's more, fiber is often food in healthy foods such as fruits and vegetables, which can be chockfull of other important vitamins and minerals, such as vitamin A, vitamin C and potassium.

How much fiber do toddlers need?

To figure out how much fiber your toddler needs, follow this formula: your child’s age + five = the number of grams she needs each day. So if your child is 2 years old, she should aim for 7 grams of fiber daily.

When upping the fiber quotient in your child’s diet, gradually increase the fiber-filled foods you give her each day, and at the same time, encourage her to drink plenty of fluids to keep the fiber moving through her system smoothly (fiber without fluid can lead to constipation).

Just keep in mind that adding too much fiber to her diet too quickly can cause gas, cramping and bloating.

Best fiber-rich foods for toddlers and kids

Many of the best fiber-rich foods for toddlers are found in brightly-hued (read: kid-friendly) fruits and vegetables.

Avocado

Apples

Beets

Berries

Black beans

Bran

Broccoli

Carrots

Chickpeas

Lentils

Peas

Pumpkin

Raspberries

Spinach

Squash

Sweet potatoes

How to incorporate fiber into your toddler’s diet

One of the best ways to interest your toddler in healthy foods of any kind is to involve her in the preparation and cooking processes. Try asking your little sous chef to wash the vegetables or sprinkle berries into pancake or muffin mixes (if she's able), or to arrange the foods into “food art” on the serving plates.

Here are some smart and easy ways to fit fiber into your toddler’s diet:

Use whole grains instead of refined grains when making toast, sandwiches, wraps or burritos.

Serve up cereals that list whole wheat or oats at the top of the ingredient list. (The cereal should also contain at least 3 grams of fiber per serving.)

Add colorful berries to yogurts, or blend them into pancakes and muffins.

Make whole grain waffles and pancakes, which have more fiber than the regular kind. You can buy whole-grain frozen waffles and pancakes at the supermarket, or make your own using a whole-grain or buckwheat mix.

Add beans and lentils to soups, stews and wraps. Or, purée them into homemade hummus.

Serve fiber-filled brown or wild rice instead of white. And for an extra fiber punch, mix in veggies or beans, like navy, pinto or black.

Blend spinach into smoothies or mix it into muffins, pancakes and egg dishes.

Choose pasta that’s made of whole wheat, spelt or quinoa. Then toss some veggies into the sauce for a fiber-rich dinner.

Mix bran into burgers, meatballs or meat loaf.

Blend avocado into smoothies or soups, or use in place of saturated fats in baked goods.

Whip up yogurt smoothies with berries and some bran.