Beth McAvey

Beth McAvey, M.D.

About Beth McAvey, M.D.

Dr. Beth McAvey is a board-certified OB/GYN and reproductive endocrinology and infertility specialist currently serving as the medical director of RMA Long Island IVF in New York.

After graduating with honors from Syracuse University, Dr. McAvey earned a graduate degree in reproductive biology, graduating summa cum laude from Johns Hopkins University. She then earned her medical degree from SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University. Dr. McAvey completed her residency training in obstetrics and gynecology at the NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell Medical Center and went on to complete her subspecialty training in reproductive endocrinology and infertility at Montefiore Medical Center.

Board certification

Dr. McAvey is certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. McAvey is affiliated with Mount Sinai South Nassau, Mount Sinai and Mount Sinai West hospitals, all located in New York.

Other relevant positions

Dr. McAvey is an assistant clinical professor of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Science at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. She is also a partner of RMA of New York and serves as the medical director of RMA Long Island IVF.

Dr. McAvey is a member of both the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) and the Society of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility (SREI).

Publications and research

Dr. McAvey has been published in a number of peer-reviewed journals — including LGBT Health , Fertility & Sterility and Current and Emerging Concepts — on infertility, fertility treatments and related subjects.

Awards

Dr. McAvey has been a Castle Connolly Top Doctor from 2019 to the present and a New York Super Doctor from 2018 to the present. She also received a American Society for Reproductive Medicine Star Award in 2020 and an AMA Women Physicians Section Inspiration Award in 2018.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window