Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfed Baby Won't Take a Bottle

help me heidi bottle rejection

“My baby is 10 weeks old and I’m going back to work in just a couple of weeks. The problem is, she’s exclusively breastfed and we’ve been trying to get her to take a bottle of pumped milk, but she absolutely refuses it. I’m starting to panic — what if she won’t take a bottle at daycare and goes hungry? Help!”

Check out the rest of the columns hereBabies who have latched on to breastfeeding aren’t easily fooled by mom substitutes. And, the older they get, the wiser they typically are to the bottle bait-and-switch — and the more resolute they become about bottle resistance. That’s why it’s best to get the bottle on board much earlier in a baby’s life — by about 2 weeks — and to give it consistently, preferably once a day, to ensure that she keeps her options (and mouth) open to the bottle. In other words, you’re not one and done once she accepts a bottle (though I know at this point you’d even take one!).

Clearly, your baby is already older and wiser and set in her breastfeeding ways, so that advice doesn’t really help you out (maybe next time!) — and that’s my goal here, to help a mama (and dad) out. So here goes.

First of all, know that you’re not alone . In fact, Erik and I were 0 for 2 in getting our kids to take a bottle. Or a pacifier . Luckily, me being their sole source of nourishment and sucking satisfaction wasn’t a serious problem for us. Sure, I could have used a break from running a 24-7 milk bar, but I worked at home. Supplementing would have been a nice convenience to tap into, but there was no real urgency about getting the babies on a bottle — as there is for you and other moms who must spend the work day away from their little ones…and take their breasts with them.

Second, know that no matter how desperate things seem now, that you will be able to break down her bottle resistance, and that she won’t starve herself in the meantime. How am I so sure about that? Because ultimately, healthy and hungry babies — even the most confirmed breast lovers among them — will opt to feed, even if it means feeding from a bottle they formerly fought.

Start by (and you may have already tried this) passing the bottle, and the baby. Your little one is more likely to accept a bottle if you’re not the one wielding it – and if both you and your breasts full of milk are out of both sight and sniffing range. Giving the bottle skin-to-skin (as long as your skin’s not involved) will give baby the cozy comfort that’s build in to breastfeeding. Note to your partner: Dads release oxytocin, that bonding hormone, just as moms do when they snuggle skin to skin with their little ones. (Plus babies don’t mind if there’s fur.)

Other tips and tricks to try (again, if you haven’t yet):

Change it up. You’ve probably already worked your way through the baby-feeding aisle, desperately seeking the bottle and nipple that finally seal the deal. But if you haven’t yet exhausted the options (and your budget), check out the best bottles for breastfed babies .

Warm it up. Your baby may be more open to breast milk when it’s served at the temperature she’s accustomed to: mom temperature. While you’re still home, that’s easy enough – just pump and serve. Later, it can be warmed to that approximate body temperature, as needed. Warming the nipple (just run it under warm water) may help, too.

Try the sleep and switch. A very sleepy baby may accept a bottle without even realizing it, so if your baby’s resisting, try slipping in that target near the end of a nap, when she’s still half asleep.

Pace yourself, with paced feeding. Bottle-feeding should mimic breastfeeding as much as possible – familiarity, after all, will breed comfort for your baby. So-called paced-feeding also puts baby in the driver’s seat, just as breastfeeding does. So whoever's giving the bottle should follow these steps:

Feed on demand, not by the clock. Wait for those hunger cues to bottle up (don’t, however, wait until baby has worked herself into a full-on feed-me-now frenzy). And speaking of time, try to offer that bottle at the time of day that baby is at her most mellow.

Put baby in an upright position (before trying to land the bottle). Bottles dispense milk faster than breasts do, and positioning baby upright will allow gravity to slow down the feed. It will also help keep gas to a minimum (and the risk of ear infections that can come from flat-out feeds from a bottle). For the same reason, keep the bottle horizontal, tipped just a tiny bit up, so that milk flows more slowly into the nipple and baby’s mouth.

Do the nipple tickle. Instead of trying to shove the bottle in baby’s mouth, encourage latching on to the bottle the breastfeeding way: bring the nipple up to baby’s nose, then stroke the nipple gently down to baby’s mouth and let her take the latching lead.

Switch sides. This is something else that’s built into breastfeeding – so build it into bottle-feeding by switching sides halfway through the bottle. Not only for continuity (and so your baby won’t become stubbornly attached to one side when breastfeeding) but to ensure a different view and perspective for her as she feeds.

Slow down the meal. Bottles tend to be eaten like fast food (which can lead to too much food and too much gas), breasts like slow food – both because milk is dispensed more slowly and because babies have to work harder to extract it (you really can’t guzzle a breast like you can a bottle). Pause for breaks in the feeding action, and make that bottle last.

Keep calm and carry on. Babies don’t just smell breast milk – they also smell fear. And stress. And panic. What’s more, they don’t much like pushing. So try a reset to relax the tensions that have bubbled up with bottle-feeding. If she doesn’t take the bottle today, try, try again tomorrow. But also try to take the process one day at a time (instead of thinking about the dwindling days before you go back to work). She’ll get there – you’ll get there!

Bottles up!

Hugs,

Heidi

Help Me, Heidi! is a weekly advice column in which What to Expect creator Heidi Murkoff answers your most pressing pregnancy and parenting questions. She’s tackling the stuff you are desperate to know right now — so if you have a question, ask Heidi here or on Facebook and she might answer in an upcoming column. (Not sure if Heidi's answered one of your questions? .)