Breastfeeding After a C-Section

woman breastfeeding baby after a C-section

If you're hoping to breastfeed your baby after a C-section, here's what you need to know — from the best nursing positions to how to keep up your supply.

Eager to breastfeed your baby after a C-section, or cesarean section? It's certainly possible — and there are benefits for both you and your baby . Read on for answers to a few common questions, along with tips to make the most of your nursing experience while recovering from a C-section.

Can you breastfeed right after having a C-section?

How soon you can get your baby to latch on and start nursing after a C-section depends on how you're feeling and how your baby's doing. More and more hospitals are allowing skin-to-skin contact right after delivery, as long as it's safe for both you and your baby. Some hospitals are even giving moms the opportunity to breastfeed right after their C-section, while they're still in the operating room.

So if you haven't yet given birth and have a scheduled C-section, talk to your practitioner about your wish to nurse immediately following the surgery, circumstances permitting.

If you do breastfeed in the OR, keep in mind that you'll have just undergone a major surgery — which means you'll have a hard time moving, so enlist the help of your partner, a nurse, your doula or a lactation consultant to help get you propped up (or shifted to your side) and in position, ready for baby to be handed to you.

If you're groggy from general anesthesia or your baby needs immediate care in the nursery, this first nursing session may have to wait. If after 12 hours you still haven't been able to get together with your baby, ask about using a pump to express colostrum and get lactation started.

What breastfeeding positions are best after a C-section?

You'll likely find breastfeeding after a C-section uncomfortable at first (at least as soon as your pain meds wear off). So find a breastfeeding position that puts the least pressure on your incision, including:

Side-lying, which is the most comfortable for many moms, especially in the first couple of days following surgery

Football hold, with baby supported by a breastfeeding pillow

Cradle or crossover hold, with a breastfeeding (or normal) pillow on your lap and your baby lying on top

Some positions will be more comfortable than others, so give each a try to see what works best for you. A belly band can also take some of the pressure off your incision, helping make breastfeeding a little more comfortable.

Baby's weight loss after a C-section and supplementing

Since you've been pumped up with a lot of fluids thanks to your IV, your baby will have a little more "water weight." Your little one will get rid of these excess fluids by peeing a lot and appearing to lose a fair bit of weight (more than a vaginal birth baby) after birth.

Giving a supplementary bottle may not be necessary if your baby is experiencing normal weight loss during those early days, and it could slow your breastfeeding progress.

If formula supplementation is medically necessary (as prescribed by a doctor), talk to the pediatrician or a lactation consultant about what you can do to help your baby switch between the bottle and breast with ease.

Does having a C-section impact your milk supply?

Some moms who have had a C-section find that their milk comes in a little later than expected, probably due to the extra stress of surgery. You can keep your milk supply on track by:

Cuddling skin-to-skin with your baby as often as you can

Starting those first nursing sessions as soon as possible

Nursing frequently — about every three hours, day and night

Pumping within the first 12 hours if you're unable to be with your baby to nurse, or later on if you're having trouble getting your supply up and running

Be sure you've documented your wishes in your birth plan and that you've got advocates on your side (your partner, a lactation consultant, a doula, the pediatrician) helping you to reunite with your baby as soon as possible.

Are pain medications safe to take while nursing after a C-section?

You'll be given pain meds (often narcotics) after your delivery. Don't hesitate to take them if you need them, since being in intense pain can unnecessarily interfere with your breastfeeding efforts.

As long as you use them only short-term at a safe dose (ask your health care provider what this would be for you) and watch for excessive drowsiness in your baby, they're safe for your little one and compatible with breastfeeding.

Thrush (yeast infections) due to C-section antibiotics

If you've been given antibiotics after your C-section, it might increase your newborn's chances of getting thrush (i.e. a yeast infection) in the mouth and/or possibly the diaper area. You can help prevent infections by:

Taking a probiotic

Thoroughly cleaning and sterilizing bottles, pump parts and pacifiers after each use

Ideally giving your nipples time to completely air dry after each feeding and changing nursing pads

If you do get thrush, the infection can be passed back and forth between you and your baby. So talk to your doctor about prescribing an antifungal medication to use on your baby's mouth and your nipples to help clear it up.