Breastfeeding With Hypoplastic Breasts

Breast hypoplasia and breastfeeding

Although the condition affects everyone differently, many people with hypoplastic breasts can indeed go on to breastfeed successfully.

Let’s face it, when it comes to breastfeeding, new moms can experience a variety of frustrating challenges, from struggles to master a proper latch to clogged ducts to painful mastitis . One condition that can make breastfeeding especially difficult is having hypoplastic breasts.

But this condition affects every woman differently, so if you have hypoplastic breasts, know that there are active steps that you can take to potentially go on to breastfeed your new bundle of joy successfully, if doing so is important to you. Learn more about hypoplastic breasts and how they might affect your breastfeeding journey.

What does it mean to have hypoplastic breasts?

Also known as tubular breasts or breasts with insufficient glandular tissue (IGT), people with hypoplastic breasts have deficient glandular tissue in the breasts. Glandular tissue helps to produce breast milk, so when there is a lack of glandular tissue, milk production can be impacted.

People with hypoplastic breasts are born with the condition, and you might not know you have it until you give birth and try to breastfeed. A few signs that might indicate that you might have breast hypoplasia include:

Areolas that appear puffy or swollen.

Asymmetrical breasts, where one is much larger than the other.

Narrow breasts or breasts that are widely spaced (more than 1.5 inches apart).

Breasts that do not change or grow during pregnancy.

Milk that does not “come in” around three to five days after giving birth.

Can you still breastfeed if you have hypoplastic breasts?

If you were hoping to breastfeed and learn that you have hypoplastic breasts, you're likely wondering whether it's still possible for you to nurse your baby. Although the condition affects everyone differently, many people with hypoplastic breasts can indeed go on to breastfeed successfully.

It's important to remember that breast appearance does not predict breastfeeding success or how much milk you'll produce. Insufficient glandular tissue is a specific condition that might contribute to lower milk production, but it shouldn't deter you from trying to breastfeed . Any breast milk you're able to give to your baby provides good nutrients and protective antibodies.

Many experts point out that having hypoplastic breasts doesn’t always mean that you will have a low milk supply. With proper support and guidance from a skilled board-certified lactation consultant, some people with hypoplastic breasts can achieve a full or nearly full milk supply.

But a few variables can impact the degree to which you may or may not be able to produce milk. The actual amount of developed breast tissue matters. For example, you might have a lower amount of glandular tissue but enough to make breast milk.

Although less common, it is also possible for one breast to be hypoplastic and the other not to be. This means that although one breast might produce limited to no milk, the other breast might produce enough milk to feed your baby adequately. In that case, you could nurse your baby from one side and supplement with formula if needed.

Tips for breastfeeding with hypoplastic breasts

If you have hypoplastic breasts and it's important to you to try to breastfeed, these tips may help increase your milk production.

Work with a lactation consultant. Most importantly, work with a board-certified lactation consultant trained in assisting parents with breast hypoplasia so that you can establish breastfeeding goals and work to maximize your milk output. Your lactation consultant and health care provider can also help you rule out any other potential causes that might be contributing to your low milk supply.

Breastfeed or pump often. Like other mothers who experience low milky supply for any number of reasons, frequent breastfeeding and/or pumping is encouraged to help stimulate breast milk production if you have hypoplastic breasts.

Try different positions. It's a good idea for all breastfeeding moms to experiment with different breastfeeding positions to see what works best for them and their babies, and that's especially true if you have hypoplastic breasts.

Keep in close contact with your baby's pediatrician. Your pediatrician can regularly monitor your baby's weight to make sure he's getting enough milk, and recommend supplementation if necessary.

Connect with others. Breastfeeding is often challenging even if you don't have a condition that impacts your milk supply, so you might find it helpful to connect with other parents who have hypoplastic breasts for additional support as you navigate your baby's feeding journey.

Learning that you have hypoplastic breasts can feel frustrating, especially if you were hoping to breastfeed and the condition impacts your milk supply. If you do want to breastfeed, know that any amount of breast milk that you are able to give to your child is beneficial .

Learning that you have hypoplastic breasts can feel frustrating, especially if you were hoping to breastfeed and the condition impacts your milk supply.

If you do want to breastfeed, know that any amount of breast milk that you are able to give to your child is beneficial .

Remember, too, that every family — and every baby — is different. There's no "right" way to feed your baby, whether you end up exclusively breastfeeding, exclusively pumping, supplementing with formula or using formula entirely.