Breastfeeding in Public: Tips and Laws for Nursing Mothers

woman breastfeeding baby in public

Breastfeeding in public is legal in all 50 states. Here's what nursing moms in the U.S. should know about public breastfeeding laws, plus tips for easier breastfeeding in public.

Breasts are celebrated on screen, in magazines, on billboards and on beaches — but, ironically, they can still be a tough sell when they’re being used to feed a baby in public. While public breastfeeding is becoming more accepted, it still seems to attract a lot more attention than bottle-feeding — and unfortunately not always the “aww sweet” kind.

But given the many benefits of breastfeeding and the fact that a hungry baby waits for no mom, you’ll quickly hang up any hangups about nursing in public. Fortunately, there are ways to nurse your baby confidently, even confidentially (if you choose), in public places.

Tips for breastfeeding in public

Here are some tips that may help you nurse with comfort and confidence when you're not at home.

Dress for (nursing) success. Many moms find that it's easier to give baby access to his lunch with two-piece outfits (dresses with a wrap-style front or that open from the front are good, too). Nursing tops or shirts that button from the bottom up, lift up or pull to the side easily are all popular choices.

Try a cover. Whether or not you use a nursing cover is a personal choice (and not all babies like them). If you do decide to use one, make sure it’s well-ventilated and baby has room for easy feeding (and doesn’t get overheated).

Wear your baby. A sling can make public breastfeeding extremely convenient.

Ask for special accommodations. Many public places, including large stores, shopping malls, airports and even amusement parks, offer special nursing rooms complete with comfy chairs and changing tables.

Looking for extra gear to make public breastfeeding a bit less stressful? The following can also help:

Breastfeeding-friendly clothing. Nursing dresses and tops that are designed with hidden flaps facilitate easy feeding and access for pumping.

Travel nursing pillow. If you normally use a nursing pillow at home, it might help to have one with you on the go. Some brands make inflatable or travel-sized nursing pillows that you can take with you.

A copy of the law. Carrying a copy of your state’s nursing law in your diaper bag can be helpful if you are ever the object of unwanted attention.

Is breastfeeding in public legal?

Breastfeeding in public is legal and protected by federal and state law in all 50 states.

You can nurse whenever your baby’s hungry. Regardless of where you live, you may breastfeed your baby anywhere that a mother is entitled to be (except in a moving car, where even a hungry baby must be secured in a child safety seat). So if you have a right to be somewhere with your baby and you can feed your baby a bottle , then certainly you have the right to breastfeed. This includes private establishments such as restaurants or stores; all 50 states have laws that allow women to breastfeed in any public or private location.

You have extra protections in certain places. Federal legislation guarantees that nursing is always allowed on federal property. Your employer must also allow you to nurse or pump during work breaks; day care centers must provide nursing facilities; and nursing mothers are exempt from jury duty in 17 states.

Breastfeeding on a plane? Stories about moms who were asked to cover up or stop breastfeeding on flights have made headlines. Although most major airlines allow breastfeeding on flights, your best bet is to check the airline's breastfeeding policy before your trip.

Your state may have additional laws to protect you. For more information on public breastfeeding specific to where you live, check out state-by-state public breastfeeding laws at the National Conference of State Legislatures .

What to do if you are harassed while breastfeeding in public

If someone does ever leer or say you don’t have the right to nurse, stand your ground and remember the law is on your side. A few tips:

Try to stay calm and avoid threats as a first line of action. That’s unless, of course, you feel physically unsafe — in which case, by all means, call the police. Otherwise, ask for clarification as to what they’re asking you to do and why. Here’s where having a copy of breastfeeding laws can come in handy.

Consider filing a complaint. If an employee is doing the harassing or doesn’t make an effort to help you to stand your ground, you might file a complaint with the establishment, either right away with a manager on-site, or later with the company’s customer relations department. Give them at least a couple of days to respond, and keep records of your conversations. If you don’t get a response, try contacting someone higher up in the company, like a corporate or public relations officer. If you still don’t get an adequate response, consider talking to your local La Leche League coordinator or Breastfeeding USA counselor .

Share your experience. Discuss your experience with your friends and mom group; you may even want to consider staging a nurse-in. If you’re comfortable doing so, post about your experience on social media. Sometimes publicly acknowledging the situation can be the most effective recourse of all.