Tips for Breastfeeding a Newborn

mom breastfeeding newborn baby, things to know about breastfeeding your newborn

Planning to breastfeed? It doesn't always go smoothly, especially in the beginning. Here's everything you need to know about breastfeeding your newborn baby.

Breastfeeding your newborn baby doesn't always come naturally or easily, especially in the beginning, and nursing can have its share of ups and downs. It can be an intensely loving, bonding experience or it can be filled with tears when nursing sessions don't go quite as planned.

Luckily, being prepared for what to expect is half the battle. Here's what you need to know about breastfeeding your newborn.

Breast milk comes in three stages

It might surprise you to know that in the beginning, your breast milk changes by the week and each formulation is designed to meet your newborn's precise needs:

Colostrum. At first, you're producing a yellow substance called colostrum . Colostrum helps provide your little one with the nutrients and antibodies he needs to fight infections in the early days. A little goes a long way, so your baby only needs a few teaspoons at a time, which might be all you're producing.

Transitional milk. Three to five days after birth, colostrum is replaced with transitional milk. Just as the name suggests, transitional milk — which looks like a mixture of orange juice and milk — is the stage between colostrum and mature breast milk, and it's just what your baby needs right now. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsTransitional Milk and Mature MilkSee All Sources [1]

Mature milk. Usually between the tenth day and second week, mature milk finally comes in. It's white and slightly thinner than transitional milk, resembling watery skim milk, and can appear bluish at first.

Latching on takes practice

For most babies, it takes a little more practice to master a proper latch . Once you and your little one get the hang of it, latching on does come naturally. These tips can help:

Get comfortable. Choose a chair or a glider with back, neck and shoulder support.

Line it up. Your baby should always be tummy to tummy with you. You may need pillows to elevate your baby to nipple height.

Guide your baby into place. Place your nipple around his lips, running it back and forth and waiting for a wide yawn. Bring him toward the breast instead of leaning in toward your baby, which could cause back and neck pain. His chin and the tip of his nose should be on the breast.

Suckling and sucking are different. You can tell that your baby is latched on and suckling (extracting milk from the breast) when there's a suck-swallow-breathe pattern.

Get help. If you're having trouble getting your baby to latch on, reach out to a lactation consultant. He or she can assess your baby's latch and make suggestions, like using a nipple shield temporarily.

Break the seal. If you don't get a good latch, try again. Put your finger into the corner of your baby's mouth and pull your breast out. Start the cycle until you get a seal with both the nipple and the areola covered.

Breastfeeding a newborn can be a full-time job

Newborns need to be breastfed every two to three hours in the beginning, and each session can take a while. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Tell if Your Breastfed Baby is Getting Enough MilkSee All Sources [2] You'll know that a feeding is done when your baby has completely drained at least one breast. For newborns, this can take between 20 and 45 minutes at each feeding.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Tell if Your Breastfed Baby is Getting Enough MilkSee All Sources

It's important for your baby to finish feeding so he gets the hindmilk , which is loaded with healthy fats, in addition to the foremilk, which resembles skim milk. Let your baby lead the way by letting him pull away when he's done feeding. If he doesn't pull away, wait until he sucks four times for every swallow, indicating an empty breast.

Finding the right position for you is ultra important

Choosing a breastfeeding position that works best for you makes breastfeeding that much more comfortable. Experiment with a few until you find your perfect match.

Laid-back breastfeeding. Lie back with your head, shoulders and neck supported. Place your baby's whole front on your whole front and let gravity do the work. Place his cheek on your bare breast.

Cradle hold. Breastfeed your baby while you're cradling him in your lap with his head resting in your elbow bend. Use pillows to elevate his head to nipple level and cup your breast with the opposite hand.

Crossover hold. Hold your baby's head with the opposite hand from the breast that's currently nursing. Your wrist should be behind his shoulder blades, your thumb behind one ear, your fingers behind the other ear. Use your other hand to cup your breast.

Football hold. This position works really well if you've had a C-section. Use the hand on the side of the breast that's nursing to lift your baby's head to nipple level, with his head facing toward you. Again, you can use pillows to help elevate your baby.

Side-lying position. This is a helpful position in the middle of the night — just make sure there's no loose bedding or pillows nearby. Mom and baby face each other, both lying on their sides. Use the hand that you're not lying on to cup your breast.

Get the support you need

If you're having trouble breastfeeding, you're not the first and you certainly won't be the last. Seek the support you need to deal with issues as they arise on your breastfeeding journey. Lactation consultants are available at the hospital or birthing center, and many even make house calls. Take a breastfeeding class or join a mom group in your area.

You may also want to contact La Leche League or the International Lactation Consultant Association for extra support.

A well-fed mama means a well-fed baby

Eating a healthy postpartum diet and staying hydrated is key to breastfeeding success — both for getting your baby the nutrients he needs but also keeping you energized during this exhausting phase. Follow these tips to start:

Drink up. Your body is working hard to make baby's milk, that's why it may seem like you're thirsty all the time. Drink at least eight glasses of water a day to stave off dehydration and keep your milk flowing.

Eat a balanced diet. You'll need plenty of protein, whole grains, fruits and vegetables daily. And make room on the menu for calcium-rich foods like cheese, yogurt, milk, collard greens, spinach and tofu.

Incorporate healthy fats. Load up on brain-building healthy fats, especially omega-3 fatty acids found in low-mercury fish like salmon and sardines and DHA-enriched eggs.

Don't skip your prenatal vitamin. Keep taking it until you're completely done breastfeeding. You can also keep taking your DHA supplement from pregnancy.

Breastfeeding should not be painful

Your breasts are your number one asset when you're breastfeeding. But when they're working overtime, you may hit a few roadblocks. A few common causes of breastfeeding and nipple pain include:

Mastitis. This breast inflammation is caused by an infection that gets into the breast. It causes flu-like symptoms and red irritation around the breast. Mastitis often happens when germs enter a milk duct through cracks in the nipple. You can avoid it by pumping or nursing your baby to avoid engorgement. If an infection forms, breastfeeding helps to relieve it, and it's safe to continue. Your doctor will also prescribe an antibiotic to clear the infection.

Blocked milk ducts. If you notice a painful spot on your breast that's red and irritated, you may have a blocked duct . Keep breastfeeding so that your flow will eventually break through the blockage. A warm compress can also help relieve blockage.

Sore or cracked nipples. Just because your breasts are working extra hard doesn't mean they should be sore. Lanolin cream applied after each nursing session can help. But more importantly, adjust your breastfeeding position and make sure your baby has a good latch.

Don't get overly anxious about your milk supply

There's nothing more stressful for new moms than worrying about whether their babies are getting enough milk. It can be hard to tell whether you're producing enough , but don't worry. You don't have to measure your breast milk to know for sure.

Here are some other ways to ensure your baby is well-fed:

Count diapers. Dirty diapers can tell you a lot about your baby's eating habits. He should have between six to 12 wet diapers and five bowel movements each day.

Check for fussiness. If your baby is snoozing and seems content, feeding is likely not an issue. But if he's crying and furiously sucking his fingers, he's probably still hungry.

Have your baby checked at well visits. Your doctor will check your baby's weight at each well-baby visit and plot it out on a growth chart. Your baby will lose body weight at first due to fluid loss after birth, but he should gain it back within 10 to 14 days. Babies should gain around 5 to 7 ounces a week.

Leaks happen

Talking to your baby, hearing your baby's voice or even seeing a picture of your little one can start the let-down process before a feeding session. This is especially true in the beginning. If you've got leaky breasts , planning ahead can help:

Keep a stash of nursing pads on hand in a pinch.

If leaks are becoming an issue at night, place towels under you while you sleep so you won't have to change your sheets in the morning.

Hide leaks better by wearing dark prints instead of solids, which will buy you some time until you get home.

Don't pump. Leaky breasts aren't helped by extra pumping. In fact, it just ups your supply and makes the problem worse.

Breastfeeding can be an emotional rollercoaster in the beginning, but with a little time and patience, you and your baby will likely get the hang of it. So have faith! Since it's such a good way to nourish and bond with your little one, it's well worth the effort.