Breastfeeding When You're Sick

breastfeeding

If you're breastfeeding with a cold, no need to worry. Viruses like the common cold do not pass into breast milk, so breastfeeding is not only safe, it's a good excuse for you to sit and rest!

It's not easy being under the weather when you're a mom. You can't call in sick and you can't take a day off. But at least there's one item you can take off your worry list: When it comes to breastfeeding your baby, you're in the clear.

It's safe and even beneficial to continue breastfeeding when you have a cold or the flu. Here's what you should know about breastfeeding while sick, including over-the-counter medications that are safe to take while breastfeeding.

Is it safe to breastfeed if I am sick?

Yes, it is still safe to breastfeed when you're feeling under the weather. Breast milk is still the healthiest source of nourishment for your baby while also providing your baby with antibodies and other immunological factors that will help keep your little one from getting sick. If you're too sick to breastfeed, expressed breast milk has the same benefits — just choose a healthy caregiver to feed your baby a bottle.

Even if you're sick with COVID-19 , you can still feed your baby breast milk, the latest recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention state. If you're nursing, wash your hands well beforehand and wear a mask during feedings and any time you're within 6 feet of your baby. Increasing ventilation — by opening windows or turning on an air purifier — can also help prevent the virus from spreading. If you're pumping, wash those hands thoroughly before you start, and sanitize pump parts afterwards. If there's a healthy, vaccinated caregiver around, have that person handle feedings (with a mask on just in case).

Does illness pass through breast milk?

Cold and flu viruses do not pass through breast milk. Current evidence also suggests that the coronavirus also does not spread through breast milk, although moms with COVID-19 could transmit the virus to their babies through tiny airborne droplets when they cough, sneeze or talk.

Certain more serious diseases such as HIV, HTLV-1 or brucellosis (a rare bacterial infection) do pass through breast milk, and you should talk to your doctor if you have been diagnosed with one of these illnesses.

Does being sick affect my milk supply?

It can, especially if you're not nursing or pumping as much as you normally would because you're not feeling up to snuff. But a drop in your milk supply is not likely to be permanent.

Being sick for a few days is just a small bump in the road when it comes to the long breastfeeding game, so continue to breastfeed if you feel up to it and pump as often as you can.

How can I keep my baby from catching my cold?

There are a few basic precautions you can take to help keep your little one healthy:

Ask for help. If you can arrange for a caregiver to help you care for your child while you're sick, it may be worth it. Let your partner or other family members help with diapering, playtime, bathtime and bedtime, and don't try to do it all yourself — you need rest to get well!

Contain germs. Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you cough or sneeze, and wear a mask when holding your baby.

Keep it clean. Wash your hands with warm soap and water after you cough or sneeze and especially if you're handling your breast pump. Wipe surfaces well to avoid the spread of disease.

Be observant. If you notice that your child has a fever, respiratory issues including shallow, rapid or very slow breathing , or is less responsive than normal, consult with your doctor immediately.

Don't forget that vaccines are one of the best ways to keep your whole household healthy. It's safe and recommended for pregnant and breastfeeding moms to get the flu vaccine and the COVID-19 vaccine.

Babies older than 6 months also benefit greatly from getting an annual flu shot and the COVID-19 vaccine themselves. Everyone who's around your child — including partners, caregivers and family members — should get vaccinated too.

What medicine can I take while nursing?

Nearly every over-the-counter medication carries some warning to breastfeeding moms, so it's best to consult with a doctor before taking any sort of medicine. That said, many medications are safe to take while breastfeeding . These include (but are not limited to):

Acetaminophen (Tylenol)

Ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin)

Antihistamines (such as Claritin; Benadryl is also safe but may cause infant drowsiness)

Decongestants (Afrin, Allegra and so on), but not those containing pseudoephedrine, which may decrease milk supply

Most antibiotics, but be sure to review them with your OB/GYN, primary care doctor or the pediatrician before starting and let the prescribing doctor know you are breastfeeding.

What medicine is unsafe while breastfeeding?

Some medications may be harmful to take while nursing. These include (but are not limited to):

Pseudoephedrine (Sudafed), a decongestant which may decrease milk supply

High-dose vitamins

Certain supplements

Safe cold remedies for nursing moms

To start off, get as much rest as possible if you're battling a cold — it's all about giving your immune system a chance to fight back. These remedies may also help:

Load up on vitamin C. Foods like oranges, tangerines, grapefruit, strawberries, melon, kiwi, mango, tomatoes, bell peppers, papaya, broccoli, red cabbage and spinach can boost your immune system.

Amp up on zinc. Foods like turkey, beef, pork,eggs, yogurt, wheat germ and oatmeal are loaded with zinc and can also help boost immunity.

Stay hydrated. Drink plenty of water or warm soothing beverages like tea and broth to stay hydrated while you're sick. This can help the illness to pass more quickly.

Switch on a humidifier. Dry air can make your cough worse. Using a cool-mist humidifier to keep the air in your home moist can help relieve coughing.

Try saline. Keep your nasal passages moisturized with saline drops, sprays or rinses.

Choose safe medications. Cold medications that are safe to take when you're nursing include many decongestants (other than those that contain pseudoephedrine) as well as pain relievers like acetaminophen and ibuprofen. Talk to your doctor before taking any cold medicine to see what he or she recommends.

Take good care of yourself and your breastfeeding baby, and feel better soon!