Brushing Baby's Teeth

Brushing Baby Teeth

From the very first tooth, your baby will benefit from proper dental care. Here's how and when to start brushing your baby’s teeth.

You might wonder why you should struggle to brush temporary baby teeth that will soon be replaced with permanent versions. But it's essential to take good care of your baby's teeth now — and not only because establishing healthy habits early on helps ensure a lifetime of good dental health.

Decayed baby teeth can interfere with good nutrition and speech development. If decayed baby teeth fall out, they don't hold a proper place for future teeth, which can make the permanent ones come in crooked.

What's more, not all baby teeth have permanent successors. There are cases when a baby tooth may be in a person’s mouth for life.

When should I start brushing my baby's teeth?

Starting at birth, use a clean, damp washcloth, a gauze pad or a finger brush to gently wipe clean the gums and the front of the tongue after meals and at bedtime — after the last bottle or nursing session.

Toothbrushing can begin as soon as your baby's first tooth pokes through. Pediatric dentists prefer you use a soft-bristled baby toothbrush moistened with water and a rice grain-sized smear of fluoride toothpaste. (The brush should have no more than three rows of bristles.) A pediatric dentist or your pharmacist can help you find the finger brushes and a proper baby toothbrush.

Toss any toothbrushes that have become rough at the edges or that are more than two to four months old, because mouth bacteria can begin to build up.

Should I brush my baby's gums?

Pediatric dentists recommend cleaning your baby's gums after feedings from the get-go. Doing so helps fight bacterial growth and promotes good oral health long before baby's first teeth start to appear.

Rather than cleaning baby's gums with a toothbrush, try a soft, damp cloth, or even a soft rubber or silicone finger brush. They're both gentle options with a nubby texture babies tend to love.

Can babies use fluoride toothpaste?

The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD) recommends using cavity-preventing fluoride toothpaste as soon as your baby's first tooth appears, rather than waiting until age 2 as was previously recommended.

Use a rice-grain-sized smear of toothpaste for your baby or toddler, graduating to a pea-sized dollop by age 3.

Don't worry if your baby swallows some of the toothpaste (as she almost certainly will). In such a small quantity, it won't cause any damage. Starting in the second year, you can teach your toddler to spit after brushing.

How to teach your baby to brush

Your older baby or toddler will probably want to try her hand at brushing herself; let her give it a go (if she has the dexterity and doesn't just get frustrated), but be sure to follow up with a more thorough cleaning of your own before bed.

To encourage her interest in brushing her teeth, try a fun brush with a favorite character and bright color. Also let her watch you in the bathroom mirror as you take good care of your teeth, so she learns that it's a habit to keep for life.

What to do if your baby hates toothbrushing

Unfortunately, not every baby loves having her teeth cleaned — and when baby is teething and her gums are sore and tender, she might be especially resistant. Here's what to try if toothbrushing time becomes a struggle:

Go easy. Baby's gums are sensitive (even when she's not teething), so if she really doesn't seem to like the brush, try a soft washcloth and a gentle touch.

Sing a song. For some babies, a little distraction is all it takes to make toothbrushing palatable. Sing a favorite tune while cleaning baby's teeth, or make up silly versions of standards (maybe "Old McDonald had a brush," or "Mary had a little tooth"). Your little one may reward you with a tiny-toothed smile.

Show her how it's done. Seeing a grown-up brushing — and enjoying it — helps make a game out of tooth-brushing time. "Dad goes first ... now your turn!"

Let her play. Your baby will probably be curious about the toothbrush or finger brush. Encourage her interest by allowing her to hold the brush and examine it at her own pace. (A short-handled one with a stopper is a good choice.) She may even end up putting the brush in her mouth, all on her own.