Cabbage Leaves While Breastfeeding

cabbage leaves while breastfeeding

You may have heard that green cabbage leaves can provide soothing relief for breastfeeding issues such as engorgement and mastitis pain. Learn more about the effectiveness of this home remedy.

When new moms envision those first moments breastfeeding their newborns, no one imagines aching, sore breasts. But breastfeeding challenges like engorgement or pain from issues like clogged ducts or mastitis can be common, especially in the early postpartum days when your milk supply is still getting established.

When new moms envision those first moments breastfeeding their newborns, no one imagines aching, sore breasts.

But breastfeeding challenges like engorgement or pain from issues like clogged ducts or mastitis can be common, especially in the early postpartum days when your milk supply is still getting established.

In addition to working with a board-certified lactation consultant to troubleshoot any breastfeeding issues, many new moms turn to home remedies to ease uncomfortable symptoms such as engorgement. And if you've spent any time searching the internet for solutions, you may have come across a surprising recommendation for sore breasts: cabbage leaves.

Here's everything nursing moms need to know about this popular home remedy, including whether cabbage leaves can really help ease breast pain and how to use them properly.

Cabbage leaves for engorgement while breastfeeding

In the first few days after giving birth, engorgement can occur in one or both breasts as a result of a sudden increase in postpartum milk production. Later on, you might experience engorgement if you go too long between nursing or pumping sessions.

If you have engorged breasts , you could experience painful throbbing and swelling of the breasts, sometimes extending as far as the armpit, and your breasts might feel hot or lumpy due to congestion of fluid and blood. Engorged breasts can also look shiny, or your skin might feel tighter.

Although there is limited research about the effectiveness of green cabbage leaves to relieve pain associated with engorged breasts, findings from existing studies (and anecdotal evidence from new moms) suggest that this veggie can be soothing. Some research has found that cabbage leaf treatment is successful in reducing pain and hardness associated with engorged breasts.

In addition to cabbage leaves, you might also find relief from using a warm compress, using a bag of frozen veggies as a compress, nursing or pumping often (at least every two to three hours) and trying different breastfeeding positions.

Cabbage leaves for mastitis pain while breastfeeding

Mastitis is a painful breast infection that can occur when harmful bacteria gets trapped in the breast tissue, and results in red, inflamed breasts and sometimes flu-like symptoms such as fever and chills.

Mastitis is easy to treat if caught early (oral antibiotics will usually clear the infection), but pus can form around the infected tissue if left untreated. Call your practitioner right away if you think you're experiencing symptoms of mastitis.

While cabbage leaves are not a treatment for mastitis, some moms say that applying the leaves to their breasts helps ease the pain associated with mastitis while the medication starts to work. There's some research to support this: Findings from a 2015 study found that applying chilled cabbage leaves to swollen breasts provides a similar amount of pain relief as a hot compress.

How to use cabbage leaves while breastfeeding

Interested in trying cabbage leaves for engorgement or to ease mastitis pain? Here are a few suggestions to get started. (Note that if you're using cabbage leaves while weaning, the steps are a bit different — more on that below.)

Green cabbage leaves can be chilled or used at room temperature.

Wash cabbage leaves thoroughly, pat dry and apply to breasts between feedings by inserting one or two leaves inside your bra, directly against your breasts.

Because the use of cabbage leaves can decrease milk supply, some experts suggest using cabbage on your breasts no more than three times per day in 20-minute (or shorter) increments.

Once engorgement begins to subside, discontinue use to maintain your milk supply.

It’s important to note that the cabbage treatment is not recommended for women allergic to sulfa drugs or cabbage, and cabbage leaves should not be placed directly onto broken skin or on bleeding, cracked or blistered nipples.

Cabbage leaves while weaning

Engorgement is normal for new mothers in their breastfeeding journey, and the same can be said about engorged breasts that result from weaning . If you're trying to stop breastfeeding (or never plan on starting), you might find yourself experiencing engorged, painful breasts. Cabbage leaves may also help ease engorgement pain in people who are trying to dry up their milk supply.

If you are using cabbage leaves while weaning, you can follow the same steps above but leave the cabbage on your breasts until it wilts, then apply new leaves as often as needed for comfort.

In addition, if you're weaning, avoid any form of nipple stimulation (but if you're feeling severe discomfort, hand express a small amount of milk for relief), wear a well-fitting and supportive bra, apply ice packs or frozen vegetables to throbbing breasts, and take a pain reliever like acetaminophen or ibuprofen.

Bottom line? While it's not a cure-all, many moms find soothing relief from common breastfeeding issues such as engorgement by applying cabbage leaves to their breasts, and this home remedy is affordable and easy to try.

Just make sure to use cabbage leaves in 20-minute increments if you're not trying to wean, and always consult a board-certified lactation consultant and your practitioner about any challenges you're experiencing while breastfeeding, especially if you think you might have symptoms of mastitis.