Caffeine While Breastfeeding

Can you drink caffeine while breastfeeding, cups of coffee

Wondering if you can keep drinking coffee or tea while you're breastfeeding? Here's what you need to know about caffeine and breastfeeding.

You've survived nine months of limiting or cutting out some of your favorite foods and drinks during pregnancy. So now that you’re a breastfeeding new mom, you may be wondering what's back on the menu and what you still need to curb.

At the top of your list may be caffeine while breastfeeding. Is coffee, tea or soda okay to drink at pre-pregnancy levels, in small amounts as it was when you were expecting, or not at all?

Here's what you need to know about drinking coffee and other forms of caffeine while you're breastfeeding your baby .

Is it safe to have coffee, tea and other caffeinated drinks when you’re breastfeeding?

Yes, it's safe to drink coffee and other forms of caffeine when you're breastfeeding in limited amounts just as it was when you're pregnant. You don’t have to kick the habit just because you’re nursing.

Though traces of caffeine have been found in breast milk, the amount passed along to your baby is generally too small to have any adverse effects.

That said, some babies are more sensitive to caffeine than others. Preemies and newborns, for instance, may be a little more sensitive than older babies.

If you notice that your little one seems more fussy, irritable, wide awake or hyper when you’ve had a few cups of coffee, you might want to cut back a bit and see if you notice an improvement.

It's also probably best to time your caffeine consumption so that you're not drinking coffee or tea right before you breastfeed or pump (or during a session!). That way, it will give the caffeine time to work its way out of your system by the time your baby is hungry and you need to feed her.

How much caffeine is okay while you’re breastfeeding?

The guidelines vary slightly depending on the source, but generally up to 200 to 300 mg of caffeine a day is fine when you're breastfeeding.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends up to 200 mg a day, which amounts to either two small cups of coffee or one 12-ounce cup a day. (It's the same level okayed during pregnancy.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as La Leche League International say no more than 300 mg a day, or about two to three cups of coffee (depending on whether you’re ordering a grande or venti).

Just be mindful of how much caffeine might be lurking in that medium, cold-brew iced-coffee with an extra shot of espresso you're thinking of ordering, since it might push you over your daily limit in just one serving!

Should you "pump and dump" with caffeine the way you've heard about doing with alcohol?

No. As is the case with light to moderate alcohol consumption, you don't have to "pump and dump" after consuming moderate amounts of caffeine, either.

Are there any risks of consuming caffeine while breastfeeding?

Drinking a light or moderate amount of caffeine doesn't pose any risks to you or your baby. But every infant is different in terms of how she'll react to your caffeine consumption (if at all).

If your baby happens to be more sensitive to caffeine, she might get more restless or fussy, or have trouble sleeping or settling down. Just keep an eye on her and see if it helps to reduce the amount of caffeine you're consuming along with having it a few hours before a feeding.

Moderation is key when it comes to most foods and drinks while breastfeeding , and caffeine is no exception. So don't feel like you have to deprive yourself of your daily cup or two of coffee or tea while you're nursing.

Just keep the amount recommendations in mind and try to drink it a few hours before feeding your baby, and you likely won't have any issues. If you are worried about caffeine and breastfeeding or have questions about it, though, don't hesitate to talk to your doctor.