Can You Really Decode Your Newborn's Cries with Dunstan Baby Language?

Dunstan baby language

The theory says babies have a built-in vocabulary — whether it helps you understand them is up for debate.

Ever wish your baby could just tell you what they want? If you follow the Dunstan Baby Language theory, they might actually be trying to — but you'll have to decode their cries to understand them.

According to the theory, there are actually five different types of baby cries — and they each mean something different. The trick is learning how to distinguish between the subtly distinct sounds.

Before you take too much time listening for the ‘nehhs and ‘hehhs’ of your baby’s wails, here’s what experts want you to know.

Key Takeaways

The Dunstan Baby Language Theory claims that certain distinctions in the different sounds that babies make may help you understand what your little one is trying to tell you.

Baby cries are hard to decipher, and there is not enough research or scientific proof to say for sure that the sounds of a cry correspond to a baby’s needs.

Over time, you'll start to learn your baby's cues for hunger, sleep, and more.

What is the Dunstan Baby Language?

Dunstan Baby Language is based on the idea that babies make five distinct sounds to communicate their needs. The method was developed by Priscilla Dunstan, a mom who felt overwhelmed by her own baby’s nonstop crying 20 years ago. The theory really gained traction when Oprah Winfrey spoke with Dunstan on an episode of her show in 2006. Afterwards, parents everywhere started wondering if this was the key to really knowing what their babies were trying to say.

The theory, which claims to work best with babies 3 months old or younger, says there are five universal sounds that babies make right before they start to cry, getting louder as they go. The sounds, says Dunstan, can give you clues to what they need:

“Neh”: This sound indicates that your baby is hungry.

“Eh”: After they have eaten, if your baby is making an “Eh” sound, it could mean they need to be burped.

“Eairh”: The “Eairh” or “Earggghh” sound might signal that your baby is gassy or needs to poop.

“Heh”: Your baby is uncomfortable in some way; they are too hot or too cold, or their diaper is wet.

“Owh”: This means that your baby is tired and ready to sleep.

Can the way your baby cries really tell you what they need?

Dunstan Baby Language sounds great in theory. The science behind it, though, doesn't exactly prove it works for most babies, says Cherilyn Davis, M.D., a board-certified pediatrician at Elliston Pediatrics in New York.

In one study out of Romania, a team used a computer program to test 65 recordings of babies from around the world. They used the computer to decipher the five different sounds that babies make, according to the Dunstan model, and the computer was able to match the recordings to the five different Dunstan sounds around 89% of the time. While the study supports the idea that all babies make similar noises, it doesn't exactly prove whether those cries successfully predict what the babies need in those moments.

“It’s also important to keep in mind that trained computers are used in these studies rather than adults trained in the methods,” says Dr. Davis. “It’s difficult to say whether these findings apply to the general population.”

What moms are saying about the Dunstan Baby Language theory

While a number of WTE Community moms have shared that they’ve tried to use Dunstan Baby Language with their little bundles of joy, only a couple have found the cues to be helpful.

“We definitely hear 'owh' a lot, and it lines up with when he’s sleepy,” says AnastasiaBeaverhousen2025 .

And when her newborn cried, WTE Community mom brea2023 says she would listen for the ‘nehhhhh’ sound. “We could definitely tell [this was how he would] cry when he was hungry,” she says. “That was the most distinctive for us.”

These parents share that the key is listening for the sounds as soon as their baby starts making noises. “Once it gets to secondary crying and becomes louder and more frantic, you cannot hear the nuance anymore,” says MegWalkr .

The reality, though, is that these cues are really hard to decipher when you’re working with a fussy, crying baby (not to mention, you're likely sleep deprived). And there might be multiple things going on at the same time. For example, they may be hungry and have a dirty diaper.

“My little one is almost 4 months and his tired/hungry/discomfort cries are not super different from each other,” says WTE member NWS29 . “It makes it hard to distinguish what he needs. Like he was just hungry, but wasn’t doing the ‘neh’ cry. Instead, he was doing ‘eh,’ ‘eairh,’ and ‘heh.’”

You will get to know your baby in due time

When you’re in the bleary-eyed newborn stage , every little cry your baby makes can sound like the same urgent wail.

“New parents are often running on little to no sleep ,” says Dr. Davis. “Trying to decipher the type of cry your baby may be making could lead to added frustration and distraction.”

You'll ultimately start to figure out what your baby is trying to say as you watch them and learn their habits and behavior patterns. For example, lip smacking, putting their hands and fingers in their mouths, or rooting (turning their heads and opening their mouths) may mean they're hungry. If they're arching their back or lifting their legs up toward their belly, it may mean they have some gas pain. But remember, your baby may also have cues that don't match patterns of what babies "typically" do, so it's not always possible to know exactly what they need. Learn more about your baby's newborn cries.

“At the end of the day, it could still take some trial and error to learn what your baby really wants," explains Dr. Davis.

Cherilyn Davis , M.D., FAAP, board-certified pediatrician at Elliston Pediatrics in New York. Cleveland Clinic, Rooting Reflex , May 2025. Dunstan Baby Language, Learn the Dunstan Baby Language , 2022. Dunstan Baby Language, The latest research into the Baby Language , 2022. IOP Publishing, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, Infant cry classification using CNN – RNN , 2020.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

What Do Your Baby's Cries Mean? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Teach Your Baby Sign Language Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Lano, M.S., CCC-SLP

Should You Use Baby Talk With Your Little One? Find Out More About "Parentese" By Hearing First, Contributor

Understanding Newborn Breathing Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Do Babies Start Talking? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

When Do Babies Start Laughing? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Soothe a Crying Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's What to Do if Your Baby Is Crying in Her Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Baby’s Tiny Ears Are Tuning In — Here’s When Hearing Develops in the Womb Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Hang in There: Understanding and Coping With Colic Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Newborn Nursing Personality Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How Do You Actually Put Your Baby Down Drowsy but Awake? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Teach Your Baby the Difference Between Day and Night So Everyone Gets More Sleep Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Is PURPLE Crying in Babies? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window