Can’t Stand the Smell? Why Scents Can Be Super Intense During Pregnancy

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Heightened sense of smell while pregnant, woman grimacing with eyes closed

The nose knows, especially when you're pregnant. Here's how to cope when your heightened sense of smell during pregnancy sends you running for the hills (or the bathroom!).

If you’re reeling from certain odors early in pregnancy, you’ve likely got a heightened sense of smell, aka hyperosmia. Fortunately, a sensitive schnozz is a temporary condition that should fade later in pregnancy or at least after you deliver. In the meantime, keep fresh air circulating and use unscented products — and soon enough, you’ll be breathing easier.

Can you tell what’s on the menu before you’ve even entered the restaurant? Does the smell of deli sandwiches turn your stomach?

As many as two-thirds of pregnant women become more sensitive and reactive to the scents around them when they’re pregnant — just another one of those strange early symptoms of pregnancy .

Key Takeaways

A strong smeller is very common. You can thank those surging hormones for this nose-related condition, known officially as hyperosmia.

Fight the quease. Because some odors can make you nauseous right now, it’s smart to open your windows wide, eat cold foods, and try unscented products.

It’s not forever. Once your pregnancy progresses — and certainly after birth — your sensitive nose should be back to normal.

What is hyperosmia (heightened sense of smell)?

Hyperosmia is a persistently heightened or increased sense of smell, and it’s very common in pregnancy. It’s also been linked to allergies and some health conditions.

What to Expect Community parent Lulu-luv noticed her nose was in overdrive even before she tested positive: “My period wasn’t late yet, but I was experiencing light-headedness and my sense of smell skyrocketed. I took my daughter to the dentist and almost threw up from the smell of the office. I tested when I got home and got the very faintest line.”

Got more pregnancy symptom questions? Check out the What to Expect app for expert tips and smart advice from a savvy group of mamas like you.

When does heightened sense of smell generally start during pregnancy?

A heightened sense of smell is an early pregnancy sign with many pregnant women noticing these nose changes during the first trimester . But the significance of those changes and their effect on expectant moms can vary.

For instance, experts have hypothesized that for some women, this heightened sense of smell can trigger morning sickness .

What causes heightened sense of smell during pregnancy?

As with so many pregnancy symptoms, when it comes to your keener sense of smell, you can once again blame those pregnancy hormones . In this case, estrogen can make every little scent that wafts your way feel like an all-out assault on your nostrils.

What can I do about a heightened sense of smell when I'm pregnant?

You can't exactly cut off your nose, but you can try to avoid scents that drive you crazy (especially those that ramp up your nausea and other pregnancy symptoms). Some strategies to try:

Eat smart. Cook and eat only those foods you can stand to smell. Even if the old you loved cauliflower and broccoli, the pregnant you might not like the odor of cooked cruciferous veggies.

Freshen up. Leave your windows open whenever possible to banish cooking or musty odors.

Keep clean. Wash your clothes more often than usual, since fibers tend to hold onto odors.

Baby your nose. Saline washes and sprays can help keep your nasal passages moist and healthy (and also help with congestion , another common pregnancy complaint).

Ditch added fragrance. Switch to unscented or lightly scented toiletries and cleaning products (or at least those with fragrances that don't make you sick).

Ask for extra consideration. Ask your partner, family, friends, and nearby coworkers if they can be sensitive to your newly superhuman sense of smell. Maybe they can go easy on the perfume and cologne or refrain from reheating fish for lunch.

Microwave it. Heating foods in the microwave tends to produce less odors than other forms of cooking.

Sniff the good stuff. Try to surround yourself with scents that actually make you feel better. Mint, lemon, ginger, and cinnamon are more likely to soothe your nausea than make it worse.

Distract your nose. Chew on a piece of gum or suck on a hard candy, which can help take your attention away from odors. Peppermint candies, specifically, may also help with nausea.

Go cold. Eating cold versions of your favorite foods may help, since your senses of taste and smell are so connected. A cold steak sandwich or salmon salad may go over better with your more powerful nose than grilled steak or salmon, which may taste and smell stronger when served hot.

Can I prevent heightened sense of smell during pregnancy?

Unfortunately, no, you can’t prevent your nose from becoming super sensitive while your hormones are surging. This is one of those mom-to-be experiences you'll have to wait out until the later months (or after your baby is born).

Think of it as your very own pregnancy superpower (!) and know that your bionic sense of smell won't stick around forever.

Does a heightened sense of smell go away?

Yes, for many women, sensitivity to strong (and sometimes icky) smells starts to subside fairly quickly and early in pregnancy. If it doesn’t, your nose will likely return to normal as pregnancy progresses or soon after delivery.