Can You Get Pregnant From Pre-Ejactulate? The Real Risks You Should Know

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Can you get pregnant from precum?

Is it possible to get pregnant from precum? Learn what pre-ejaculate is and what your chances are of getting pregnant from it.

If you’re trying to get pregnant — or avoid pregnancy — "pre-ejaculate" is an important word to know. Here's what you need to understand about its role in conception.

Key Takeaways

Pre-cum may have sperm. This substance isn’t semen, but it can still contain those little swimmers from the urethra, which means you could potentially get pregnant from it.

The pull-out method has to be perfectly timed to work. Truth: Men can’t feel when pre-ejaculate releases, which is why withdrawing to avoid pregnancy fails 20% of the time.

Not ready for a baby? Pick more effective birth control. Condoms, the pill, or a long-lasting IUD are all much more protective than relying on the withdrawal method alone.

What is pre-ejaculate (precum)?

Pre-ejaculate, also called precum, is a clear, thick fluid that comes out of a man's penis when he's aroused. This usually happens before he ejaculates.

Unlike actual semen, pre-ejaculate doesn't come from the testes but instead from the Cowper's gland — two pea-sized glands located right beneath the prostate gland. Pre-ejaculate may act like a lubricant during sex, and it also makes semen less watery, creating a conducive living environment for sperm.

Want more birth control facts? Download the What to Expect app for the real deal, including advice from the experts and a supportive community on the same family-planning track.

Can you get pregnant from pre-ejaculate?

In a word, yes. Pre-ejaculate may contain sperm, which means you could get pregnant even if your partner doesn't fully ejaculate into your vagina.

There hasn't been a lot of research on this, but one small study found that over 40% of men had some sperm in their pre-ejaculate. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthSperm Content of Pre-Ejaculatory FluidSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthSperm Content of Pre-Ejaculatory FluidSee All Sources

It's thought that this is "cross-contamination" from semen that may be present in the urethra (the tube that transports urine from the bladder to the tip of the penis) from a past sexual encounter, since both pre-ejaculate fluid and semen pass through the urethra.

Can you get pregnant if the man pulls out before ejaculating?

Again, yes. Most men can't tell when they've pre-ejaculated, and withdrawal itself takes a lot of self-control, which can be quite difficult when you're in the heat of the moment. And if even a few drops of semen land on the outside of your vagina, sperm may still swim in, which can lead to pregnancy.

What to Expect Community member ftm2722 knows full well that pre-ejactulate can be a roll of the dice. “It works until it doesn’t. My ex and I used pull-out successfully for 3 years — then I accidentally got pregnant twice in 6 months,” she shares.

It's also important to remember that "pulling out" doesn't protect you against sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Some STIs, like genital warts and herpes, are spread through skin-to-skin contact, while others, such as chlamydia, syphilis, or gonorrhea, can be carried in precum. So if you're worried about any infection, make sure that you use a condom.

If you're actively trying to avoid pregnancy, the main argument for withdrawal is that it keeps some semen out of the vagina. Other forms of birth control, like condoms, are more effective (but not foolproof). You can combine the two for a more potent pregnancy protection, or consider a more reliable method, such as the birth control pill or the IUD .

What are your odds of getting pregnant from pre-ejaculate?

It's impossible to know for sure, as it can vary from person to person and with each sexual encounter. The best data available are studies that look at the withdrawal method. If your partner "perfects" the pull-out method, then your chances are relatively low: only about 4%.

But the reality is that doesn't always happen, which is why the "real life" effectiveness is only about 22%. That means about 22 out of 100 people who use the withdrawal method get pregnant every year, or roughly one in five.

By comparison, the IUD has a failure rate of less than 1%, while methods like the pill or patch are under 10%, and condoms are under 20%.

Bottom line? Pre-ejaculate is still ejaculate, which means it most likely contains sperm. If you're currently trying to avoid pregnancy, your best bet is to use a more reliable method of birth control.