Can You Take Prenatal Vitamins Without Being Pregnant?

prenatals

It may actually be harmful to take prenatals when you aren't TTC or pregnant, but it's a bit more nuanced than that. Here's what doctors want you to know.

It’s important to start taking prenatal vitamins as soon as you think you may want to get pregnant. In fact, doctors want you on these vitamins two to three months before you even start trying to conceive . That's because, by taking prenatals before you get pregnant, you'll be sure to get the appropriate amount of those essential vitamins and nutrients, like folic acid and iron, that contribute to your baby's growth and development. But is there ever a situation when it’s too soon to take prenatal vitamins? Is it safe? Are there any added benefits? Here's what OB/GYNs want you to know.

How are prenatal vitamins different from regular vitamins?

Although they may have some similarities, prenatal vitamins and standard multivitamins are not the same. Prenatal vitamins are specifically formulated with the crucial nutrients needed to support your health during pregnancy, and your baby's health and development .

“Prenatal vitamins contain higher amounts of calcium and vitamin D to support bone and tooth development in utero,” explains Anate Brauer, M.D ., OB/GYN and reproductive endocrinologist in New York. “They also contain higher doses of folic acid than standard vitamins, which support neural tube development as well as DHA, which supports neural development in a fetus.”

Should you take prenatal vitamins even when you aren't trying to conceive or pregnant?

No, it's not a good idea to take prenatals if you aren't pregnant, trying to conceive (TTC) or thinking about TTC.

Prenatal vitamins may have a similar formulation to a standard multivitamin. However, prenatal vitamins contain additional nutritional support including calcium, vitamin D, iron, folic acid and DHA needed for fetal neural development. So if you’re not pregnant or TTC, Dr. Brauer says these additional nutrients are not necessary. What’s more, she notes that taking excessive vitamin amounts can lead to side effects such as constipation and nausea .

Instead, a woman’s multivitamin is typically sufficient when you're not pregnant or TTC, she adds. Finding a multivitamin specific to your age and gender can also be helpful. For example, women who are older may need more calcium for their bone health as they age, so finding a supplement that has extra amounts of calcium would be a good choice.

There are some rumors that prenatal vitamins can help with hair and nail growth . While this may be anecdotally true for some people who are otherwise deficient in some nutrients that prenatal vitamins have, Dr. Brauer says there is really no evidence that supports these claims. For these specific benefits, stick to supplements like biotin and vitamins B, C and A instead.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Nutrition During Pregnancy , December 2021. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, Offices on Women’s Health, Folic Acid , February 2021. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Good Health Before Pregnancy , December 2021.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

How Early Should You Start Taking Prenatal Vitamins? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Can Prenatal Vitamins Really Help Your Hair Grow? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Prenatal vs. Postnatal Vitamins: What’s Actually the Difference? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Which Vitamins Do I Need During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Folic Acid During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

How Much Vitamin C Do You Actually Need During Pregnancy? A Doctor-Approved Guide Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Pregnant and Low on Vitamin D? Here’s How to Boost Your Levels Safely Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

The 9 Best Prenatal Vitamins That OB/GYNs Recommend — and Moms Actually Take Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Surprising Ways Pregnancy Can Change Your Nails Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Eating Vegetarian and Vegan During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Do Fertility Supplements Really Work? What the Science Says Before You Try Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

How Much Calcium Do You Really Need During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Your Preconception Nutrition Plan: How to Prep Your Plate for Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Can Iron Help You Get Pregnant? Why This Mighty Mineral Matters Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

Trying for a Baby? Folic Acid May Matter for Men Too Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window