Can a Certain Sex Position Help You Get Pregnant? Here’s What Science Says

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Couple holding hands and cuddling on bed

If you’re trying to conceive, here’s the low-down on sex positions and other bedroom tips to boost your odds of getting pregnant.

Wondering about specific sex positions and whether they can impact conception? The truth is, any setup can result in pregnancy, which means you don't have to worry about arranging yourself in a pretzel or learning a new trick in the bedroom. Instead, try to relax and enjoy the baby-making process!

But there are some caveats — here's what to know.

Key Takeaways

All positions work! That's right, there's no best method of arranging your limbs to make a baby. Sperm are excellent swimmers, no matter the position.

Your comfort matters. More than any specific position, your own ability to relax and enjoy sex during your fertile window is what's most important.

Tweak as needed. A tilted uterus may benefit from a certain position, but skip lube that might slow sperm as they journey to the cervix.

Does sex position matter when you're trying to conceive?

Studies have shown that no sex position increases the odds of getting pregnant. Sperm make their way to the cervix within seconds of ejaculation, no matter how the sex happens. Within 15 minutes, they can be found in the fallopian tubes, where your egg is (hopefully) waiting. That's because sperm are extremely good swimmers, even when they're swimming upstream against gravity.

That said, choosing a certain sex position certainly can't hurt — and, if you ask some women anecdotally, it might even help.

Got more questions about sex and TTC? Download the What to Expect app for your go-to-guide to baby-making, plus information from the experts and tips from other moms.

What's the best sex position if you're trying to get pregnant?

While there are no science-backed sex positions that boost the odds of getting pregnant , the missionary position (or woman on bottom, man on top) can get sperm closer to your cervix and the goal line. Propping a pillow under your hips puts gravity in your favor.

If your practitioner has told you that you have a tilted uterus (meaning that your uterus is naturally tilted toward your spine, not your belly button), doggy style (on your hands and knees, with penetration from behind) might be the ticket.

Are some sex positions better than others if you're trying for a baby?

As long as sperm from your partner is deposited close to your cervix, you have an equal chance of getting pregnant no matter how you're set up. That means you don't need to learn tantric sex or go back to the missionary basics to conceive.

Your best bet? Focus on finding a position you really like, since research has shown that sperm are transported closer to the finish line when a woman has an orgasm during sex, although even that hasn't been proven to increase the odds of conception. But since you'll probably need to try for a baby multiple times, you might as well relax and enjoy it.

Keep in mind that since many types of lubricants, and even saliva, can slow sperm's motility and speed, it's best to skip them when you're TTC. If you've lost your baby-making mojo, taking the time to engage in foreplay can help prime you for sex naturally.

If you'd still rather use lubricant, choose an FDA-approved one marketed as fertility-friendly (like Astroglide TTC, Conceive Plus, or Pre-Seed) designed to mimic cervical mucus and have the same pH as sperm.

One last tip: Lounging around, in this situation, might pay off. Since it takes about 15 minutes for sperm and egg to meet, lying down after sex keeps gravity working in your favor — although again, there's no science backing this up and research has found that lying down doesn't make a difference when it comes to getting pregnant.

No matter what tricks you try, it can take up to 12 months for the average couple to conceive. So do your best not to think too much about it and just have fun!