Can You Lose Weight While Breastfeeding?

can you lose weight while breastfeeding, mom with baby on exercise mat

Is it possible to lose weight while you're breastfeeding? Find out more about weight loss when you're nursing your baby.

Does breastfeeding make the pounds you gained during pregnancy melt away — or stubbornly hang on? The answer depends on who you ask.

Your body burns extra calories when you're breastfeeding, which can translate to a lower number on the scale. But for lots of different reasons, that's not always the case. And both situations are totally okay!

That said, if you're hoping to lose weight after giving birth , it's also okay to make the effort while you're nursing. You'll just want to be mindful about getting enough fuel to keep making enough milk for your baby — and stay energized yourself.

How breastfeeding impacts your weight

Breastfeeding burns an additional 400 to 500 calories per day, some of which comes from your body's stored fat, according to the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (AND). Trusted SourceAcademy of Nutrition and DieteticsLosing Weight While BreastfeedingSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAcademy of Nutrition and DieteticsLosing Weight While BreastfeedingSee All Sources

For some people, that can lead to weight loss. In fact, exclusive breastfeeding slightly increases a person's chances of returning to their pre-pregnancy weight a year after giving birth, some research shows. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, Preventive MedicineEffects of Breastfeeding on Postpartum Weight Loss Among U.S. WomenSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, Preventive MedicineEffects of Breastfeeding on Postpartum Weight Loss Among U.S. WomenSee All Sources

The increased calorie burn doesn't always send the scale downwards though. A lot of people tend to eat a little more when they're breastfeeding. (If you've ever been ravenous after a nursing session, you get it.) Those extra calories can offset the calories burned from breastfeeding, causing your weight to stay about the same or even go up.

Your physical activity level factors in too. You might be spending more time sitting these days, either because you're holding your newborn or you're too sleep-deprived to exercise (or both), for instance.

Which camp you fall into depends on lots of different factors.

"Hormonal shifts, sleep deprivation, stress, genetics, and individual metabolic differences all influence how a woman's body responds during this stage," says Suzanne Chan , D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T., a pediatric nurse practitioner and certified lactation counselor at the Infant Cardiac NICU at NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital in New York and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

Is it safe to try to lose weight while breastfeeding?

If you'd like to try to lose weight while you're breastfeeding, it's perfectly okay to do so. Just take a gradual approach.

"Slow and steady is best for both health and milk quality," says Chan.

That means waiting until you're in a solid nursing groove before attempting to lose weight and aiming for a loss of no more than one pound a week, recommend experts at Johns Hopkins Medicine. Trusted SourceJohns Hopkins Medicine5 Breastfeeding Diet MythsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceJohns Hopkins Medicine5 Breastfeeding Diet MythsSee All Sources

Trying to lose too much weight too soon can send your body the signal to make less milk, jeopardizing your supply. Curbing your calories too much (think less than 1,800 calories or so) can also make it harder for your body to get the fuel and nutrition you and your baby need.

Want more breastfeeding tips? Find them on the What to Expect app .

I can't lose weight while breastfeeding — what's going on?

While the weight seems to fall off for some nursing parents, that's not the case for all of them. Everyone is different, and some breastfeeding bodies will try really hard to hold onto the extra pounds gained during pregnancy, Chan says.

"With my first, I wasn’t able to lose a pound until I stopped breastfeeding around 6 months,” recalls What to Expect Community mom babymom1234. “I’m sure there were other factors that contributed — exhaustion, increase in hunger, hormones, etc. — but I immediately lost 10 pounds when I stopped, so breastfeeding definitely didn’t help me lose weight."

Again, even though your body is burning more calories making milk, you might also feel hungrier, be less active, or not be getting as much sleep while breastfeeding. And all of those things can potentially offset the extra calories your body is burning to produce milk.

That can definitely be frustrating if you were expecting to easily slip back into your postpartum clothes within weeks or months of giving birth. But ultimately, it's pretty normal, so try not to beat yourself up over it. There's a good chance you'll have an easier time dropping the weight once you stop nursing.

Are weight loss diets or supplements safe while breastfeeding?

Gentle weight loss is the name of the game when you're breastfeeding. Crash diets that have you cut a ton of calories to drop a lot of weight quickly or diets that have you nix entire food groups can zap your milk supply and leave you feeling tired and sluggish. They can also set the stage for possible nutrient shortages.

Wondering about particular diets that have been trending lately? Keto and intermittent fasting are too extreme for breastfeeding: The former doesn't deliver enough carbs for milk production and the latter can cause your blood sugar to crash, Chan points out. So if you want to try one of them, save them for after you've weaned.

Less restrictive eating plans like a moderately low-carb diet or a Paleo style diet are probably okay, provided you get enough total calories and eat a variety of foods like fruits, vegetables, and high-quality protein, according to La Leche League International. Trusted SourceLa Leche League InternationalWeight Loss While BreastfeedingSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceLa Leche League InternationalWeight Loss While BreastfeedingSee All Sources

Steer clear of supplements that promise to help you lose weight, even if they're natural. There's simply not enough evidence to say whether any of these products are safe for breastfeeding. That’s especially true since supplements are only loosely regulated and can potentially contain questionable ingredients or contaminants that aren't on the product label.

Slow and steady [weight loss] is best for both health and milk quality.

Suzanne Chan, Pediatric Nurse Practitioner, Certified Lactation Counselor, and Member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

Tips for healthy weight loss while breastfeeding

If you want to try to lose some weight while you're nursing, here's how to do it while keeping up your milk supply and your energy levels.

Give yourself some time. It's a good idea to wait until at least six to eight weeks postpartum before trying to lose weight. Your supply will be well-established by then, and you'll probably have a bit more energy (both physical and mental) compared to those very early days after giving birth.

Aim to lose no more than one pound a week. Try not to cut your calories below 1,800 per day. Going lower or trying to lose weight faster might make your supply tank.

Eat a variety of healthy foods. Try to have fruits, veggies, whole grains, low-fat dairy, lean proteins, and healthy fats on the menu. It will help ensure that you get the nutrients you and your baby need.

Take mealtime breaks. It's not always easy, but try to sit down for a few minutes when it's time to eat. You'll enjoy your meal and feel more relaxed, which is good for your overall wellbeing.

Stay hydrated. Your fluid needs go up when you're breastfeeding; get what you need by drinking an extra glass of water before each nursing session.

Try to move every day. Adding in some exercise will bolster your weight-loss efforts, just make sure you've gotten the green light from your provider. Walking, swimming, or yoga are all great. "Nice long walks with your baby are helpful!” says What to Expect Community mom boymomupnorth. “On nice days I throw a podcast in and can walk for one to two hours. Audio books are awesome too!"

Be mindful about snacks. Healthy nibbles can help you keep your energy up throughout the day. Just pay attention to how much you're having, especially when it comes to snacks that claim to boost your milk supply. Lactation cookies, for instance, haven't been shown to actually help nursing parents make more milk. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition Effectiveness of Lactation Cookies on Human Milk Production Rates: A Randomized Controlled TrialSee All Sources [5] So they may just be contributing extra calories.

Weight loss can be effortless for some breastfeeding parents, but others might have to work hard to drop pounds when they're nursing. If you're in the latter camp, it's okay to change your diet or exercise to try to lose weight. Just take it slowly. You'll get there in time!

Key Takeaways

Breastfeeding burns extra calories. You'll expend an extra 400 to 500 calories on making milk, which is why some people lose weight while nursing.

But burning calories during breastfeeding doesn't always translate into weight loss. Other factors can offset the extra calorie burn, like feeling hungrier, being less active, or getting less sleep.

It's safe to lose up to one pound per week while breastfeeding. Eat a variety of healthy foods and don't cut your calories below 1,800 per day.