Can Block Feeding Help Manage Oversupply Issues?

what is block feeding?

Everything you need to know about this breastfeeding technique, which may help manage oversupply.

Anyone who’s ever had their milk “come in” knows that (fleeting) feeling of whoa-baby fullness. But for moms experiencing oversupply, which is when your breasts are making more milk than your baby needs, the feeling isn’t so fleeting. You might feel like your breasts are never soft and empty, and notice they fill with more milk soon after your baby finishes a feeding. In short, you can feel really uncomfortable.

Breastfeeding can be hard enough as is, but trying to manage oversupply issues can be especially frustrating since the exact thing you want to do (find relief by removing milk through pumping or hand expressing ) can signal your body to produce even more milk. After all, when it comes to breastfeeding, it’s all about supply and demand: Your body creates the milk that it thinks your baby needs.

Fortunately, if you do have oversupply issues (which a board-certified lactation consultant can help you diagnose), there are breastfeeding techniques aimed at helping you get your supply under control.

One technique that's sometimes recommended is block feeding, which involves splitting up your feeding sessions into “blocks” of time spent on one breast. Here's more about block feeding, how it works and how to decide if it's right for you.

What is block feeding?

Block feeding is a breastfeeding technique that’s sometimes recommended to manage oversupply issues. It involves feeding your baby on one breast for an entire feeding instead of switching halfway through, and offering that same breast for all subsequent feedings within the next six hours before switching to the other side.

If you have true oversupply issues (which you can confirm by working with a lactation consultant), block feeding may help slow milk production to more manageable levels, since you’re stimulating your breasts less overall.

How to try block feeding

If your lactation consultant recommends block feeding to help manage oversupply, try the steps below. Just remember that block feeding is not right for everyone, and it’s important to listen to your body and see what feels best for your breasts and your baby.

An hour before feeding: Pump both breasts until they are soft using an electric breast pump .

During the first feeding: Offer one breast to your baby for the entire feeding, nursing for as long as she needs. Make a note of the time when you start this feeding.

For the next six hours: While block feeding, continue feeding your baby on demand to make sure she's getting the nourishment she needs. Offer that same breast for any subsequent feedings within the next six hours.

For the following six hours: After the first six-hour window ends, offer the other breast to your baby for all feedings within the next six-hour window.

If the opposite breast feels full at any point during the process, La Leche League International recommends pumping or hand expressing just enough to relieve the pressure (which might be 1/2 to 2 or 3 oz., depending on your body). However, if discomfort is very uncomfortable or severe, fully pump your breasts and start over.

If, over the course of a few days, you start to notice some improvement — you feel less full in between feedings and your baby seems comfortable — you can cut back to switching sides every other feeding (if you were doing back-to-back feedings on the same side) or return to alternating breasts in one feeding.

However, if you don't experience any progress within a week, meaning you wake up and your breasts feel exactly the way they did on day one, consult your doctor or lactation consultant.

Some mothers may need to stick to the same breast for longer stretches in order to manage oversupply, up to eight to 12 hours. Your lactation consultant can help you determine the best schedule for you.

Sample block feeding schedule

Here's what block feeding might look like in a day for a baby who generally nurses every two to three hours. Just keep in mind that every baby is different, and you should continue to nurse on demand while block feeding.

6 a.m.: Pump both breasts until soft.

7 a.m.: Nurse from right breast.

9:30 a.m.: Nurse from right breast.

10:30 a.m.: Hand express to relieve discomfort in left breast.

12:00 p.m.: Nurse from right breast.

1:00 p.m.: Six hours have passed; switch sides at next feeding.

2:30 p.m.: Nurse from left breast.

5 p.m.: Nurse from left breast.

6:00 p.m.: Hand express to relieve discomfort in right breast.

7:00 p.m.: Six hours have passed; switch sides at next feeding.

7:30 p.m.: Nurse from right breast.

10 p.m.: Nurse from right breast.

What are the benefits and risks of block feeding?

Possible benefits

Block feeding is a technique that may help manage oversupply issues, in part due to a whey protein in breast milk called Feedback Inhibitor of Lactation (FIL), which slows milk production when your breasts are full (and contain more FIL). By allowing one breast to remain full for longer by block feeding, you gradually send signals to your body to slow down milk production.

Another benefit of block feeding is that it may help ensure your baby gets enough high-calorie hindmilk . Sometimes, if a mother has oversupply issues, her baby might end up taking in more watery foremilk (the first milk baby gets at the beginning of a nursing session) and less hindmilk (which has higher fat content).

If baby gets more of that watery foremilk regularly (which can happen when a baby takes in a lot of milk at once because of oversupply), you might notice explosive, green or frothy stools. Allowing your baby to fully drain one breast can ensure she gets both foremilk and hindmilk in each nursing session.

Possible drawbacks

If you’re doing one or two feedings on one breast only, the other breast can get full to the point of discomfort. That’s why it’s suggested that you hand express or pump to the point of comfort if you need to. If your breasts become uncomfortably full at any point, La Leche League International recommends fully pumping and starting again.

Another potential side effect of block feeding is that your milk ducts may become clogged during the process since you're draining your breasts less frequently. Plugged ducts can potentially lead to mastitis , an infection that occurs when harmful bacteria gets trapped in the breast tissue.

If you experience breast swelling, pain or redness; a fever (usually 101°F or more); or flu-like symptoms, contact your health care provider right away. Mastitis is easy to treat if caught early, but it can be serious if untreated.

Tips to manage oversupply

Block feeding is one method to help you manage oversupply, but there are others. If your practitioner confirms you are experiencing oversupply, you could also try some of the following strategies:

Manage a fast let-down. The reflex that causes your body to release milk is called the let-down reflex . A fast let-down isn’t always a sign of oversupply, but it can be. Ensuring that your baby has a deep latch can help her manage a fast flow. Feeding baby in a position where her head is higher than your breast (a laid-back position, for example) can also help.

Feed on demand. Always let your baby take as much milk as she wants during a feeding. Babies are experts at telling us what they need and if they are eating until they are fully satisfied, that ensures they are getting all the benefits of your milk .

Hand-express. Pumping too often or for too long can end up encouraging your body to make more milk — contributing to oversupply. Hand-expressing your milk might be a good alternative, since it tends to produce less milk.

How to tell if block feeding is right for you

If you have a true oversupply, block feeding could be a good option. A board-certified lactation consultant can help you determine if you do have oversupply and guide you through this technique.

Some experts also recommend waiting six to eight weeks postpartum before trying block feeding since your body is still building your initial supply during this time.

Block feeding is generally meant to be a short-term strategy — a technique you use for a week or so. If you try it and are not seeing any changes or feeling any relief, consult your practitioner.