Can Iron Help You Get Pregnant? Why This Mighty Mineral Matters

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

how iron boosts fertility, ask heidi murkoff, hands holding plate with salmon

If you're trying to conceive, here's what you should know about getting enough iron in your diet, plus whether or not you might benefit from a supplement.

"I've heard there's a link between iron and fertility. Should I take iron supplements when trying to get pregnant or just make sure to get iron in my diet?"

You’re smart to be thinking about pumping up your iron levels while trying to conceive. As you’ve heard, there does seem to be a link between iron and fertility. In one study, researchers found that women who took iron supplements had a significantly lower risk of ovulatory infertility (an inability to produce healthy baby-making eggs) than those who didn't supplement.

Here's what you need to know about iron and fertility if you're trying to get pregnant.

Key Takeaways

You need iron, but maybe not extra. Iron in your system is key when you’re TTC as it may lower the risk of ovulatory infertility — but not everyone needs a supplement.

Your doc is your go-to. A quick blood draw can check your iron levels and then you’ll know whether you need more than what’s found in your prenatal vitamins.

Nosh with iron in mind. Certain foods with iron like salmon, lentils, and spinach are smart to include, especially when eaten with things high in vitamin C (better absorption!)

Do you need an iron supplement if you're trying to conceive?

Before you rush out to buy iron supplements, keep the following in mind:

Not all women need supplements (but they do need iron). Experts say more research is needed before they’d recommend iron supplements to all women as a fertility booster. But even if iron isn’t recommended for you specifically, you’ll still want to beef up your iron stores the natural way before you get pregnant. Iron is one of the minerals that your future baby-to-be will siphon from you — and too little iron at the start of pregnancy can put you at risk for anemia during pregnancy and afterward (when you need all the energy you can get to take care of your baby).

Talk to your doctor. Your best bet when it comes to thinking about iron, fertility, and pregnancy? Discuss your nutrition with your practitioner and ask to get a blood test that will check your iron levels. If your test results indicate that you could use iron supplements, you and your doctor can work together to determine an appropriate dose for you. If your iron levels are healthy, then you may not need a separate iron supplement, but you’ll still want to make sure you take a prenatal vitamin every day (most of which include about 27 mg of iron).

Eat iron-rich foods . Every day, pregnant women need to aim for about 27 mg of iron. The most easily absorbed iron — called heme iron — is found in animal sources, such as meat, poultry, and fish . The other form of iron — called non-heme iron — comes from plant sources. However because of its chemical structure, it's more difficult for the intestines to absorb. But don’t disregard non-heme iron — it’s still worth your while. In fact, heme iron helps improve the absorption of non-heme iron, so eating food sources of both forms of iron at the same time is ideal.

Looking to eat better while TTC? Head to the What to Expect app for expert advice, smart tips, and a judgment-free, supportive community.

Best iron-rich foods for fertility

The easiest way to get as much bang for your nutrition buck when eating iron-rich foods? Pair them with foods rich in vitamin C, which boosts iron absorption. So go ahead and top that burger with a tomato slice or two, sprinkle strawberries in your oatmeal, and follow that PB&J sandwich with an OJ chaser.

Need some more ideas? Here are some foods rich in iron and vitamin C:

Foods rich in heme iron:

Liver paté, 1/4 cup (5 mg)

Lean beef, 3 oz braised (2 mg)

Lean pork, 3 oz ground and cooked (1 mg)

Chicken, 3 oz cooked (1 mg)

Salmon, 4 oz filet (1 mg)

Tuna, canned light in water, 3 oz (1 mg)

Egg, 1 hard-boiled (1 mg)

Shrimp, 3 oz cooked (0.4 mg)

Foods rich in non-heme iron:

White beans, 1 cup (8 mg)

Lentils, 1 cup (6 mg)

Kidney beans, 1 cup (4 mg)

Chickpeas, 1 cup (4 mg)

Tofu, 1/2 cup (3 mg)

Spinach, 1/2 cup boiled (3 mg)

Oatmeal, 1 cup (about 2 mg)

Broccoli, 1/2 cup boiled (1 mg)

Enriched whole wheat bread, 1 slice (1 mg)

Enriched white rice, 1/2 cup (1 mg)

Prunes, 7 pitted (1 mg)

Raisins, 1/4 cup packed (1 mg)

Figs, 5 medium (about 1 mg)

Peanut butter, 2 tbsp (0.6 mg)

Foods rich in vitamin C:

Red sweet peppers, 1 cup chopped (190 mg)

Kiwis, two whole (138 mg)

Strawberries, 1 cup halves (89 mg)

Broccoli, 1 cup chopped (81 mg)

Orange, medium (61 mg)

Orange juice, 8 oz (60 mg)

Mangoes, 1 cup pieces (60 mg)

Tomatoes, 1 cup chopped (24 mg)

When it comes to iron and fertility, fueling up with iron-rich foods may not be a sure ticket to conception, but it will help keep you healthy as you try to conceive. After all, the healthier you are, the better your chances of conceiving and having a healthy pregnancy and baby.

Here’s to happy eating and conceiving!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. What to Expect Before You're Expecting , 2nd edition, Heidi Murkoff. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, Foods that can affect fertility , April 2025. National Institutes of Health, Iron: Fact Sheet for Health Professionals , March 2021. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Iron intake and risk of ovulatory infertility , November 2006.

Updates history

January 22, 2026

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

Early July Test Day Countdown

Late June early July testers!

There are 91,708 active discussions happening now in our Trying to Conceive community group.

Your Next Read

You Need 50% More Iron During Pregnancy. Here Are the Best Sources Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

A Dozen Tips for Getting Pregnant Fast Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Your Preconception Nutrition Plan: How to Prep Your Plate for Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Do Fertility Supplements Really Work? What the Science Says Before You Try Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Fertility Fact Check: What Can Help You Conceive (and What's Just Hype) Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

Trying for a Baby? Folic Acid May Matter for Men Too Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Acupuncture and Fertility: Can It Really Help You Get Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

How to Boost Your Chances of Getting Pregnant (Starting Today) Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Which Vitamins Do I Need During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

How Much Vitamin C Do You Actually Need During Pregnancy? A Doctor-Approved Guide Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

How to Prevent and Treat Anemia in Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Pregnant and Low on Vitamin D? Here’s How to Boost Your Levels Safely Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Can You Take Prenatal Vitamins Without Being Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The Best Energy-Boosting Pregnancy Foods to Sustain Your Strength Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Iodine During Pregnancy: Are You Getting Enough? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window