Can You Get a Tattoo While You're Breastfeeding? Here's What the Experts Say

Updates to copy, information, sources, formatting, and headlines, and new medical review.

Tattoos While Breastfeeding

If you’re breastfeeding, here’s what you should consider before getting — or removing — a tattoo.

Congratulations on your new arrival! Now that your little one has finally made her debut, you might be thinking about commemorating the unforgettable moment with a tattoo.

If you held off while you were expecting — as there's ongoing debate about whether tattoos are safe to get during pregnancy — you might be wondering whether it's safe now that you've given birth.

Tattoos are popular, with more than 30% of Americans sporting ink. Trusted SourcePew Research Center32% of Americans Have a Tattoo, Including 22% Who Have More Than OneSee All Sources [1] But if you're breastfeeding, you may want to think again before getting a tattoo.

Trusted SourcePew Research Center32% of Americans Have a Tattoo, Including 22% Who Have More Than OneSee All Sources

“Has anyone gotten a tattoo done while they were exclusively breastfeeding?” wonders What to Expect Community member mermaidmama333. “I will ask my OB more about this at my 6-week appointment next week, but just curious.”

It’s smart to talk to your doctor first because getting a tattoo when you're breastfeeding comes with some risks, says Anthony Rossi, M.D., a dermatologist in New York City.

“It’s not just the immediate procedure,” he explains. “It’s also the potential downstream effects that could pose challenges while breastfeeding.”

Key Takeaways

Hold off on getting a tattoo while you're breastfeeding. While it’s tempting to commemorate your new arrival with some ink, experts recommend waiting until your baby is fully weaned. There’s not enough research to know if tattoo ink or numbing agents can pass through breast milk — so it’s best to play it safe.

Skip tattoo removal while you’re still breastfeeding too. Tattoo removal comes with unknowns — including whether broken-down ink particles can pass into breast milk. Experts suggest waiting until your little one is completely finished with breastfeeding before starting the process.

When you do decide to get a tattoo, be safe . Make sure you go to a licensed tattoo artist who uses sterile, single-use needles. That lowers your risk of infection.

Can you get a tattoo while you're breastfeeding?

There are a number of reasons why getting a tattoo can be problematic when you’re postpartum, especially if you’re breastfeeding. For starters: There’s little known about whether the ingredients of tattoo ink can pass through breast milk, according to some research. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthTattooingSee All Sources [2]

There are a number of reasons why getting a tattoo can be problematic when you’re postpartum, especially if you’re breastfeeding . For starters: There’s little known about whether the ingredients of tattoo ink can pass through breast milk, according to some research

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthTattooingSee All Sources

Since the American tattoo industry is not federally regulated — and the Food & Drug Administration doesn't approve tattoo pigments — it’s hard to know for sure what you (and your baby) might be exposed to if you get a tattoo. Trusted SourceFood & Drug AdministrationThink Before You Ink: Tattoo SafetySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceFood & Drug AdministrationThink Before You Ink: Tattoo SafetySee All Sources

The more talked-about risk associated with tattooing is infection. Tattooing comes with a risk of HIV, hepatitis, allergic reactions, and skin infections.

"While the risk of blood-transmitted diseases is rare, some studies have shown an increased risk of Hepatitis C and HIV in those with tattoos, says Jessica Wu , M.D., a dermatologist in California and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "To reduce your risk, make sure the tattoo artist is licensed and sterilizes their equipment. Some state and local laws also require regular health department inspections."

Mothers with HIV can pass the infection through breast milk if they aren't taking the proper medication to suppress it, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and it's possible to transmit hepatitis while breastfeeding if you have cracked nipples. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionHIV and BreastfeedingSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionHIV and BreastfeedingSee All Sources

An allergic reaction or skin infection (caused by an infected tattoo) can’t be passed on to your little one, but it’s still important to work with a doctor to ensure you get treatments that are safe and effective.

One other thing to watch out for is any numbing cream or local injected anesthetic, says Dr. Wu. "Be sure to check with your doctor about whether what they're using is safe, since these typically contain lidocaine and other ingredients that could enter breast milk."

It’s also important to remember that your body — and life! — are rapidly changing right now. Taking care of a new tattoo isn’t as difficult as taking care of a newborn, but that doesn’t mean you want to do them at the same time.

Constantly picking up and caring for a wriggly baby when you’re sore and exhausted is hard enough without having to work around what is essentially an open wound. Your body is also in the process of recovering from pregnancy and delivery, and it’s possible that the canvas for your new masterpiece will look different in the coming months.

In all cases, it’s better to be safe than sorry, and focus on the real works of art: you and your newborn.

“When we’re in the ‘we don’t know for sure’ category, we usually say err on the side of caution,” says Anne Chapas, M.D., a dermatologist in New York City.

How soon after giving birth can I get a tattoo?

If you're wondering when you can mark the occasion — and your skin! — most doctors recommend waiting at least a few months to a year after childbirth before getting inked to give your body time to recover .

If you’re breastfeeding, hold off getting a tattoo until your child is fully weaned .

When you do go for it, choose a reputable artist who is licensed in your state and uses single-use, sterile needles in a clean environment.

Can you get a tattoo removed while you're breastfeeding?

For the same reasons you probably shouldn't get a tattoo while you're breastfeeding, you should also hold off on removing one while you're nursing.

Tattoo removal can involve multiple laser treatments to break up the ink particles in your skin. Since there’s little research on whether those particles can pass through breast milk and the laser treatments involved come with the risk of an allergic reaction or infection, it’s best to wait until your baby has stopped nursing completely.

Tattoo removal can involve multiple laser treatments to break up the ink particles in your skin. Since there’s little research on whether those particles can pass through breast milk and the laser treatments involved come with the risk of an allergic reaction or infection, it’s best to wait until your baby

Curious about what else is and isn't safe while you’re breastfeeding? Get tips, expert-backed answers, and real parent insights in the What to Expect app .

The bottom line? Hold off on getting or removing tattoos, not only until after pregnancy but also after you've recovered from childbirth postpartum and stopped breastfeeding altogether. You'll be doing the safest thing for you and your baby.

Frequently Asked Questions

Is it safe to breastfeed if you already have tattoos?

Yes, it is safe to breastfeed if you are otherwise healthy and have tattoos that are fully healed — even if your tattoos are on your breast.

Can you donate breast milk if you have tattoos?

It depends. According to the Human Milk Banking Association of North America , moms can donate milk even if they have a recent tattoo, as long as it was done at a regulated site with a sterile, single-use needle and dye pot. If not, the organization requires tattooed moms to wait three months and take a blood test before donating. However, individual milk banks may have their own rules and guidelines, so it’s a good idea to check with the bank beforehand.

Can breastfeeding cause your tattoos to look different?

Sometimes! But unless the tattoo in question is on your breasts (which typically swell after giving birth ), any discoloration or distortion is likely the result of pregnancy itself, not breastfeeding. Chloasma or melasma — a skin condition characterized by darker patches of skin — is often caused by the hormonal changes that come with pregnancy, and it can change the look of your tattoo. It’s also possible for your tattoo to stretch and change as you gain and lose weight during and after pregnancy.