Can I Take DayQuil While I’m Pregnant or Breastfeeding?

is dayquil safe during pregnancy and while breastfeeding, bottle of liquid medicine being poured into a teaspoon

Learn more about whether it's safe to take the cold medicine DayQuil while you're pregnant or if you're breastfeeding.

DayQuil can help you feel less zombie-like when you have a cold or the flu. But is it a safe way to find relief when you're pregnant or breastfeeding?

The answer is different for moms-to-be versus nursing moms, with the latter having a little more leeway. But in general, experts say that there are better ways to manage symptoms like pain, fever, coughing, or congestion.

Read on to learn more about whether DayQuil is the right choice for you (and if it's not, what you can do instead).

Key Takeaways

DayQuil isn't recommended for pregnancy. It contains active ingredients that may increase the risk of birth defects, particularly in the first trimester.

DayQuil is safe for breastfeeding, but it may not be the best choice. It's not thought to be harmful to your baby, but it could decrease your milk supply.

Single-symptom medications are generally a better option. Choosing a medication with just one active ingredient exposes your baby to fewer unnecessary drugs overall.

What is DayQuil?

DayQuil is an over-the-counter medication that treats daytime symptoms of cold and flu, like nasal congestion, coughing, headache, minor aches and pains, fever, and sore throat.

The med can tackle all of these different symptoms because it contains multiple active ingredients, including:

Acetaminophen (for pain and fever relief): 325 milligrams

Dextromethorphan (cough suppressant): 10 milligrams

Guaifenesin (expectorant, which loosens and thins mucus): 200 milligrams

Phenylephrine (nasal decongestant): 5 milligrams

Can I take DayQuil while I’m pregnant?

It's best to avoid DayQuil when you're pregnant because some of its active ingredients could be harmful to your developing baby.

The biggest concern is phenylephrine, which could potentially cause stomach defects or reduce blood flow to the placenta. These risks are thought to be biggest during the first trimester, when a baby's organs are forming, according to the National Library of Medicine. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology InformationPhenylephrineSee All Sources [1]

There's some evidence that guaifenesin is tied to increased risk of neural tube defects and inguinal hernias, especially if taken during the first trimester.

There are certain exceptions where a doctor might recommend a medication like DayQuil during the second or third trimester for very short-term symptom relief (like two or three days max). But you shouldn't take it without consulting with your provider first and deciding on the safest possible dosing plan.

Can I take DayQuil while breastfeeding?

The answer's a bit murkier here. While it's technically okay to take DayQuil when you're breastfeeding, there's a good reason why you may still want to steer clear.

The active ingredients in DayQuil are generally safe for nursing moms and babies, says the Infant Risk Center. Trusted SourceInfant Risk CenterCough & Cold Medications While BreastfeedingSee All Sources [2] However, one of the med's active ingredients, phenylephrine, could decrease your milk supply.

Trusted SourceInfant Risk CenterCough & Cold Medications While BreastfeedingSee All Sources

So if you and your health care provider decide that you should take it, you should keep a close watch for signs that your supply is decreasing (like your baby not seeming full or satisfied after a feed).

If it seems like you're not making as much milk, it's worth incorporating a few days of power pumping to help bring things back up, says What to Expect Medical Review Board Member Suzanne Chan , D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T., a pediatric nurse practitioner and lactation counselor at the Infant Cardiac NICU at NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital in New York City.

Experts also generally recommend that breastfeeding moms "choose symptom-specific medications rather than a medication that contains multiple active ingredients and addresses multiple symptoms when possible," Chan says. (Think: just acetaminophen or ibuprofen for pain or just dextromethorphan for a nasty cough.)

Picking a symptom-specific option exposes your baby to fewer meds overall, which is always preferable.

The bottom line: If you're thinking about taking DayQuil while you're breastfeeding, talk with your doctor or your baby's pediatrician first. There are probably other options for managing your symptoms that are a better choice.

Not sure what’s safe to take for your cold or cough while pregnant or breastfeeding? The What to Expect app gives you expert-backed medication guidance, symptom tips, and real-mom remedies — all tailored to your stage.

Pregnancy- and breastfeeding-safe alternatives to DayQuil

The most effective option will depend on which symptom is bothering you the most. If you're dealing with pain, a fever, or a headache, acetaminophen, known by the brand name Tylenol , is safe for most pregnant and breastfeeding women.

As with other meds, you should get the green light from your practitioner first and take the lowest effective dose for the least amount of time.

And here's an important FYI: Some acetaminophen-based headache meds (like Excedrin) also contain caffeine. Those are okay when you're pregnant too, but just make sure that your total caffeine intake for the day (including the acetaminophen and any coffee or other caffeine sources you have) doesn't exceed 200 milligrams.

If you'd rather avoid OTC meds altogether, home remedies can also make a big difference.

For a headache: Thwart the throbbing by lying in a dark, quiet room with a cool compress on your head. Lightly massaging your head or doing some gentle stretches might also make a difference, especially if you're dealing with a tension headache.

For coughing and congestion: Soothe a sore or scratchy throat by sipping hot tea with honey or gargling with salt water (try 1/4 teaspoon salt mixed with 8 ounces of water). If you're stuffed up, saline nasal drops or nasal strips (like Breathe Right) can make it easier to breathe. "Something I found helpful a little were showers with lavender or eucalyptus oil," reports What to Expect Community mom SaLomama. Try to get as much rest as you can too.

For pain and soreness: If you're achy, try a warm or cool compress or a warm bath . Just keep the bath water below 97 or 98 degrees Fahrenheit if you're pregnant.

As always, check with your practitioner before taking any medication when you're pregnant or breastfeeding, and be mindful of what's pregnancy-safe and what isn't. It's no fun being sick and pregnant or nursing a newborn, but you'll feel better soon and there are medicines that get the green light and can help you feel better in the meantime.

Frequently Asked Questions

What should I do if I already took DayQuil?

Your best bet is to call your health care provider. Together, you can talk through your concerns. If you can't reach your doctor, you can also contact an expert at MotherToBaby for free.

If you're breastfeeding, you might also want to consider adding in a few power pumping sessions to offset any supply dips caused by the med.

Is NyQuil safe?

NyQuil isn't recommended for pregnant women, since it contains phenylephrine, which is linked to an increased risk of certain birth defects.

Experts generally recommend steering clear if you're breastfeeding too, since the phenylephrine can cause a dip in your milk supply. The med can also make you drowsy, which can be dangerous if you're caring for your baby without any backup support.

Can I take a different cold medicine?

Most symptom-specific medications with a single active ingredient are safe to take when you're breastfeeding, and some may be safe when you're pregnant.

The best way to find out whether a specific medicine is safe for you? Check with your doctor. You can also look up specific medications in the MotherToBaby database .