Can You Take Antidepressants While Pregnant? What Experts Recommend Now

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

January 27, 2026

Yellow pills with different smiley faces in a blister pack

Do you need to stop taking antidepressants if you're pregnant or trying to conceive? Here's what moms-to-be need to know.

"I'm currently in therapy and on antidepressants. Now that I'm trying to conceive, do I need to stop taking my meds? And can antidepressants harm my baby once I do get pregnant?"

The preconception period is a great time to put in place some new good-for-you (and your future baby) habits. But while you might think that tossing out all your prescription medications is a healthy move when you're trying to conceive, when it comes to the antidepressants, the medications you can and can't take during pregnancy aren't always so clear-cut.

That's because if you really need antidepressants such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), going off them due to a pregnancy and potentially slipping back into depression could do you (and your baby-to-be) more harm than good.

Key Takeaways

Some antidepressants are safe to take during pregnancy. Other drugs may pose a risk.

Untreated depression can be dangerous. Stopping medication can increase the risk of depression returning, which may affect pregnancy and postpartum health.

It’s ideal to come up with a plan upfront. Check in with your provider and therapist before trying to conceive to determine whether it’s safest to stay on your antidepressant, switch meds, or go off medication during this time.

Weighing benefits and risks

Studies show that women who suffer from major depression during pregnancy have a greater chance of preterm delivery and babies with low risk birth weight. They're also at increased risk for postpartum depression , which can make it difficult for them to care for their babies after they're born.

Staying on antidepressants during pregnancy needs to be weighed carefully too. In the past, there was some concern that certain types of antidepressants could be linked to birth defects, but more recent research has found that the risk of birth defects for babies of moms who took antidepressants during pregnancy is low.

However, some types of antidepressants have been found to pose problems to a developing baby, so talk to your practitioner and therapist about whether it makes sense for you to stay on or go off antidepressants when you're trying to get pregnant.

Generally, certain SSRIs (like Celexa and Zoloft) are considered low risk during pregnancy, though your practitioner might discourage you from continuing Paxil, which may have a small increased risk of a fetal heart defect.

“I’m on Zoloft,” shared What to Expect Community member mbmhumphries. “My high-risk OB is actually the one who prescribed this. For me personally, with all the hormones and emotions that come with pregnancy, it’s not possible to take care of myself physically and mentally without it.”

Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) are also generally considered to be safe to take while pregnant.

If the consensus is that you should wean yourself off your meds or try different kinds, start at least three months before you start trying to conceive, so you've got plenty of time to see how it goes.

If you start to notice the signs of depression coming back — sleep and appetite changes, anxiety, inability to concentrate, mood swings, and lack of interest in sex — you might try alternative therapies, like psychotherapy, light therapy, meditation , or yoga.

Wondering what’s safe during pregnancy? Consult the What to Expect app for the latest guidelines and expert advice.

Exercise can be a great mood lifter, too, as can getting support from friends and loved ones. And of course, keep in close contact with your practitioner and/or therapist, who can steer you to the safest type and dose of antidepressants should you need to stay on your meds once you do get pregnant.

May all your happiest dreams come true,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Depression , May 2025. John Hopkins Medicine, Antidepressants and Pregnancy , 2026. Mayo Clinic, Antidepressants: Safe during pregnancy? , December 2023. National Institute of Mental Health, Postpartum Depression Facts , 2023. Food and Drug Administration, Paxil prescription information , November 2024. American Journal of Psychiatry, Pregnancy Complications Following Prenatal Exposure to SSRIs or Maternal Psychiatric Disorders: Results From Population-Based National Register Data , December 2015. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Antidepressant Use in Pregnancy and the Risk of Cardiac Defects , June 2014.

Updates history

Editor: Lisa Lombardi/Rebekah Wahlberg

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

40 Plus Ladies TTC Part 6

Late June early July testers!

There are 91,506 active discussions happening now in our Trying to Conceive community group.

Your Next Read

Why I Stayed on My Antidepressants While Pregnant, Despite the Risks Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Depression During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Can You Drink Alcohol While Trying to Conceive? Here’s What Experts Recommend Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Medications During Pregnancy: What’s Safe and What’s Not? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is it Safe to Get A Facial When You're Pregnant or Trying to Conceive? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Getting Pregnant After Postpartum Depression Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Pregnancy and Meditation Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Anxiety During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Can I Take Ibuprofen While I'm Pregnant or Breastfeeding? Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Is It Safe to Use Marijuana During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Postpartum Depression (PPD) Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

How to Ask for Help When You Think You Have Postpartum Depression Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

Medications While Breastfeeding: What’s Safe and What’s Not Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Manage IBS Flare-Ups While Pregnant (and Which Meds Are Actually Safe) Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Mood Swings Happen and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window