Can Babies Have Too Much Iron?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

Is it possible for your little one to get too much of this nutrient? Here's what parents need to know about iron for babies.

"On an average day, my 10-month-old daughter eats iron-fortified formula, yogurt and cereal. Is it possible for her to consume too much iron in her daily diet? What's the right amount of iron for my baby?"

Because iron is a crucial mineral that every baby needs, infant feeding formula and cereals are routinely fortified with it. Iron helps increase a baby's red-blood-cell volume to meet the demands of rapid growth. Too little iron can result in iron deficiency anemia, which can slow vital blood production and slacken a baby's appetite for solid foods.

The good news is that thanks to fortified foods, it's easier than ever to serve your baby all the iron she needs to grow (and grow and grow). Fortified food packs a big iron punch, but meat and green vegetables are full of iron, too.

In fact, if she's chugging formula and wolfing down cereal and other fortified foods, she might even be lapping up more than her daily quota. Which might cause you to wonder: Can my baby get too much iron in her diet? Here's what parents need to know.

How much iron does a baby need?

Unless your child's pediatrician tells you that your baby has an iron deficiency, here's how much iron little ones should be getting at different stages.

Before starting solids :

Breastfed or partially breastfed babies should start taking 1 milligram per kilogram body weight per day of oral iron supplements at 4 months old until iron-rich solid foods are introduced.

Formula-fed babies do not need added iron.

After starting solids:

7- to 12-month-olds: 11 milligrams (mg) of iron a day

1- to 3-year-olds: 7 mg of iron a day

Can babies have too much iron?

Even though you may be worried about your baby getting too much iron, turns out it's actually pretty hard for your baby to ingest a harmful amount of iron from foods alone. To consume a toxic amount, your baby would have to swallow several doses of an infant iron supplement (which is why it's critical to keep supplements — including your prenatal vitamins — out of reach).

If you're still concerned, check your formula and food labels to see how much iron your little one is getting and talk to your pediatrician about your baby's iron intake (it's always good to get another opinion about your cutie's iron needs), and let your doctor know if you think your baby is consuming more than the recommended amount.

Feel free to ask any other questions you may have about vitamins and babies , and be sure to speak up if her stool is very black or if she's constipated , both of which can signal excess iron.

Here's to your child's good health,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect The First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Best Iron-Rich Foods for Toddlers , February 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Vitamins and Breastfed Babies , September 2020. American Academy of Pediatrics, Vitamin D & Iron Supplements for Babies: AAP Recommendations , May 2016. American Academy of Pediatrics, Stools - Unusual Color , 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, Starting Solid Foods , March 2021. Mayo Clinic, Solid Foods: How to Get Your Baby Started , May 2021. Mayo Clinic, Iron deficiency in children: Prevention tips for parents , December 2019. KidsHealth from Nemours, Iron , October 2016.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Nutritional Needs of Babies: the First 12 Months Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Parents Need to Know About Heavy Metals in Baby Food Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Vitamins and Breastfed Babies Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How Much Should My Baby Eat? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Introducing Solid Foods to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

8 Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Vitamin D for Babies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

You Need 50% More Iron During Pregnancy. Here Are the Best Sources Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Baby Feeding Schedules & Baby Food Chart for the First Year Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Here’s How Much Formula You Should Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Formula-Feeding Your Baby? Here’s What You Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Relieve Baby and Toddler Constipation Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Can Iron Help You Get Pregnant? Why This Mighty Mineral Matters Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

Can a Toddler Eat Too Much? What to Do When Your Child Always Wants More Food Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Calcium-Rich Foods for Toddlers and Kids Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window