11 Times Celebrities Got Real About Their Breastfeeding Struggles

Celebrities breastfeeding

Spoiler alert: Breastfeeding doesn't always come easily (not even for Hollywood moms).

Breastfeeding can be a beautiful way to bond with your baby. But it's also true that for some moms (okay, make that lots of moms), it’s not all butterflies and rainbows. If you are struggling to breastfeed, it can be an uncomfortable, emotionally draining and not-so-magical experience — which is exactly why it’s so refreshing when other moms are honest about it. Especially celebrity moms, who we’re so used to seeing in carefully-curated Instagram photos or looking glamorous while walking red carpets.

Luckily, though, plenty of A-list mamas are helping to shatter that image of perfection by offering candid interviews or raw, unfiltered Instagram posts about the real struggles of breastfeeding. And each time, it’s like they’re reaching out across the abyss and speaking directly to us.

Hilary Duff

View this post on Instagram THIS ONE’S FOR THE LADIES Just a few thoughts that I wanted to share on Breast-feeding. Last week was my last week nursing Banks (my six month old) I am a working mom of two. My goal was to get my little girl to six months and then decide if I (and her of course) wanted to keep going. Let me tell you. Pumping at work sucks. I had zero down time and am usually pumping in a hair and make up trailer while four hands work to get me ready for the next scene with lots of other people around. Even if I had the luxury to be in my own room, it’s not even considered a “break” because you have to sit upright for the milk to flow into the bottles! Plus you are having your damn nipples tugged at by an aggressive machine that makes an annoying sound, that echoes through your head day and night (I swear that machine and I had many conversations at midnight and 3 am)! Ttttthen having to find someplace to sterilize bottles and keep your milk cold (ok I’m done with that rant lol)! Anyway, I didn’t know this because with Luca I didn’t work until he was about nine months old, so I didn’t pump very often. Your milk supply drastically drops when you stop feeding as often and lose the actual contact and connection with your baby (??). So I was eating all the feunugreek goats butt blessed thistle fennel cookies/drops/shakes/pills I could get my hands on! It was maddening. (Does fenugreek make anyone else smell like maple syrup and rubber gloves?...not chill) With all of this complaining, I want to say I enjoyed (almost) every moment of feeding my daughter. Felt so lucky to be so close to her and give her that start. I know many women are not able to and for that I am sympathetic and very grateful that I could. For six wonderful months. But I needed a break. I was going to break. With the stress of a dropping milk supply and a baby that was getting bored or not caring about nursing when I was available to. I was sad and frustrated and feeling like a failure all of the time. When really I’m a bad ass rock star. Moms get high on feeling like superwoman...because we are! Doing too much, because we can! KEEP READING in the comments below ?????? A post shared by Hilary Duff (@hilaryduff) on May 7, 2019 at 4:27pm PDT

In addition to her Lizzie McGuire days — and her subsequent run as a real-life pop star — Hilary Duff has also stolen our hearts on Instagram, where she often opens up about life as a single mom, finding love again and welcoming her second child. A few months after the birth of her daughter Banks in 2018, Duff shared a candid snapshot of herself breastfeeding, along with “just a few words” about her experience.

“Let me tell you,” Duff began. “Pumping at work sucks.” (Yes, even when you’re an actress on a Hollywood set.)

First, Duff said, there’s the fact that you’re “having your damn nipples tugged at by an aggressive machine that makes an annoying sound” — one that replays in your head, both day and night. Then there’s the stress-inducing situation of a low milk supply . (“I was eating all the fenugreek goats butt blessed thistle fennel cookies/drops/shakes/pills I could get my hands on!” she wrote. “It was maddening.”)

“I was sad and frustrated and feeling like a failure all of the time,” she admits. “When really I’m a bad ass rock star. Moms get high on feeling like superwoman … because we are!”

Chrissy Teigen

View this post on Instagram hi my lulu! A post shared by chrissy teigen (@chrissyteigen) on Apr 19, 2016 at 4:02pm PDT

Has Chrissy Teigen ever not told it like it is? (Short answer: Nope.) In a 2016 interview with Entertainment Tonight , the mom of two opened up about the amazing rush of love that new motherhood brings, saying, "We're so happy. It's been really exciting and fun, and every day is so different, and seeing all [daughter Luna's] little changes is so cute."

But she was also honest about breastfeeding — or more specifically, how it made her feel.

"You just feel like you are just a cow all day,” Teigen said. “It's hard to work your entire day around getting her all the nourishment she needs."

Jessica Alba

View this post on Instagram Went into my @honest office today for a board meeting, although I’m still technically on mat leave. Not gonna lie, it’s impossible for me to completely unplug from work ...and it felt nice being back -even though it was just a half day. Baby boy came to visit/eat at lunch. Felt very productive today. ???????? #workingmom #entrepreneurlife #breastfeedingmama A post shared by Jessica Alba (@jessicaalba) on Feb 7, 2018 at 4:52pm PST

Jessica Alba may make motherhood look easy (after all, she's raising three kids and running her company, Honest); but the actress has admitted it isn't always glamorous.

Alba has shared photos of herself breastfeeding everywhere from a board room meeting to a Target dressing room, and has been honest about her breastfeeding journey.

"I breastfed as long as I could, but not as long as I wanted,” she wrote in her 2013 book, The Honest Life: Living Naturally and True to You. "I had to get back to work, and I wasn't able to keep it going. But I am proud to say I did the best for my daughters and I'm proud of all of my mom friends for doing the best they can on this issue."

Amy Schumer

View this post on Instagram Guys what are we doing tonight? #schumerpump #ootd @stassischroeder A post shared by @ amyschumer on May 18, 2019 at 7:37am PDT

Do people expect anything but brutal honesty from Amy Schumer? Not really; and that’s exactly why fans love her. When she became pregnant last year with her first child, Schumer was open about her struggles with hyperemesis gravidarum , an extreme form of morning sickness. And when she welcomed her son Gene this past spring, she also got real about the not-so-fun realities of pumping — with one simple, hilarious photo.

Taking to Instagram, she shared a snapshot of herself in a strapless nursing top with an automatic breast pump attached. Her simple caption was a nod to how much her weekends have changed since having a baby.

“Guys what are we doing tonight?” the new mom wrote, followed by the hashtags #schumerpump and #ootd.

Mila Kunis

It's legal in all 50 U.S. states, so you’d think that by now, the stigma of breastfeeding in public would have finally faded, but even celebs are still dealing with it. In 2016, Mila Kunis told Vanity Fair that she “literally fed [her daughter Wyatt] everywhere.”

“There were many times where I didn’t bring a cover with me, and so I just did it in a restaurant, in the subway, in the park, at airports and in planes," Kunis shared. "Why did I do it in public? Because I had to feed my child. She’s hungry. I need to feed her whether it’s out of a bottle or out of my boob no matter where I was.”

Still, it didn’t come without shameful looks from strangers.

“People actually looked at us in a shameful [way], and we were like, ‘Oh my God,’ because it’s so not a sexual act," she said.

But to the haters, the Bad Moms star had this to say: "If it’s not for you, don’t look."

Kristen Bell

View this post on Instagram ???? A post shared by kristen bell (@kristenanniebell) on Jul 11, 2019 at 4:14pm PDT

If you could have one celeb bestie, chances are you’d pick Kristen Bell. (Actually, chances are we all would!) The actress and mom of two is hilarious and endlessly endearing. But she doesn’t sugarcoat motherhood — and has been honest about what breastfeeding was really like for her. In an episode of her web series Momsplaining last year, Bell commented on the weird transition that takes place when you start to breastfeed.

“It is a little bit strange to go from an autonomous woman to all of a sudden being a food truck, ’cause that’s essentially what you are,” Bell shared with her co-host, actress Katie Lowe.

Bell said she also developed three nasty bouts of mastitis , a painful breast infection that can result in red, inflamed breasts.

Pink

View this post on Instagram When you're almost done pumping and you know what's next A post shared by P!NK (@pink) on Oct 29, 2017 at 8:23pm PDT

Pink has always been vocal about normalizing breastfeeding, and has shared multiple photos on Instagram of herself pumping while on the road. So, it’s no wonder she gets fired up by people who try to shame mothers for public breastfeeding.

In an appearance on Ellen in 2017, the talk show host kicked off a discussion by saying, “It’s such a weird thing that people have such strong opinions about breastfeeding. It’s a child, and it needs to eat.”

Pink wholeheartedly agreed, adding: “Strong opinions about things that don’t affect their life at all.”

“I’m feeding my kid,” she continued. “Would you rather him scream? Because he’s very capable of that, too."

Whitney Port

View this post on Instagram This was the day you stole my ?? forever. Sonny- you are an ???? sent from heaven. I think my dad sent you to me. In fact, I know so. I promise to do my very best to keep you safe, comfortable and happy. You are loved infinitely. HAPPY BIRTHDAY, our chickens!!!!!! A post shared by Whitney Port (@whitneyeveport) on Jul 27, 2018 at 5:00pm PDT

If you haven’t been following Whitney Port’s YouTube series, I Love My Baby, But… , you might want to check it out. The Hills: New Beginnings star gets candid about the many changes she’s gone through since her baby Sonny entered the world in 2017, including her struggles with breastfeeding — and each video is incredibly relatable.

“I'm not obsessed with breastfeeding,” Port wrote in the caption of one video back in 2017. “There. I said it. Don't get me wrong, I LOVE the fact that my baby is getting all the amazing nutrients from my milk and that I am literally giving him life, but it has been quite the challenge. A challenge I didn't feel prepared for at all.”

For Port, the agonizing pain she felt during every feeding made breastfeeding hard to stick with. “Because of the pain I’ve demonized breastfeeding in my head,” she explained in the episode, “and the thought of doing it is dreadful.”

In a March 2019 interview with Refinery29 , Port said she wishes she hadn’t put so much pressure on herself to keep going.

“For me, breastfeeding was difficult from the start, and thinking back, I wish I’d stopped earlier and not put myself through all the torture that I did,” she shared. “At the time, I thought breastfeeding was the BIGGEST deal, and the stakes felt impossibly high — as if my little Sonny’s life was solely dependent on my success. I remember not being able to see outside this narrow view that I had created in my mind of what was acceptable as a new mother and what wasn’t.”

Kelly Rowland

View this post on Instagram ????TITAN???? My greatest blessing and Bestest Friend in the whole wide world! When you came into this world I knew you’d change my life forever but YOU my incredible son changed me in way I never Imagined! You give me courage, made me a Better woman, artist and I pray you think I’m a pretty ok Mom! You will change the world in a mighty way! HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO MY BIG BOY MY HEART BEAT! “Until the rainbow burns The stars out of the sky”......ALWAYS, I LOVE YOU! #4ona4 #champagnebirthday A post shared by Kelly Rowland (@kellyrowland) on Nov 4, 2018 at 8:39am PST

It’s no secret that pregnancy changes your body, but breastfeeding can change it, too — in ways we don’t always hear about. R&B singer Kelly Rowland decided to lift the veil on breastfeeding breast changes in her 2017 book, Whoa, Baby! , which was largely inspired by the 2014 birth of her son Titan.

“All that gnawing at your nipples will take its toll!” she wrote, before adding that, “In those early days, I was fascinated (my polite way of saying ‘horrified’) by the transformation of the boobs.”

Still, it was hard to adjust to all the changes going on in her body, and recognizing her new self in the mirror took some getting used to, Rowland wrote.

“My nipples were HUGE — we are talking the size of Frisbees — and sometimes I could see these veins bulging out while I was nursing,” she shared. “My boobs themselves were so long and stretchy that I sometimes felt like I could’ve swung them over my shoulders.”

Adele

Adele might be a Grammy-winning singer-songwriter, but she’s also known for her hilariously refreshing candor. When she became a mother in 2012 to son Angelo, it wasn’t long before Adele started opening up about what life as a new mom was like.

While talking to the audience during a 2016 concert , the songstress somehow got on the subject of breastfeeding, and she did not hold back.

“The pressure on us is f***** ridiculous,” Adele said. “And all those people who put pressure on us, you can go f*** yourselves, all right? Because it’s hard. Some of us can’t do it. I managed about nine weeks with my boobs.”

Lauren Conrad

View this post on Instagram Got exactly want I wanted for Christmas ???? This sweet little boy loved every minute of it! ??: @jessiburrone A post shared by Lauren Conrad (@laurenconrad) on Dec 26, 2018 at 8:59am PST

For fashion designer and former The Hills star Lauren Conrad, the hardest part about her breastfeeding experience was dealing with her low milk supply — something that emotionally impacted her more than she expected.

“I felt like I was failing at something that should come really naturally and it was really difficult for me,” she shared in an episode of her podcast, Lauren Conrad: Asking for a Friend . Not being able to make enough milk for her 4-month-old son — even after trying lactation cookies, teas and pills — left her feeling “ashamed” and even “like a bad mom,” she admitted.

“[I thought breastfeeding] would just come really easily to me and I would just kind of know what to do because that’s what my body is made to do,” Conrad reflected. But instead, it was an emotional rollercoaster.

She even shared a story about a “really sad, half-full frozen bag of breast milk” that she left in her freezer but couldn’t bring herself to throw out.

“It had a tiny little martini glass drawn on it because it was from the one time I had a martini and I couldn’t give it to [her baby],” she shared. “So it just sat there next to the Popsicles, mocking me. Besides that, I had nothing, and I couldn’t keep up with [her baby’s need].”

What Our Community Is Talking About

How to get fattier milk?

Night lights?

Best pacifiers for breastfed baby?

There are 34,073 active discussions happening now in our Breastfeeding community group.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

15 Moms Share What Breastfeeding Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

I Breastfed 4 Kids (But the Truth Is, I Hated It) By Charlotte Hilton Andersen, Contributing Writer

Moms Who Exclusively Pump Reveal How They Make It Work Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Most Common Breastfeeding Problems and Solutions Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Key to Making Triple Feeding Work? Knowing Your Limits Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Tips for Breastfeeding a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Breastfeeding in Public: Tips and Laws for Nursing Mothers Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

How Partners Can Help Support Breastfeeding Moms Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Why You Might Not Be Able to Breastfeed Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Common Pumping Problems and Solutions Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Breastfeeding Support Groups Can Be the Resource New Moms Need Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How Combination Feeding Helped Me Manage as a New Mom of Twins By Zayda Rivera, Contributing Writer

The Breastfeeding Trick That Saved My Sanity With a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

You're Not Alone if Breastfeeding Turns You Off Sex Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfeeding Toddler Doesn't Want to Wean By Heidi Murkoff

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window