Chinese Gender Predictor Chart

For centuries, eager parents have looked at the Chinese gender calendar to find out whether they're having a baby boy or baby girl.

Boy or Girl? Learn More About the Chinese Gender Predictor

How accurate is the Chinese gender predictor?

Should I use a Chinese gender calendar?

How do I determine the sex of my baby for sure?

What is a Chinese gender predictor chart?

A Chinese gender predictor chart guesses baby's sex by taking the mother's birth date and the estimated date of conception or the baby's due date , then converting the numbers into the mom's lunar age when she got pregnant and the lunar date of conception. The result is a prediction about whether you'll be having a baby boy or a baby girl.

chinese gender predictor chart illustration

The tradition goes back some 700 years, when, according to legend, a gender prediction calendar was discovered in a royal Chinese tomb. Practitioners of Chinese astrology believe that these charts do a pretty good job of predicting the sex of your baby.

But there’s not much information out there from credible sources — either about the chart itself, whether it actually works or how accurate it is. In short, the Chinese gender predictor calendar may just be another old wives’ tale for how to guess baby's sex.

How accurate is a Chinese gender predictor chart and does it really work?

Lots of pregnant moms-to-be say the Chinese gender predictor chart is the best non-medical test for telling you whether you're having a boy or girl. But how accurate are they, really?

Some claim that using a Chinese gender calendar can be up to 93% accurate in predicting your baby’s sex . And because it’s based on your age and the month you conceived, you can consult the chart at any point during your pregnancy.

Unlike the second trimester ultrasound that can reveal your baby’s sex if you want to find out, you don’t have to wait so long to use a Chinese gender predictor.

But of course, there’s no real evidence that Chinese gender calendars work. The chart isn’t based on science, so it’s no more accurate than other low-tech, non-medical gender tests (as far as experts know, anyway!). After all, with only two outcomes — either you’re having a boy or a girl — any unscientific method will be right about 50% of the time!

Looking for more ways to guess your baby's sex? Find them on the What to Expect app .

Should I use a Chinese gender calendar?

Sure, if you want to! There’s certainly no harm in giving this and the other fun "boy or girl?" tests a try, and it can be pretty entertaining — especially if you do them with family and friends.

So if you get a kick out of gender guessing games, go for it. Just don’t take the results too seriously or use them to make any big decisions (like picking the perfect baby name or deciding how to decorate the nursery).

How can I determine my baby’s sex for sure?

If you want to find out your baby's sex the accurate way, you’ll have to schedule an appointment with your OB/GYN or midwife. There are a few different tests your practitioner can use to determine your baby’s sex — but in most cases, your doctor, an ultrasound technician, or another health care provider will check during the more extensive second trimester ultrasound known as the 20-week anatomy scan , which is usually done between 18 and 22 weeks.

Even though your baby’s sex is set at conception, this ultrasound test doesn't work until the genital anatomy is developed enough to see. This method is highly accurate, but it’s not 100 percent. Even technicians can sometimes make mistakes.

Other medically sound ways of finding out baby’s sex include noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) , chorionic villus sampling (CVS) , and amniocentesis (amnio) .

The first one is a blood test used more and more often by moms-to-be wanting to know what they're having early. The other two are generally reserved for higher-risk pregnancies, since they’re more invasive procedures designed to detect chromosomal abnormalities.

Chinese gender predictor charts can be a fun way to guess whether your little bundle will be a boy or a girl. But they’re not based on science, so you should only use them for your own amusement.

If you want to find out for sure, you’ll have to head to your doctor for one of the medical tests known to be accurate. Or you can just wait it out! In a few short months, you’ll get to meet this adorable little person and learn the answer for yourself.

For more fun baby predictions, discover the fun astrological traits of your future baby with our free Birth Chart Calculator .

Chinese Gender Prediction Chart FAQs

How often is the Chinese Gender Predictor chart right?

While some people swear by the Chinese Gender Predictor, there is no evidence that it is more accurate than other unscientific methods of predicting baby's sex. Put another way: You have a 50/50 chance of being right just by guessing whether it's a boy or a girl, and this tool has the same odds of being right 50 percent of the time!

How does the Chinese Gender Predictor work?

The Chinese Gender Predictor factors in the mom's birthday and the baby's due date, then reveals a prediction of baby's sex based on the mom's lunar age and the lunar date of conception.

How can you find out the sex of your baby?

Accurate methods to find out the sex of your baby include prenatal testing (like NIPT and amniocentesis), along with a second trimester ultrasound. While home games like the ring test and prediction charts are a fun way to guess your baby's sex, they're not reliable. Medical methods are far more accurate.

When do you find out the sex of your baby?

With prenatal testing, you can find out the sex of your baby starting late in the first trimester. If you choose not to get any genetic testing, you can find out the sex of your baby during the anatomy scan ultrasound, around 20 weeks.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, When Can You Find Out Baby's Sex? , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, What Is the Ring Gender Test? , October 2024. WhatToExpect.com, How to Tell if You're Having a Boy or Girl on an Ultrasound , August 2025. WhatToExpect.com, 8 Scientific Signs That You're Having a Boy or a Girl , July 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Can Nub Theory Predict if You're Having a Boy or a Girl? , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, What Is the Ramzi Theory and Does It Really Work? , November 2024. WhatToExpect.com, How to Have a Boy or a Girl, August 2025. WhatToExpect.com, When Your Baby's Sex Is Determined , January 2025. The Journal of Family Medicine and Primary Care , The Ultrasound Identification of Fetal Gender at the Gestational Age of 11–12 Weeks , Jan-Feb 2018. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Ultrasound Exams , January 2024. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Accuracy of the Chinese Lunar Calendar Method to Predict a Baby's Sex: A Population-Based Study , July 2010. University of Michigan, Chinese Lunar Calendar: Don't Paint the Nursery Just Yet , May 2010.

Your Next Read

Boy or Girl? Here’s When (and How) You’ll Find Out Baby’s Sex Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

12 Scientific Signs You’re Having a Boy or a Girl Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

When and How Your Baby’s Sex Is Determined in the Womb Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnant Moms Are Asking ChatGPT to Guess Their Baby's Sex — Does It Actually Work? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Nub Theory, Explained: How the "Angle of the Dangle" Works—and How Accurate It Really Is Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Does the Ovary Gender Test Work to Predict Your Baby's Sex? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Do At-Home Gender Tests Really Work? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Tell if You’re Having a Boy or Girl on an Ultrasound Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Does the Heartbeat Gender Prediction Method Work? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Conception Date Calculator: When Did You Conceive? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Pregnancy Due Date Calculator Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

What Is the Ramzi Theory and Does It Really Work? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Can The Shape Of Your Baby's Skull Really Be The Key to Learning Their Gender? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Pregnancy Tests Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window