Cluster Pumping vs. Power Pumping — What’s the Difference?

cluster pumping vs power pumping, woman pumping breast milk

Cluster pumping and power pumping may help boost your milk supply. Learn more about the difference between the two methods and whether cluster pumping is right for you.

If you're breastfeeding and are running into some supply issues, you might be thinking about trying cluster pumping or power pumping. Both can help your body make more milk, and sometimes you'll even see the two strategies mentioned interchangeably.

The reality? Cluster and power pumping do have a few key differences. One tends to be easier than the other. Here's what to know about both before you get started. Trusted SourceGenuine LactationPower Pumping and Cluster PumpingSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceGenuine LactationPower Pumping and Cluster PumpingSee All Sources

Key Takeaways

Power and cluster pumping can both boost your milk supply. The increased demand tells your body to make more milk.

They work on different schedules. Power pumping sessions are shorter and more structured; cluster pumping mimics a baby’s on-demand (often irregular) feeding spurts over a longer period of time.

Power pumping tends to be easier to manage because it's shorter. If you're thinking about trying cluster pumping, check with a lactation consultant first.

What is power pumping?

Power pumping is a method of pumping that many nursing moms use to increase their milk supply.

It involves pumping in short, frequent spurts for a set period of time — usually alternating 10 to 20 minutes of pumping and resting over the course of an hour, once a day. But if you're short on time, you can try a condensed schedule of alternating 10 minutes of pumping with five minutes of resting for 30 minutes, twice a day.

Some moms opt to power pump right after a breastfeeding session, while others may do it instead of a feeding session (like if you're at work or away from your baby for a few hours.) The best schedule is one that works for you .

Breast milk production is all about supply and demand. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBreastfeeding Your BabySee All Sources [2] When you stimulate your breasts with extra pumping sessions, your body gets the message that it needs to start making more milk — just like it would if your baby started cluster feeds during a growth spurt. Most women notice an uptick of milk production within three to seven days.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBreastfeeding Your BabySee All Sources

What is cluster pumping?

Cluster pumping is another pumping method you can use to boost your milk supply. It's pretty similar to power pumping, and if you look online, you might find that the terms are sometimes used interchangeably. But there are a few subtle and important differences to know about.

While power pumping follows a set pump-and-rest schedule, cluster pumping more closely mimics how your baby actually nurses when he’s cluster feeding: in short, frequent, irregular spurts over the course of three to five hours.

So you might pump for 10 minutes, rest for 20 minutes, pump for seven minutes, rest for 30 minutes, pump for 12 minutes, rest for 25 minutes, and so on.

"The intervals are less regular and more babylike, similar to how your baby might nurse when they're fussy in the evening," says What to Expect Medical Review Board Member Suzanne Chan , D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T., a board-certified pediatric nurse practitioner and certified lactation counselor with the Infant Cardiac NICU at NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital in New York City.

These more flexible spurts might sound more appealing, especially if you're home alone with your baby and can't necessarily commit to pumping and resting every 10 minutes.

“I’ve power pumped first thing in the morning, and then do the cluster pumping schedule two times … once during the day and [once] before bed,” says What to Expect Community mom babypinaaa.

But the fact that cluster pumping happens over the course of a number of hours instead of just one hour can end up making it more challenging and stressful for Mom.

"It can be more intense, and it can actually be harder to structure your ability to care for a newborn," says Jessica Anderson , M.A., I.B.C.L.C., C.L.C., a lactation consultant and owner of Genuine Lactation based in Crofton, Maryland.

Frequent pump sessions over the course of several hours can also be tough on your nipples, especially if your pump flange isn't the correct size or if your flanges aren't held in place correctly (either by your hands or with an ill-fitting pumping bra).

"It can cause discomfort that could go to active nipple damage," Anderson says.

For those reasons, it's best to consult with a lactation consultant before trying cluster pumping. They can help you make sure your flanges and pumping bra are the right fit, so they're less likely to cause discomfort. They can also help you figure out a plan for making sure you have the support you need to cluster pump and care for your baby at the same time.

What's the difference between cluster pumping and power pumping?

Both cluster and power pumping boost your milk supply Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsLow Breast Milk Supply: 5 Steps That Can HelpSee All Sources [3] by increasing demand. But the timing and duration are different.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsLow Breast Milk Supply: 5 Steps That Can HelpSee All Sources

Power pumping sessions are regular and predictable, and you stop after just an hour. Cluster pumping sessions are meant to happen irregularly over a couple of hours. It's closer to how your baby would actually nurse when he’s cluster feeding.

“Cluster pumping is a little different [from power pumping],” says What to Expect Community member jocelyng925. “Instead of making your pumping session longer, it’s just short bursts throughout a couple of hours.”

But trying to cluster pump while you're caring for and feeding your baby at the same time can often become overwhelming.

Power pumping | Cluster pumping Boosts milk demand to increase supply | Boosts milk demand to increase supply Schedule-based | Mimics baby's cluster-feeding behavior More predictable: alternates 10 minutes of pumping and 10 minutes of resting for an hour | Less predictable: alternates short spurts of pumping and resting for three to five hours Often easier to manage, since it's only for an hour at a time | Can be harder to manage, since it happens over the course of several hours Less likely to cause discomfort, pain, or nipple damage | More likely to cause discomfort, pain, or nipple damage Can try it on your own | Should talk to a lactation consultant before trying

Should I choose power pumping or cluster pumping?

Ultimately, the best method for pumping to boost your supply is what works for you. In terms of telling your body to make more milk, "they're pretty similar," says Chan.

That said, cluster pumping's longer duration can definitely feel harder to manage, to the point where you're more prone to becoming drained or burnt out.

It can also set the stage for tenderness and pain, and even cracked or injured nipples.

"It's not something I'd recommend to the average parent, because unless we have all the supports in place, it can be enough to make you want to quit breastfeeding," Anderson warns.

So again, if you want to give cluster pumping a try, talk with a lactation consultant first. You can decide if it's the right approach for you and come up with a plan to set yourself up for success.

Tips for success with cluster pumping and power pumping

Adding in pumping sessions when your breastfeeding can be a lot. So whether you decide to try power pumping or cluster pumping, it's worth thinking through a plan for how you'll get it done while feeling your best physically and mentally. Some tips to keep in mind:

Pick the schedule that works for you. Some moms opt to pump in the morning when their supply tends to be highest; others pump during naptime or at night when it's quiet.

Ask for the support you need. Whether you're pumping for an hour or several, you'll need some support. So talk with your partner or another support person ahead of time to make sure everyone's on the same page. If you're pumping while your baby is awake, have them hang out with the baby, for instance. Your partner can also be responsible for cleaning your pump parts or bagging up the milk after you pump.

Stay nourished and hydrated. Keep healthy snacks and plenty of water nearby. You're using up a lot of energy here.

Invest in a hands-free pumping bra. Being able to do something else with your hands — even if it's just grabbing your water bottle or answering a couple of quick emails — makes a big difference.

Make it as enjoyable as possible. It may not always be possible, but when you can, use your pumping time as an opportunity to do something fun for yourself. Watch a TV show, call a friend, or crack open that book you've been meaning to read.

If it hurts, stop. Pain isn't worth it, and it could set the stage for cracked or damaged nipples.

Keep your goal in mind. If you're starting to feel discouraged, remember that you're doing this for your baby — and that it's only temporary. You can get through it!

Need a little extra support while pumping? The What to Expect app can help, with a baby feeding tracker to record pumping and feeding sessions, expert-backed guidance, a community of parents who are going through the same stage, and tips tailored to your journey.

Both power and cluster pumping can increase your milk supply when you're breastfeeding and need a boost. Power pumping's shorter, more predictable schedule tends to be easier for most people.

If you're thinking about trying cluster pumping, check in with a lactation consultant first to make sure you're prepared.