Planning a Coed Baby Shower? Why They’re the New Thing — Plus Party Themes Guests Will Love

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

coed baby shower, blue bingo machine on pink background with yellow bingo cards and bingo markers

Many parents get the whole family involved in celebrating their new arrival by expanding the invite list.

If you’re planning a coed baby shower, your timing is impeccable. While the baby shower is traditionally thrown for the mom-to-be, it's becoming more common to host a coed baby shower — one that honors and celebrates both parents-to-be instead of just one. A coed shower (or a sprinkle for a second baby ) also allows your whole family to share in the excitement of the presents and games, as well as bask in all of the oohing and aahing. As one What to Expect Community mom who's planning to have a coed baby shower put it, "It's my partner's baby, too."

Sometimes referred to as a "Jack and Jill" shower, a coed baby shower invites the entire family to welcome the newest addition. "Gone are the days of gendered tasks and activities," says Syrie Roman, owner of Social Maven , an event and wedding planning company in Buffalo, New York. "Today's expectant parents enjoy being active participants in everything leading up to the arrival of their baby, as they understand that both parents play an equally significant role in the raising of their child."

Key Takeaways

Coed baby showers just feel right. Including everyone is increasingly common as the gesture underscores a more modern approach to parenting.

Think creatively! Go to town with any cute theme, like travel, nature, or the circus, and then match the idea to your decorations, games, and food.

Focus on inclusivity. From the invitations to the activities, be sure each aspect of your coed baby shower leaves room for everyone to participate and have fun.

What are some cute coed baby shower themes?

Cute coed baby shower themes can align with any hobby or activity you share with your partner. Here are some fun ideas to inspire a custom baby shower theme .

Superheroes

If you don't already feel superhuman from creating a baby-to-be, you soon will when you're able to get so much done while running on zero sleep!

"The decor for this theme can be vibrant primary colors and mock superhero logos," Roman suggests. "You can go as far as encouraging the guests to come dressed as their favorite superhero or a superhero from their imagination."

Woodland

You don't have to host your coed baby shower outdoors to create an enchanted environment that feels woodland-like. Just stock up on rustic decor like twine, burlap, and natural greenery.

"Incorporate woodland creatures like foxes, owls, rabbits, and deer into the decor. Set up a cozy seating area with blankets and pillows," Roman advises. "This theme would be ideal for parents hoping to decorate the baby's nursery in the same theme, as you could reuse much of the decor."

Sports

If you're die-hard supporters of a certain team, consider centering the baby shower around your fandom.

"This infuses their competitive spirit, so guests can participate in games, winning gift ideas, and favors," says Jacqueline Vizcaino, owner of Tinted Events Design and Planning . "Imagine a Wimbledon or a U.S. Open-themed shower, and the table is long and decorated like the court, or the cake replicates the stadium with fans in the stands."

Circus

A light-hearted circus or carnival theme is so sweet and easy to pull off. Simply use a vibrant color palette and amplify it with balloons, Vizcaino suggests. Tap a friend (or a professional) to show off their juggling skills, and use an animal-themed backdrop for photos.

Music

If you're big into music, use a favorite genre, band, or artist as the theme for the shower.

"Music can inspire fun entertainment and jam sessions, or carry over into a karaoke night," Vizcaino says. "Guests could be encouraged to write lullabies or showcase the food served on album-inspired trays."

Travel

For a couple of travel enthusiasts, consider a coed baby shower with a passport theme that highlights the places you love to visit.

"Whether it's in the ambiance, decor, or the menu selections, the beauty of this theme is it has permission to take the guest on a journey and not stay in one place," Vizcaino says. For example, you could feature an Italian-inspired charcuterie buffet and pâtisserie-inspired dessert table as a nod to France.

Books

You'll soon be reading a lot of story books to your baby, so a "once upon a time" theme is quite fitting. Whether it's traditional fairy tales like Cinderella and Robin Hood or classic baby books such as Goodnight Moon and The Very Hungry Caterpillar , featuring a variety of tales can make a baby shower more gender-neutral, notes Keith Willard, owner of Keith Willard Events .

What are some sweet coed baby shower invitation ideas?

Coed baby shower invitation ideas should focus on the wording most of all, since you want your guests to know that the invite is intended for everyone.

"Overall, using inclusive language and addressing both parents-to-be can help ensure that all guests feel welcome and included in a coed baby shower," Vizcaino says. She suggests using language such as:

Shower the Parents-to-Be

Join Us for a Couples' Shower in Honor of Baby (Last Name)

All Are Invited to Honor Baby (Last Name)

Common baby shower etiquette dictates sending out invitations is six to eight weeks before the event date. That gives guests enough time not only to respond, but also to make any necessary travel arrangements.

Looking for more baby shower inspo? The What to Expect app has tons of ideas for cute themes, sweet invitations, party games, and more.

Which coed baby shower games should we play?

As for which coed baby shower games to play, your best bet is to pick ones that’ll help break the ice and get guests interacting. Here, planners share some of their most beloved baby shower games for coed parties.

Who will they look like

This fun guessing game involves deciding who the baby will look like. Of course, it's entirely non-scientific, but that makes it even more fun.

"Print one photo of each of the parents, adhere them to a magnetic sheet, cut them into different pieces (eyes, nose, lips, hairline, etc.) and place them on a magnetic board, like a puzzle," Roman says. "The results always get lots of laughs."

Diaper derby

This game isn't only fun, but it's also educational since it involves the guests competing with each other to see who can change a diaper the fastest. A baby doll can work well as a stand-in — and get the expecting parents up to speed on some of the dirty work they'll be doing very soon.

Baby bingo

This classic game of bingo has a baby twist to it. "Purchase or make a bingo card template, and customize it with baby terms like diaper, pacifier, rattle and bassinet," Roman says. "Have the guests mark off the words as they are mentioned through the shower, in conversation or otherwise." The first person to get a line or a full card wins.

"This game encourages people to mingle and talk to each other," Roman adds.

What's your vote

It doesn’t have to be near Election Day to play this fun coed baby shower game, which serves as a way to remind guests of the due date (so they can stop asking the mom-to-be!). Have attendees predict the birth date of the baby by writing on a physical calendar or entering their guesses via an online survey. If you do the latter, "the guests can be notified of the birth along with a photo and congratulations to the [closest] guess," Vizcaino says.

Of course, no game is complete without a fun prize. For a coed baby shower, consider handing out gift cards, self-care items, sweet treats, or even to-go thermoses to the lucky winners.

Syrie Roman, Owner, Social Maven . Jacqueline Vizcaino, Owner, Tinted Events Design and Planning . Keith Willard, Owner, Keith Willard Events .

Updates history

March 9, 2026

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Rebekah Wahlberg

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Baby Shower? Smart Etiquette Tips to Make The Day Run Smoother Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan the Ultimate Gender Reveal Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Gender Reveal Themes to Inspire Your Special Celebration Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

20 Fun Baby Shower Games Your Guests Will Love to Play Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw a Fall-Themed Baby Shower for Your Little Pumpkin Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a Virtual Baby Shower Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw a Winter Wonderland Baby Shower for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

5 Printable Baby Shower Games That Will Keep Your Guests Entertained Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

What Are Some Fun Party Games for a Gender Reveal? Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

When Is the Best Time to Have Your Baby Shower? Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Pregnancy Announcement Templates to Personalize Your Big News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window