Colds in Babies: Causes, Symptoms, Tips and Remedies

parent holding sleeping baby, how to treat baby's cold

Here's why babies are extra vulnerable to the common cold — and what you can do about it.

There's a reason colds are called "common": Many healthy children have eight to 10 colds and other viral infections in the first two years of life, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsChildren and ColdsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsChildren and ColdsSee All Sources

That's because their developing immune systems aren't good at staving off infections yet — not because you didn't dress her warmly enough or left the window open a crack overnight. And sometimes those colds will overlap as your baby catches one just as another is ending.

If you're a new parent, the constant flow of symptoms (literally!) can be distressing and exhausting, so check in with your pediatrician if you're worried about your little one, especially if she is under 3 months old.

Here's what you need to know about the common cold in babies, from causes to symptoms, duration and treatments.

Baby cold symptoms

Fortunately, most cold symptoms in babies are mild and include:

Runny nose (watery at first, then opaque to sometimes yellow or green-tinted)

Nasal congestion or stuffiness

Sneezing

Mild fever (sometimes)

Dry cough (which may get worse at night and toward the end of a cold)

Sore or scratchy throat (not so easy to spot in a baby)

Fatigue or crankiness

Appetite loss

Cold symptoms can be similar to those of COVID-19 in babies and young children, so check in with your pediatrician to see if your child should get tested for COVID .

What causes colds in babies?

Colds, otherwise known as upper-respiratory infections, are caused by viruses. These viruses spread through skin-to-skin contact, droplet transmission from coughs or sneezes, and sometimes contact with an object that's been contaminated.

That means touching, kissing and cuddling — all the delightful things that go on when an adorable baby is around — can spread the cold virus. And there are more than 200 viruses known to cause colds, which explains why they're so common.

Babies and small children have more than their share of run-ins with runny noses because they haven't yet had the chance to build up immunities against the many different cold viruses in circulation.

But here's a reason to take comfort. Though these frequent colds are rough on your baby's nose, they won't do any harm — in fact, they can actually do your baby some good. Frequent bouts with bugs can boost your little one's immune system, making her less susceptible to infection later in life.

How long does a cold last in babies?

The common cold usually lasts seven to 10 days, though a residual cough may linger for longer — sometimes up to three weeks. Symptom-wise, day three is often the worst.

The incubation period for a cold is between one and four days. It's typically most contagious a day or two before symptoms appear but can be passed along when the cold is already under way. Once the really runny nose dries up, it's less contagious.

Tips for treating baby's cold

Check with your pediatrician before giving your sniffling baby any medication, as babies should never take adult cold medicine. Most other cough and cold medications for children aren't safe or effective either. To help relieve baby's cold symptoms, especially during the germ-packed winter months, try these tips:

Monitor mucus. A stuffed-up nose can be uncomfortable for your baby, making it difficult for her to breathe and for both of you to sleep. Use a suction bulb to gently extract the excess mucus. Over-the-counter saline nose drops can soften mucus before suctioning. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCoughs and Colds: Medicines or Home Remedies?See All Sources [2]

Heighten humidity. Use a cool-mist humidifier in your baby's room. Moist air can reduce congestion and make breathing easier.

Apply moisturizing ointment. A light dab of petroleum jelly under your baby's nose can help prevent red skin, chapping and soreness.

Fight back with fluids. Increase your baby's fluid intake to replace those lost through fever or runny nose — especially warm ones. Chicken broth, once the ingredients have been introduced, is particularly effective; it can be served strained and slightly warmed in a sippy cup . Feed your baby plenty of nutritious foods, too, including those rich in vitamin C. If your baby isn't eating solids yet, keep up breastfeeding or bottles.

Know which medications are safe to give and when. Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is safe for babies ages 2 months and older, while ibuprofen is safe for babies 6 months and up. Always check with your doctor first before giving your child medications.

How to prevent baby's colds

Unfortunately there's no way to entirely protect your little one from cold viruses. The number one way to prevent a cold is to wash your baby's (and everyone else's) hands regularly, especially after diaper changes.

Can't get to a sink? Hand-sanitizing gels or wipes will do in a pinch, though they're not as effective as soap and water in washing away germs.

Other helpful strategies: Try to keep your baby away from anyone with a cold when possible. Use a disinfectant solution to clean surfaces that may be contaminated with cold germs. While breastfeeding can reduce susceptibility to colds, it's not foolproof.

When to call the doctor for baby cold symptoms

For most common colds, there's no need to visit the pediatrician unless you're concerned it might be something more serious like the flu or COVID-19. But if your baby is under 3 months old or if it's your baby's first cold, it's a good idea to get in touch with your practitioner, if only to put your mind at ease.

Otherwise, watch for any of these signs that your little one's illness is getting worse and be sure to call the doctor if your baby:

Is experiencing her very first cold

Seems to be especially out of sorts (very restless during the night or has pain that causes night waking, which can be hard to detect in very small babies)

Is lethargic

Refuses to eat or drink

Develops a fever of 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit or higher on a rectal thermometer and she's under 3 months old Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsWhen to Call the Pediatrician: FeverSee All Sources [3]

Has a fever of over 100.4 F and she's 3 months or older (the normal threshold is between 101.5 and 102 degrees F for babies this age, but a temp higher than 100.4 degrees F may require a COVID-19 test)

Has a cough that's getting worse or continues during the day after other symptoms are gone

Breathes significantly more rapidly than usual

Has greenish-yellow, foul-smelling nasal discharge from the nose or from coughing

Has swollen glands in the neck

Pulls on her ear

Has symptoms lasting longer than 10 days

If your baby seems to have a continuous cold, a chronically runny nose or very long-lasting or frequent colds (especially if accompanied by under-eye circles), talk to the doctor about whether allergies might be responsible (though they're rare in babies).

Baby summer colds

Contrary to popular belief, colds aren't actually caused by being cold, going bare-headed in the winter, getting wet feet or being exposed to drafts (though being chilled can lower a baby's immunity).

In the winter, colds are caused by rhinoviruses, the most common viral infection in humans. Rhinoviruses tend to survive better in cold weather (September to May) — hence the reason you're more likely to get sick in the winter.

That said, summer colds are still possible. A different set of viruses causes summer colds: non-polio enteroviruses, which can infect the tissues throughout the body, most commonly those in your eyes, nose and digestive system. Enteroviruses make 10 to 15 million people sick every year, usually between June and October.

While most run their course like the common cold, check in with your pediatrician right away if your baby's symptoms last longer than seven to 10 days, are accompanied by a fever, or if your baby vomits, develops a rash or is having trouble breathing.

The most common symptoms of enteroviruses include:

Fever of 101 to 104 degrees F

Sore throat

Headache

Muscle aches

Nausea

Vomiting

Symptoms usually clear up within a few days to a week. Prevent and treat summer colds in babies the same way you would with a winter cold — making sure to wash your baby's hands frequently and check in with the doctor if you see any of the above-mentioned warning signs.