Conception Date Calculator: When Did You Conceive?

Wondering when your baby was conceived? Use our Conception Date Calculator to find out the most likely date you conceived your little bundle. You may even be able to use your conception date to see how far along you are and when baby is likely to arrive.

What is a conception date?

Your conception date is the date your baby was conceived (sounds simple enough, right?).

And guess what? You can use your conception date to find out your baby’s due date . Just add 266 days (aka 38 weeks or 9 ½ months) to your conception date to get the answer in the form of your estimated due date.

But contrary to popular opinion, your conception date is not necessarily the same as the day you had sex when you were trying to get pregnant.

If you're a little confused about how that could be the case, read on to find out more about your conception date when planning for your cute new addition.

How do you calculate your conception date?

You might want to grab your calendar, calculator and notepad if you don't already have them handy for this ... You can figure out your conception date by adding a typical range of 11 to 21 days to the first day of your last period. The day you conceive your baby will depend on how often you get your period.

How accurate is your conception date?

Your conception date isn’t always that accurate and can be difficult to pinpoint. Sperm can be viable for several days and an egg can be fertilized up to 24 hours after ovulation , so it’s hard to zero in on exactly when conception occurred.

That’s why doctors are more likely to use the first day of your last menstrual period (LMP) rather than your conception date to figure out your due date.

Not sure how far along you are? The What to Expect app helps you track your pregnancy, stay on top of each week, and get expert tips every step of the way.

Is your conception date the same as your ovulation date?

No, your conception date isn’t the same as your ovulation date.

Your ovulation date is the day or days that you ovulate, which usually happens about two weeks (or 14 days) after the first day of your cycle, lasting for a few days. Your conception date is the day when the egg is fertilized by sperm.

Can you predict your conception date?

Yes! You can predict your conception date by calculating when you’ll be ovulating and what your fertile window will be.

Remember that ovulation generally occurs about two weeks after the first day of your period (though everyone is different), but the LH surge that triggers ovulation may last for one to two days.

Your fertile window usually starts a couple of days before you ovulate and lasts until about a day after ovulation.

You can predict your conception date as being one of those days in your fertile window. Count seven to 10 days from the last day of your period to pinpoint the stretch of time when you’re most fertile and are likely to conceive.

It's also worth noting that this tool isn't meant to replace anything your doctor or midwife tells you. Always have your pregnancy doctor or other practitioner confirm your pregnancy and due date as soon as possible. In the meantime, have fun with this Conception Date Calculator and our other pregnancy tools, and let the planning and the countdown begin!

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Methods for Estimating the Due Date , reaffirmed 2022. Cleveland Clinic, Due Date Calculator , May 2024. Stanford Children's Health, Calculating a Due Date , 2024. John's Hopkins Medicine, Calculating a Due Date, 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Pregnancy Due Date Calculator , September 2024. WhatToExpect.com, IVF Due Date Calculator , June 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Pregnancy Weeks 1 and 2 , September 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Preparing for a Baby Before Conception , September 2022. Aaron K. Styer, M.D. , a Reproductive Endocrinologist and Founding Partner and Co-Medical Director of the Colorado Center for Reproductive Medicine (CCRM) Boston , and a Member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. What to Expect Before You're Expecting , 2nd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Pregnancy Week-by-Week , 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Ovulation Symptoms: 10 Signs of Ovulation to Know , October 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Why Your Doctor May Change Your Due Date , January 2023. WhatToExpect.com, How Many Weeks, Months and Trimesters in a Pregnancy? , May 2022. WhatToExpect.com, In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) , March 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Your Guide to Prenatal Appointments , August 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Fertility , 2024. WhatToExpect.com, What Is Fertilization? , July 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Infertility , 2024.

Trending On What to Expect

Signs of Labor

Pregnancy Calculator

⚠️ You can't see this cool content because you have ad block enabled. Please whitelist our site to get all the best deals and offers from our partners.

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S.

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S.

Braxton Hicks Contractions and False Labor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window