Confession: I Tasted My Breast Milk — And Guess What? Nearly 2 in 5 Moms Do, Too

drops of milk on a pale blue background

It's sweet and creamy — and safe to sip, if you're curious.

Admit it: If you've ever lactated, you're at least a little bit curious what your breast milk tastes like. It's kind of like when you cook a meal for someone else, and you just want a little bite to make sure it came out well before you serve it.

I'm a lifelong taste-the-batter kind of gal, so it's really no surprise I sampled my own milk when I was breastfeeding. And other What to Expect Community members have copped to the same: "I tasted my milk out of curiosity, and it tasted sweet," one member posted .

If you're new to parenting, the thought might turn your tummy, but it's not that unusual. Just about 2 out of 5 breastfeeding moms have sampled their own wares, a new What to Expect survey finds.

Key takeaways

Two in 5 breastfeeding moms say they've tried their own milk; 3 in 10 say their partner has tried it.

Breast milk tastes similar to cow's milk, and it's safe to try in most cases.

Your own diet and how you store pumped milk can affect its taste.

Many moms try their own breast milk

What to Expect surveyed 390 moms, and among those who breastfed their baby, about 3 in 5 (62%) said someone other than their baby tried their breast milk. Approximately 2 in 5 (41%) of breastfeeding moms have tasted their own milk, and about 3 in 10 (32%) say their partner sampled it.

If you're a kindred spirit or even just curious about tasting your own liquid gold, you might wonder what it's supposed to taste like and whether there are any risks to taking a sip here and there. Here are answers to all of your lingering questions.

What does breast milk taste like?

Breast milk likely tastes a little bit different from person to person because everyone is unique, but in general: "Breast milk usually tastes slightly sweet and creamy," says Andrea Braden , M.D., I.B.C.L.C., an OB/GYN, breastfeeding medicine specialist and medical director of the Atlanta Birth Center.

The sweetness comes from lactose, a sugar found naturally in the milk of mammals, while the creaminess comes from fat. Trusted SourceCleveland Clinic How Lactose Fits Into (and Complicates) Your DietSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCleveland Clinic How Lactose Fits Into (and Complicates) Your DietSee All Sources

The taste tends to evolve somewhat as the baby grows, though. "It’s generally richer and creamier in the early months when fat content is highest to support rapid growth," Dr. Braden says. "As feeding patterns change and babies start eating solid foods , milk can become slightly thinner and less sweet, although it remains highly nutritious."

The relatively high levels of lactose in human breast milk make it taste similar to cow's milk , says Melissa Kotlen , I.B.C.L.C., a New York City-based lactation consultant. It has the consistency of skim milk but the sweetness and creaminess of whole milk, she explains.

The time of day can affect the taste of your breast milk, too. "Supply is highest first thing in the morning, and the milk is high in lactose then," so it's sweeter, Kotlen says. As the day wears on, it gets fattier, creamier and a little less sweet.

As for how breast milk compares to formula? The taste of formula can differ from brand to brand, but breast milk is generally sweeter and has more of an umami flavor influenced by the mom's diet (more on that in a minute). Trusted SourceThe American Journal of Clinical Nutrition Early Milk Feeding Influences Taste Acceptance and Liking During InfancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceThe American Journal of Clinical Nutrition Early Milk Feeding Influences Taste Acceptance and Liking During InfancySee All Sources

Is it okay to taste breast milk?

In most cases, it's perfectly fine for someone other than the baby to try a sip of breast milk.

"For healthy adults, tasting breast milk – including their own – is generally safe," Dr. Braden says. "However, breast milk can carry infections like HIV , HTLV, Ebola or herpes (if there’s an active sore on the breast), and it may contain harmful substances during chemotherapy, radioactive treatment or certain drug use."

When it comes to HIV, if the mom is on antiretroviral therapy and her viral load is low, there's very little chance of transmission through breast milk, Kotlen clarifies.

And while herpes can be transmitted through active sores on the breast, the virus isn't passed on through the breast milk itself. The same goes for syphilis, Kotlen says. "Avoid sharing breast milk until any sores have healed," she advises — with your baby and anyone else.

If you're unsure whether a medication is safe during breastfeeding , ask a pediatrician or a certified lactation consultant for advice.

What can change the flavor of breast milk?

Quite a few things, it turns out.

"Like any small-batch, gourmet creation, breastmilk’s flavor can shift based on diet, storage methods and even the 'season' of the body," Dr. Braden says.

Mom's diet

Certain foods in mom's diet can make breast milk taste more bitter, Dr. Braden says. "Foods like broccoli, cabbage, Brussels sprouts, onions, garlic and strong spices (like curry or cumin) are often the culprits," she says. "They don’t always cause a noticeable change, but in some people, the flavors can come through more distinctly."

Other foods that can change the taste of breast milk include asparagus, fish and heavily spiced dishes, she adds.

Don't worry, though. Flavor changes from food aren't harmful to your baby in any way, and it's actually good for them to get different flavors through your milk.

"In general, we want them tasting a lot through breast milk," Kotlen says. "If mom eats a varied diet while breastfeeding, kids tend to be less picky eaters because they've already tasted so much through her milk."

Research backs this up: A review in Current Biology notes that babies start learning about different food flavors in the womb and while breastfeeding, and these early experiences set the foundation for food preferences throughout their life. Trusted SourceCurrent BiologyEarly Influences on the Development of Food PreferencesSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCurrent BiologyEarly Influences on the Development of Food PreferencesSee All Sources

Storage

Flavor shifts can also occur in pumped milk that's stored in the fridge or freezer due to a naturally occurring enzyme in breast milk called lipase, which breaks down the milk's fat over time. This can cause a soapy or metallic taste, Dr. Braden says, especially if the mom's milk is naturally higher in lipase, which would break down the fat more quickly.

This kind of flavor change is very normal, Kotlen says, and the milk is totally fine to feed to your baby. However, some babies may not like the taste of high-lipase breast milk , in which case you can try serving it room temperature or chilled (instead of warmed), mixing it with fresh milk, or scalding the milk before serving it (that is, heating it to about 180 degrees Fahrenheit, then letting it cool).

If stored milk smells or tastes very bitter or rancid, though, it's likely spoiled and you should pour it out, Kotlen says.

Pregnancy

Breast milk tends to taste saltier in the first few days after a baby is born, when it's known as colostrum, Dr. Braden says. Colostrum is thicker and more yellow than mature breast milk; it also has more protein and fewer carbohydrates and fat. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthAnatomy, ColostrumSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthAnatomy, ColostrumSee All Sources

Breast milk can turn salty again if you get pregnant while breastfeeding . This change usually happens around the five-month mark, Kotlen says.

"What I've found is it's maybe a 50/50 split between toddlers who don't care about this change in taste and those that wean themselves because of it," Kotlen says. "It really depends how picky the child is."

Methodology

The Everyday Health Group Pregnancy & Parenting Talk to Moms Monthly Poll was conducted by Everyday Health Group – Pregnancy and Parenting between March 28 and April 2, 2025. We surveyed 390 women ages 18 to 44 who are currently pregnant or have at least one child up to 5 years old.