Constipated While Expecting? Here’s What You Need to Know About Milk of Magnesia

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

milk of magnesia during pregnancy, two gold spoons with white capsules on one and powder on the other

Some over-the-counter laxatives are safe to use during pregnancy, and others you should avoid. Here’s what you should know about taking milk of magnesia.

Ah, pregnancy — so many symptoms, so few pregnancy-approved medications. The good news is when it comes to easing constipation , there are some meds that are generally considered safe to use when you’re expecting — including milk of magnesia, a popular over-the-counter laxative.

But before you run out and buy a bottle, here’s what you should keep in mind about taking milk of magnesia during pregnancy.

Key Takeaways

Ask the doc before taking milk of magnesia. This medication is generally safe in pregnancy, but always check first before taking anything, whether OTC or Rx.

It’s a quick fix only. Milk of magnesia works like a charm in a matter of hours. But don’t use it longer than a week as an electrolyte imbalance is possible.

Try fiber, water, and exercise first. Before grabbing a laxative, strive to get more fiber (fruits, veggies, whole grains), drink plenty of H2O, and keep moving.

What is milk of magnesia?

Milk of magnesia — aka magnesium hydroxide — is a laxative that’s used to treat the occasional bout of constipation.

The medication works by drawing water into the bowel, which helps soften and pass the stool, usually within 30 minutes to six hours after taking the recommended dose.

While you can buy milk of magnesia over-the-counter in liquid or tablet form, you should always talk to your doctor before trying it, since not all OTC meds are safe for pregnant women .

Feeling backed up is no picnic! The What to Expect app has expert-backed answers and a community of supportive mamas ready with smart tips and advice.

What is milk of magnesia used for during pregnancy?

Milk of magnesia is often used to treat short-term constipation, which is a fairly typical pregnancy symptom. Blame pregnancy hormones like progesterone, which can slow down the passage of food and cause a build-up of waste in the GI tract. Iron supplements are another cause of constipation in pregnant women.

In some cases, magnesium hydroxide can be paired with other medications and used as an antacid, which helps relieve symptoms like heartburn and indigestion.

Is taking milk of magnesia during pregnancy safe?

In general, milk of magnesia is considered safe to use during pregnancy, but you should always double-check with your doctor before taking it.

It’s possible for the laxative to interact with medications you’re currently using. It can also cause complications for people on magnesium-restricted diets and for those who have kidney disease.

Be sure to take milk of magnesia exactly as directed. Using too much of a laxative can cause side effects like abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea, or, in very rare cases, coma or death.

And no one — pregnant or not — should take milk of magnesia for longer than a week unless they’ve been told to do so by their doctor.

What dosage of milk of magnesia is safe during pregnancy?

Milk of magnesia is usually taken as a single dose at bedtime, though it can also be split into two or more doses and taken throughout the day.

Some brands recommend taking 1 to 4 tablespoons of the liquid version of milk of magnesia along with an 8-ounce glass of water per dose.

Regardless of how you divvy up the doses, don’t take more than the maximum daily amount in any 24 hour-period.

And remember, if you’re pregnant, talk to your doctor before taking any dose, and follow your provider's instructions as well as the directions on the label.

What constipation remedies are okay to use during pregnancy?

There’s no such thing as a medication that’s 100% safe for pregnant women — which is why it’s a good idea to try to treat your constipation by changing up your diet or exercise routine first.

If that doesn't work, however, there are a few other laxatives available on the market that are generally considered safe to use during pregnancy. Talk to your practitioner before taking any of them.

In the meantime, here’s what you can do to try to regulate your bowel movements while you’re pregnant:

Fill up on fiber. Adding roughage to your diet in the form of whole grains, fruit, vegetables, and legumes can help bulk up your stool and move it faster through your intestines. Aim for at least 25 grams of fiber a day. Be sure to consume both soluble and insoluble sources of fiber, though, as too much insoluble fiber (especially on an empty stomach) may cause tummy trouble in some people. What to Expect Community parent ddavidenko fixed her constipation the old-fashioned way: “Prunes! I’ve been eating five or six daily in the morning and haven’t had any issues since early pregnancy.”

Drink up. Upping your fluid intake can help usher food through the digestive tract and soften your stools, making them easier to pass. Try to drink 10 8-ounce glasses of fluids a day.

Get up and go. Exercise can increase the muscle activity in your intestine, which can then help move waste out of your GI tract.

Talk to your doctor about taking a bulk-forming laxative. Fiber supplements like Citrucel and Metamucil work by absorbing water, prompting your body to naturally pass stool.

Ask your provider if you should take a stool softener. Meds like Colace and Surfak work by adding moisture to the stool, making the waste easier to pass.

Avoid stimulant laxatives like Dulcolax or Senokot, which trigger the intestinal muscles to contract and can be harmful to pregnant women.

Side effects of milk of magnesia during pregnancy

The side effects of milk of magnesia during pregnancy can be the same as those for the non-pregnant population. These can include:

Bloating

Cramping

Nausea

Gas

Increased thirst

Loose or watery stools

Diarrhea or more frequent bowel movements

Some of the more serious side effects that warrant a call to your doctor right away include:

If you see blood in your stool

If you still haven't had a bowel movement six hours after taking the medication

Benefits of taking milk of magnesia during pregnancy

Milk of magnesia is known to ease constipation — an all-too-familiar symptom that can crop up starting in the second and third month of pregnancy. And unlike the stimulant laxatives, saline laxatives like milk of magnesia are generally considered safe to use during pregnancy.

Here are some of the benefits of milk of magnesia during pregnancy:

Relieves constipation, usually within 30 minutes to six hours

Eases heartburn symptoms when used as an antacid

Soothes an upset stomach when used as an antacid

Risks of taking milk of magnesia during pregnancy

It’s not known for certain whether taking milk of magnesia can harm a developing fetus — after all, pregnant women don’t make ideal research subjects — but doctors generally believe that the medication is safe to use during pregnancy. Just make sure you get the green light from your health care provider before trying it.

While it’s possible for milk of magnesia to trigger side effects like bloating and diarrhea, there are a few more serious issues that could arise, including:

Electrolyte imbalances when taken for long periods of time

Heart rhythm disturbances in people who have kidney problems

Trouble controlling your bowel movements, including an inability to go to the bathroom without using laxatives

When to call the doctor

If you’re experiencing loose, watery stools that don’t go away, blood in your stools, or an inability to have a bowel movement six or more hours after taking the medication, call your doctor right away.

And remember: When you’re pregnant, there’s really no such thing as being too careful. If any unusual symptoms appear after using the laxative, make the call.