Constipation is Super Common in Pregnancy. Here's How to Get Things Moving

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

constipation during pregnancy

Here's what causes constipation during pregnancy — and what to do when your bowels just can't seem to get a move on.

Constipation can be an uncomfortable (and all-too-common) pregnancy symptom, but there are plenty of ways to find relief. Filling up on fiber-rich foods, staying well hydrated, and keeping active can help get things moving again. If those strategies don't do the trick, your health care practitioner can recommend a pregnancy-safe stool softener or laxative.

Here's why pregnancy constipation happens and what you can do if you're feeling stopped up.

Key Takeaways

Constipation is common throughout pregnancy. It can begin as early as the second or third month, when progesterone rises, and may worsen as your uterus grows and puts pressure on your digestive system.

Hormones and physical changes slow digestion. Progesterone relaxes intestinal muscles, giving your body more time to absorb nutrients. At the same time, your expanding uterus is claiming more intestinal territory. The result can be sluggish bowel movements and that bloated, backed-up feeling.

Simple daily habits can make a big difference. Eating fiber-rich foods, drinking plenty of fluids, staying active, and not delaying bathroom trips can help keep things moving. And your practitioner can guide you on safe supplements or medications if needed.

When does constipation generally start during pregnancy?

Some women report feeling constipated from the get-go, but constipation tends to start around the second or third month of pregnancy, when your progesterone levels rise. It may get worse as pregnancy progresses and your growing uterus puts more pressure on your digestive tract.

What causes constipation during pregnancy?

As with many pregnancy symptoms, pregnancy hormones are largely to blame. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsProblems of the Digestive SystemSee All Sources [1] Progesterone relaxes the muscles in your bowels, which slows digestion and allows food to stay in your system longer. The upside is that your body has more time to absorb nutrients for your baby. The downside is things can back up, leading to that all-too-familiar clogged feeling.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsProblems of the Digestive SystemSee All Sources

Your expanding uterus also takes up space normally occupied by your intestines, which can further slow things down.

"I never thought I would miss pooping so much!" says What to Expect Community member gamjayeobo.

What can I do about constipation when I'm pregnant?

You don't have to resign yourself to months of discomfort. These strategies can help get things moving (and may also help prevent hemorrhoids , a common side effect of constipation):

Fight back with fiber

Fiber-rich foods help your body eliminate waste. Aim for 25 to 35 grams each day by filling your plate with whole grains, legumes (like chickpeas and edamame), fruits and vegetables (especially with the skin on), and dried fruit.

Leafy greens and kiwi are especially helpful — kiwi, in particular, has a natural laxative effect.

Try to limit refined grains like white bread, white rice, and refined cereals, which can slow things down. When you buy pasta, choose the whole grain variety.

"Sounds weird but ever since I started having spinach in my eggs for breakfast, I go regularly," says Community member AnonymouslyExcited.

"My go-to that works every time is oatmeal with chia seeds and ground flax seeds," says Community member GeminiMah. "You can sweeten it up with maple syrup and fresh fruit."

If you're still struggling, ask your health care practitioner about adding bran or a fiber supplement. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicIs It Safe to Take Stool Softeners to Treat Constipation?See All Sources [2] Keep in mind that these fiber powerhouses can carry away important nutrients before they can be absorbed, so start slowly and increase only as needed. And always check with your practitioner before adding supplements.

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicIs It Safe to Take Stool Softeners to Treat Constipation?See All Sources

Also be prepared for some flatulence, a temporary side effect of upping the fiber in your diet. You may have to try different types of fiber supplements before finding the right one for you.

Drink up

Aim for eight to 10 glasses of fluids a day, including water, vegetable or fruit juice, and broth. Staying hydrated helps soften stool, making it easier to pass.

"Ladies, drink apple juice," advises Community mom JanuarytoJanuary. "I'm going once or twice a day now, and it helps so much with bloating."

You can also turn to warm liquids, including that health spa staple, hot water and lemon, to help stimulate peristalsis (the intestinal contractions that help you go). For tougher cases, prune juice is a gentle, natural laxative.

"I have horrible constipation with all my pregnancies," says Community mom Nettie5. "I drink prune juice every few days and that helps."

Eat smaller meals

Large meals can overtax your digestive system and contribute to constipation. Try eating five or six mini-meals throughout the day rather than three large ones.

Go when you gotta go

Ignoring the urge to go can worsen constipation , so head to the bathroom when your body tells you to.

"Get a footstool to set in front of your toilet while you're having a bowel movement," recommends Community member PamperYourPooch. "It helps!"

Add probiotics

Probiotics (like acidophilus found in yogurt with active cultures) can help support healthy digestion. You can also ask your practitioner to recommend a good probiotic supplement in capsule, chewable, or powder form.

Stay active

Regular exercise during pregnancy can help keep your digestive system moving. Trusted SourceCanadian Family PhysicianTreating Constipation During PregnancySee All Sources [3] Even just a 10-minute walk can make a difference.

Trusted SourceCanadian Family PhysicianTreating Constipation During PregnancySee All Sources

"I'm only regular if I get a walk in," says Community mom khollinr. "I don't go on days I don't walk."

And don't forget about exercising your pelvic floor . Straining when you’re constipated (along with simply being pregnant and giving birth!) can cause your pelvic floor muscles to weaken, but regular Kegels can help keep those muscles stronger.

Talk with your practitioner

Some common pregnancy supplements — like iron or calcium — can make constipation worse. So check with your practitioner about alternatives (such as slow-release iron supplements) or adjustments in dosages.

Also ask your practitioner about taking a magnesium supplement to help fight constipation. Taking it at night may relax achy muscles and help you sleep better, too.

"I take the recommended amount of magnesium to keep me from getting constipated from the prenatal vitamin," says Community member maddirenee8.

And let your practitioner know if at-home measures aren’t getting things moving. They can recommend an over-the-counter stool softener or laxative, such as milk of magnesia , that's safe during pregnancy. (Don't take any without your practitioner's go ahead.)

Tracking your symptoms in the What to Expect app can help you and your practitioner come up with a plan.

Can I prevent constipation during pregnancy?

Healthy habits go a long way. Eating plenty of fiber, drinking enough water, and staying active can help prevent pregnancy-related digestive slowdowns.

When will pregnancy constipation end?

For some women, constipation lasts throughout pregnancy as progesterone levels remain high. But for many, symptoms improve with diet and lifestyle changes — and there are ways to manage it at every stage.

With a few simple adjustments — and help from your practitioner if needed — you can keep things moving and feel more comfortable throughout your pregnancy.