Could a Peanut Ball Help Speed Up Labor? Benefits, Positions, and Safety Tips

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

peanut ball for labor, laboring mom with midwife using a peanut ball

This birthing ball may help speed up labor and lower your odds of needing a C-section. Here’s what to know about the peanut ball and how to use it.

The answer is yes! There’s actually some evidence that using a peanut ball while laboring might shorten the process and even increase the chances of a vaginal delivery. This rubbery tool offers good support for women with an epidural who are usually laboring while lying down. Ask about a peanut ball at your hospital or birthing center or bring your own with you. A shorter labor FTW!

No matter how you'd like to deliver your baby — at a hospital , at a birthing center, or at home , with or without pain medication — you'll want labor to go as smoothly and quickly as possible. A peanut ball may help.

A relatively new addition to labor and delivery rooms, a peanut ball can help speed up labor and lower the odds of a C-section, according to some research. Trusted SourceThe Journal of Perinatal EducationReducing Length of Labor and Cesarean Surgery Rate Using a Peanut Ball for Women Laboring With an EpiduralSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceThe Journal of Perinatal EducationReducing Length of Labor and Cesarean Surgery Rate Using a Peanut Ball for Women Laboring With an EpiduralSee All Sources

Thinking about using one during your delivery? Here’s what you need to know.

Key Takeaways

Using a peanut ball may help shorten labor and increase the chances of a vaginal delivery, especially for moms with an epidural.

It supports your legs and helps open your pelvis , which can encourage baby to move down the birth canal.

The peanut ball can be used in a variety of positions , often while lying down, making it a helpful option if you need to stay in bed during labor.

What is a peanut ball?

As the name suggests, a peanut ball is a type of inflatable birthing ball shaped like a peanut. While it’s used during labor and delivery like the traditional, rounded birthing ball and can be found in many hospitals and birthing centers , unlike the round ball, the peanut ball is pinched in the middle and used for different reasons.

Want more labor tips? Download the What to Expect app for expert info when it’s go-time plus advice from a supportive community of like-minded mamas.

How is a peanut ball used for labor?

A peanut ball can be used in labor to support a mom's legs, widening the pelvis, and potentially, helping the baby down the birth canal.

Unlike a traditional rounded birthing ball — which you lean on or sit on during labor to ease the pain from contractions — a peanut ball is typically used while a laboring mom is lying down, which can be good for women who’ve had an epidural or otherwise need to stay in bed.

Though your hospital or birthing center could have a supply of these birthing balls on hand, you may want to bring in your own so you're sure to have one handy when you need it. Don’t want to tote a big ball around with you? Try partially inflating the peanut ball at home and filling it up the rest of the way at the hospital.

What to Expect Community parent 25andmommyof2 is working up her next birth plan and has the device on the list. “I’d like to have a pregnancy ball if possible or/and a peanut ball if available.”

What are the best peanut ball labor positions?

There are a number of different peanut ball positions that can be tried to open up the pelvis and help your baby descend through the birth canal. A doula or birth professional can show you the various ways you can use one before you go into labor, or help you get into one of the following positions in the delivery room: Trusted SourceClinical Evaluation & Improvement ChildbearingEffect of Peanut Ball and Position Changes in Women Laboring With an EpiduralSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceClinical Evaluation & Improvement ChildbearingEffect of Peanut Ball and Position Changes in Women Laboring With an EpiduralSee All Sources

Side-lying between knees

Lie on your side on the bed with your legs slightly bent and place the center of the peanut ball between your knees so the legs are externally rotated. This is most appropriate for the first stage of labor , or whenever the baby is higher in the pelvis.

Side-lying between ankles

Lie on your side on the bed with your legs slightly bent and place the center of the peanut ball between your ankles so the knees and upper legs are internally rotated. This is most appropriate for the second (i.e. pushing) stage of labor, or whenever the baby is lower in the pelvis.

Side-lying hug

Lie on your side on the bed and place the peanut ball between your thighs. Next, wrap your hands around the top half of the peanut ball and hug it toward your chest, as if you were doing a squat.

Semi-sitting lunge

Starting from a semi-reclined position, lean back onto a pillow and extend one leg over the top of the peanut ball. The other leg should be bent slightly out at your side rather than straight out in front of you.

Sitting

Place a large peanut ball on the floor and sit on it, with one foot on either side. As you rock on the ball, you can also hold onto the edge of the bed for more support.

Kneeling

Start on all fours, with your hands and knees on the bed. Next, lift one of your knees and place the peanut ball underneath it, so that one hip is slightly elevated. You can rock back and forth or simply rest in this position.

Side-lying with legs bent

Lie on your side on the bed, and place the peanut ball between your knees, making sure your feet aren’t touching. Then, bend your knees back until your legs form a 90-degree angle with your torso. This is particularly helpful during early labor, when the baby is higher in the pelvis.

Can a peanut ball shorten labor?

Yes, though more research is needed. Still, one small study found that using a peanut ball significantly shortened the amount of time spent in labor. This may be because using a peanut ball can help open the pelvis, which could speed up the baby's arrival during the pushing stage.

And some research has also found that using a peanut ball may increase your odds of having a vaginal birth. One study, for example, found that women who used a peanut ball after receiving an epidural were less likely to have a C-section than those who didn’t use one.

Are there any risks associated with using a peanut ball?

Using a peanut ball during labor is rather safe, but there are still some safety tips to keep in mind. Take a look at the following before trying a peanut ball:

Work as a team. You may want to have your birth partner or doula close by if you’re trying some of the more complicated positions like kneeling or sitting.

Factor in symphysis pubis dysfunction (SPD). If you have this condition in which the ligaments of the pelvic bone start to relax, causing stiffness or pain — you may want to steer clear of using a peanut ball between the knees during labor, since external rotation might worsen the symptoms.

Find the sweet spot size-wise. You should also make sure you’re using the correct-sized peanut ball. If you’re using one that’s too small or too large, you may injure yourself trying to maneuver into position.

Know your height for the right ball. If you’re buying your own ball, check the height recommendations from the manufacturer. They typically come in four sizes: 40 centimeters, 50 centimeters, 60 centimeters and 70 centimeters. Many laboring moms can use the 50-centimeter peanut ball, intended for people between 5 feet 3 inches and 5 feet 6 inches.

Nix the peanut ball if there’s any pain. Note that using this device should feel comfortable (or as comfortable as possible when you’re in labor). If you’re having back, hip, joint, or leg pain, talk to your practitioner to see whether you need to readjust it or stop using it all together. Remember, too, that a peanut ball is just one of many labor tools at your disposal that may help bring your baby into the world faster and (at least a little) easier.