Cradle Cap (Seborrheic Dermatitis) in Babies

Updated and medically reviewed to ensure accuracy.

cradle cap on baby

A common flaky skin condition, cradle cap doesn't doom your baby to a lifetime of dandruff. Here’s why it happens, along with how to prevent and treat it.

While cradle cap definitely isn’t cute, happily it’s not permanent either. Also known as seborrheic dermatitis, this skin condition usually begins in the first three months of baby’s life and may linger through the first year (though more often, it runs its flaky course by the time baby is 6 months old).

Fortunately, in most cases, cradle cap won’t bother baby — and there are a few simple steps you can take to prevent and treat it.

What is cradle cap?

cradle cap in babies

Cradle cap, also known as seborrheic dermatitis, is an inflammatory skin condition that appears as scaly skin, which can be red or yellow crusty scales and flakes. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of DermatologySeborrheic DermatitisSee All Sources [1] It usually starts on the scalp and is sometimes seen on the eyebrows, nose, neck, groin, armpits and eyelids.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of DermatologySeborrheic DermatitisSee All Sources

Cradle cap is usually asymptomatic, but can feel itchy. It can get infected, usually in skin folds (like around the groin, neck and armpits), rather than on the scalp. Without proper treatment, some older infants may scratch affected areas, which can lead to redness, bleeding and infection.

What causes cradle cap?

No one knows for sure what causes this harmless skin condition, Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursCradle Cap (Seborrheic Dermatitis) in InfantsSee All Sources [2] which tends to run in families. Some experts speculate that cradle cap occurs because a mom’s pregnancy hormones remain in a baby’s system for some time after birth, causing the sebaceous glands in some infants' scalps to go into overdrive. The excess oil in turn drives overproduction of a type of yeast in the skin known as Malassezia, resulting in flakes and rash.

How to treat cradle cap

Most cases of cradle cap are mild, with greasy surface scales appearing on the scalp. Different techniques and products work for different babies. Here are a few treatments to try with your child: Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCradle CapSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCradle CapSee All Sources

Mineral oil or petroleum jelly. Massage either into your baby’s scalp to loosen the scales. Follow with a thorough shampoo to remove skin flakes and oil. Avoid olive oil.

Brush baby’s scalp. Gently use a soft brush on your baby’s scalp a few times a day, including after shampooing, to loosen up scales. Be sure to wash the brush daily with soap and water to remove skin and oil residue.

Natural shampoos and treatments. A number of mild, non-medicated shampoos are specifically made for baby cradle cap. Use daily until you don’t see scales, then use just twice a week. There are plenty of options, so if one product doesn’t seem to have any effect on your baby after a week or two of use, try another. You can also try a shampoo with zinc or selenium sulfide as active ingredients.

How to prevent cradle cap

Unfortunately, there is no way to prevent cradle cap — though there are steps you can take to lessen the symptoms:

The condition usually worsens when the scalp sweats, so keep your baby's head as cool and dry as possible.

Forgo a hat unless it’s sunny or cold out. Remove it when you’re indoors or in a heated car.

When to call the doctor about your baby's cradle cap

Check with the pediatrician if your baby has a more severe case that won’t respond to any of the above treatments and comes with heavy flaking and/or brownish patches and yellow crustiness. Your baby may benefit from the daily use of an antiseborrheic shampoo that contains selenium sulfide or salicylic acid — look for no-tear formulas. Because these shampoos can irritate a baby’s delicate skin, only use them with your doctor’s recommendation.

Also see your pediatrician if you notice your baby’s scalp is draining fluid or pus or has become very red — it could indicate a bacterial or fungal infection that requires medication.

The seborrheic rash may spread to the face or buttocks. In severe cases, your child’s doctor will likely prescribe a topical cortisone cream or ointment. Make sure to follow all directions for application (more is not always better!).