Plus, here's why you want that dill spear so badly in the first place.

In the words of one mom, the What to Expect Community just had "the most pregnant thread ever" — and it was about (what else?) pickles.

"I desperately want pickles, but all the ones I've bought so far are either too salty or too mushy or weird-flavored," one What to Expect mom wrote , asking for advice. "I had this stupid issue last pregnancy, and someone had a recommendation, and of course I ate the whole container. Now I don't have any idea what kind it was since I didn't 'need' pickles after I gave birth."

She's not alone in her craving or her search. Many individuals become super serious about finding the best possible pickle while pregnant — not too sweet, not too sour, with just the right proportion of crisp. Really, who wants to eat mediocre mushy pickles?

Here's why you simply need pickles during pregnancy and the best ones to buy that'll satisfy your craving.

Why am I craving pickles during pregnancy?

A combination of physiological and psychological factors likely cause food cravings during pregnancy , says Alexandra Paetow , a registered dietitian nutritionist specializing in pregnancy and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

Physiologically, nutrient needs shift and increase during pregnancy. Some people theorize these hankerings can help pregnant moms and their developing babies get the ones they need. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthPickles and Ice Cream! Food Cravings in Pregnancy: Hypotheses, Preliminary Evidence, and Directions for Future ResearchSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthPickles and Ice Cream! Food Cravings in Pregnancy: Hypotheses, Preliminary Evidence, and Directions for Future ResearchSee All Sources

Pickles, for example, contain sodium and chloride (i.e. table salt). These two electrolytes are critical during pregnancy when fluid volume in the body increases, but this doesn't really explain why pickles remain such a popular craving.

"Many foods have a high-salt content, and many people easily meet sodium requirements, so a pickle-specific craving could be linked to other factors such as the flavor, texture, or because it is such a popular association with pregnancy," Paetow explains.

What about pickle juice?

For some expectant moms, it's the pickle juice they crave. Surprisingly, drinking pickle juice may actually have a few health benefits. Naturally fermented pickles and pickle juice (like the kind you find in the refrigerated section of the store) can contain probiotics that benefit healthy gut bacteria.

As is the case with actual pickles, pickle juice contains a lot of sodium, so chase that pickle juice with some additional water.

"Check in with your body, and keep an eye on the concentration (color) of urine to ensure that you aren't getting dehydrated," Paetow advises.

If you have high blood pressure or follow a low-sodium diet, speak to your doctor. Your provider might recommend a lower-sodium pickle option.

Does craving pickles while you're pregnant mean you're having a boy or a girl?

One old wives' tale says a hankering for sour, salty foods during pregnancy means a baby boy is on his way. (Sweet and fruity cravings supposedly point to a baby girl.)

There's no science behind this superstition, however, so you might want to look for some other signs whether you're having a boy or a girl .

The best pickles during pregnancy, according to moms

If you haven't eaten pickles in a while or never felt drawn to pickles before pregnancy, you have so many options to choose from now.

Parents (and parents-to-be) in What to Expect community have a lot to say when it comes to what is definitively the best pickle. While there's no clear winner, nothing is stopping you from picking up several of the recommended brands and having a test test of your own:

"The big jar of Claussen pickle spears you find at Walmart!"

"My favorites are Vlasic because they are very vinegary, crispy and have more dill than garlic."

" Grillo's Pickles all the way"

"I like spicy dill pickles. If you do, try either Wickles Wicked Pickles or Famous Dave's Sweet and Spicy . Sooo good!"

"I got Mt. Olive Kosher Dills recently, and they are so good and crunchy."

"I love the dill pickles at Trader Joe's . They are so good and don't have yellow food coloring."

" Kroger Kosher Dill Halves ! I have them on hand at all times and go through two jars a week!"

"Do you have a Jimmy John's near you? I’ve been getting like one a week to appease the cravings."

"My favorites are the Boar's Head Dill Spears . They're in the produce section."

"I absolutely housed a jar of Suckerpunch Spicy Garlic Pickles last week, and they were amazing."

Whether plan to search out a favorite jar at the store or head to your local sandwich shop, don't forget to stock up on extras. You never know when a pickle craving will strike. As one Community mom shared, "It's 4:30 a.m., and now I want pickles."