How to Create a Night Shift System When You Have a Newborn

creating a night shift system with a newborn

One way parents of newborn babies can get a little more sleep is by taking shifts at night.

Sleep is never easy to come by in those hazy newborn days. But one way parents can get a little more of it is by taking shifts at night.

Read on for different ways families can manage nighttime feedings with a newborn, including sample schedules.

What is a newborn night shift system?

During the newborn days, many couples opt to establish a night shift system where each parent takes turns caring for the baby. Parents alternate baby care duties, such as overnight feeds, diaper changes, burping and getting baby back to bed.

Night shift systems don't necessarily work for every family, including single parents and families where one parent works overnight. But in two-parent households where both partners have a similar schedule, splitting up those late-night duties can help everyone feel more rested, as well as give non-birthing parents more opportunities to bond with baby. The extra sleep that comes with taking shifts can also help parents who are at risk for or are experiencing postpartum depression. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsDepression During & After Pregnancy: You Are Not AloneSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsDepression During & After Pregnancy: You Are Not AloneSee All Sources

But parents aren't the only ones who can take on nighttime duties. You might ask other family members or friends to be on call overnight — a move that can be especially helpful for single parents or families where one parent works at night. Hiring a night nurse can be another option, if it's financially feasible.

Figuring out the right night shift system for your family depends on how you're feeding your baby, and it can take some trial and error. Here are some sample schedules to help you get started, plus tips for making the plan work for everyone.

Sample baby night shift schedules

Just as there's no "right" way to feed your baby, there's no one-size-fits-all nighttime schedule when you have a newborn. Some families breastfeed exclusively ; others supplement with formula or exclusively pump and bottle-feed; others formula-feed from day one. All these feeding methods deliver the nourishment a baby needs to grow and thrive.

Shift times will vary depending on how your baby is fed. (Exclusively breastfeeding moms, for instance, will be up more often than parents who exclusively use formula.) You and your partner's individual needs and preferences will factor in, too.

These schedules will also vary depending on your baby's age and how often she's sleeping and eating at night, as well as other variables (how long it takes her to fall back asleep, for example). Still, the sample schedules below can help provide a jumping-off point to figure out a system that works for your family.

Sample night shift schedule for a formula-feeding family

Formula-feeding offers the most flexibility for families wanting to take nighttime shifts. Since parents can share feeding responsibilities equally, each person gets the ability to snooze for longer stretches. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAmount and Schedule of Formula FeedingsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAmount and Schedule of Formula FeedingsSee All Sources

7:00 P.M.: Parent 1 gives baby a formula bottle

8:00 P.M.: Both parents go to bed

10:00 P.M.: Parent 2 gives baby a formula bottle

11:00 P.M.: Parent 2 goes to bed

1:00 A.M.: Parent 1 gives baby a formula bottle

2:00 A.M.: Parent 1 goes to bed

4:00 A.M.: Parent 2 gives baby a formula bottle

5:00 A.M.: Parent 2 goes to bed

7:00 A.M.: Parent 1 gives baby a formula bottle

(Note: This schedule assumes baby is a formula-fed newborn eating roughly every three to four hours. It also assumes that it takes about an hour to complete each feeding session, though in reality it may take a little more or less time for everyone to get back to sleep.)

Sample night shift schedule for a combo-feeding family

Switching between breast milk and formula bottles, also known as combo feeding, gives breastfeeding mothers some overnight flexibility, since they're not on duty for every feeding. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursBreastfeeding FAQs: Solids and SupplementingSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursBreastfeeding FAQs: Solids and SupplementingSee All Sources

However, sleeping longer stretches could up the odds for feeling engorged , especially if your baby is a newborn and you're still establishing your milk supply . You might opt to wake during each feeding and pump (some mothers find that this is a little faster than nursing, and it lets you go back to sleep immediately after pumping while the other parent handles baby care and cleans the pump parts).

7:00 P.M.: Mom breastfeeds baby

8:00 P.M.: Mom goes to bed

10:00 P.M.: Non-birthing parent gives baby a formula bottle

11:00 P.M.: Non-birthing parent goes to bed

1:00 A.M.: Mom breastfeeds baby

2:00 A.M.: Mom goes to bed

4:00 A.M.: Non-birthing parent gives baby a formula bottle

5:00 A.M.: Non-birthing parent goes to bed

7:00 A.M.: Mom breastfeeds baby

(Note: This schedule assumes baby is a breast- and formula-fed newborn who is eating roughly every two to three hours. However, breastfed babies should be fed on demand, so your little one may want to eat more often during the night. It also assumes that it takes about an hour to complete each feeding session, though in reality it may take a little more or less time for everyone to get back to sleep.)

Sample night shift schedule for an exclusive pumping family

Pumping gives both parents the opportunity to feed baby. But even when the non-birthing parent is the one offering the bottle, mom will likely still need to pump during the night in order to maintain her supply.

7:00 P.M.: Mom gives baby a pumped milk bottle after having pumped earlier

8:00 P.M: Mom goes to bed

10:00 P.M.: Mom pumps (and returns to bed after pumping) while the non-birthing parent gives baby a bottle of previously pumped milk

11:00 P.M.: Non-birthing parent goes to bed

1:00 A.M: Mom wakes up and pumps, then gives bottle to baby

2:00 A.M.: Mom goes to bed

4:00 A.M.: Mom pumps (and returns to bed after pumping) while the non-birthing parent gives baby a bottle of previously pumped milk

5:00 A.M.: Non-birthing parent goes to bed

7:00 A.M.: Mom pumps, then gives bottle to baby

(Note: This schedule assumes the baby is a newborn who is bottle-fed breast milk roughly every two to three hours. However, your little one may want to eat more often than this during the night. It also assumes that it takes about an hour to complete each feeding session, though in reality it may take a little more or less time for everyone to get back to sleep.)

Sample night shift schedule for a breastfeeding family

Moms who are exclusively breastfeeding will need to be up for every feeding during the night. But they can still maximize their sleep time if the non-birthing parent takes on the non-feeding duties like changing, burping and getting baby back to sleep. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBreastfeeding Your BabySee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBreastfeeding Your BabySee All Sources

7:00 P.M.: Mom breastfeeds baby

8:00 P.M.: Mom goes to bed

10:00 P.M.: Mom breastfeeds baby

10:30 P.M.: Mom goes back to bed, non-birthing parent handles diaper changes and burping

11:00 P.M.: Non-birthing parent goes to bed

1:00 A.M.: Mom breastfeeds baby

1:30 A.M.: Mom goes back to bed, non-birthing parent handles diaper changes and burping

2:00 A.M.: Non-birthing parent goes to bed

4:00 A.M.: Mom breastfeeds baby

4:30 A.M.: Mom goes back to bed, non-birthing parent handles diaper changes and burping

5:00 A.M.: Non-birthing parent goes back to bed

7:00 A.M.: Mom breastfeeds baby

(Note: This schedule assumes baby is a breastfed newborn who is eating roughly every two to three hours. However, breastfed babies should be fed on demand, so your little one may want to eat more often than this during the night. It also assumes that it takes about an hour to complete each feeding session, though in reality it may take a little more or less time for everyone to get back to sleep.)

Tips for navigating a night shift schedule

Taking shifts can take some getting used to. These tips can set the stage for success and help you and your partner log more shuteye.

Set the schedule ahead of time. Talk about who will take which shift so you know who will be on duty when. That way there's no debating whose turn it is to tackle the diaper change at 3:00 A.M.

But allow for some flexibility. See your plan as a loose set of guidelines rather than a strict schedule. Newborns don't adhere to timelines, so there will be nights when you need to veer off script.

Plan to go to bed as soon as the baby does. Especially for breastfeeding moms, you'll max out your snooze time by turning off the lights ASAP after baby eats. If you're having trouble nodding off, make sure you're sticking with good sleep habits like not scrolling through your phone right before bed and avoiding late-afternoon caffeine.

Consider sleeping in different rooms. The off-duty parent will get the most restful sleep if they can snooze somewhere quiet.

Setting up a night shift schedule can make the best of a bleary-eyed situation. By working together, you and your partner can tackle the late nights (and wee hours) so you both feel a little more rested during the day.