Curious About Different Types of Birth? Here are 5 Real-Life Videos to Help You Prepare

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Mom in hospital bed with newborn baby

Whether you want a home birth, hypnobirth or something else, these amazing videos will prepare you for the life-changing event ahead.

Whether it's your first baby or your fifth, it's hard to predict just how your labor and delivery will progress. In fact, there are several possible birthing scenarios — including an unplanned birth, a vaginal birth after a C-section (VBAC), a water birth, a home birth, and hypnobirthing — and any one could end up becoming your reality. To help, check out the videos on each scenario so you're ready and confident.

If you're like most modern mamas, chances are you've never been on the business end of a live delivery. (And while it is very entertaining, watching Call the Midwife doesn't count.) Sure, you have a doctor or midwife who will take care of the medical side, but it's important to know the basics about the type of delivery you'd like to have. Getting familiar with what'll happen inside and outside of your body can help reduce any fears and anxiety you may have.

And if your birth doesn't go according to plan? Understanding other types of deliveries can help you feel prepared for any contingency. These educational birth videos can help.

Note: Any way a baby comes safely into the world is a good way. Discuss your options with your doctor, make a birth plan , (and a backup birth plan) and know that you're doing your best for both you and your baby.

Key Takeaways

A real look is eye-opening. Getting an up-close view of a home birth, water birth, a VBAC, and more can fill in knowledge gaps and help you get ready.

There's not one correct birth. Whether you want to labor at home or under hypnosis, the right plan for you depends on your health and doctor's guidance.

Keep flexibility in mind. Even with good intentions, the birth you want might not happen. To help, learn about all the options so you're prepared for anything.

What is an unplanned birth?

Just as it sounds, an unplanned birth can occur in an unusual or unfamiliar setting, when you'd least expect it, or, possibly, when you're alone. Of course, no woman wants to deliver her baby in a car, in a restaurant, or stuck at home during a storm, but while rare, these things do happen. It can't hurt to learn what to do if you do find yourself giving birth alone or having an unplanned delivery.

This video, by HowCast, explains the basic supplies you need and how to help deliver the baby, cut the umbilical cord, get the baby to breathe, and deliver the placenta . Most likely you'll never need to use this information, but it can't hurt to be prepared!

Labor and delivery questions are super common! To help, head to the What to Expect app for all the science-backed info you crave, plus tips from moms who've been there.

What is a vaginal birth after C-section (VBAC)?

A VBAC is a vaginal birth for a woman who's already had a Cesarean. There's a popular myth that once you've had a Cesarean section , then you are committed to the same surgery for any future children. However, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends attempting a vaginal birth after a C-section as long as there is no medical reason not to, saying it's safer for mom and baby than a subsequent C-section.

Talk to your doctor about whether you're a good candidate for a vaginal birth after C-Section (VBAC) . Note that your doc will most likely want you to give birth in a hospital in case something goes wrong and you need another C-section.

What to Expect Community parent shevoraedy says, "I had a C-section in January 2024 and then had a VBAC in September 2025. It was a wonderful experience for me!"

This delivery vlog by Hailey Paige Johnson shows just how smooth a successful VBAC can be. Bonus points for adorable fresh-from-the-womb newborn!

What is a water birth?

If you love the water, giving birth in it might be for you. ACOG doesn't recommend pushing and delivering in water due to the increased risk of certain conditions, but it does give interested moms the green light for laboring in a pool or tub during the early stages of childbirth.

This video, by Bikini Body Mommy, shows her experience with her second at-home water birth . You get to see her laboring process, her pain, the moment she meets her daughter, how her kids react, and … is it raining in here? We're not crying, you're crying!

What is a home birth?

Laboring and delivering your baby at home may be appealing since being in your own space is often comforting and peaceful. About 1% of all babies born in the U.S. are delivered at home, a stat that's gone up for the past decade or so, according to a study published in the journal Birth.

If you have no pregnancy complications, a planned home birth can be a good option, but ACOG still recommends giving birth in a hospital or birthing center, which have lower infant mortality rates.

In the video above, by the B.E.A.M. Squad, the husband and proud papa adorably narrates the birth of his daughter as his wife gives birth in bed at home.

What is hypnobirthing?

Hypnobirthing uses meditation and hypnotherapy techniques to soothe laboring moms. Proponents say it works by helping you achieve a state of deep relaxation and reducing the fear often associated with childbirth.

This video, published by Auckland HypnoBirthing, shows an almost entirely silent labor and delivery. If a baby hadn't appeared at the end you might not have even known what was happening.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, How to Create a Birth Plan That Feels Empowering — and Realistic , April 2025. WhatToExpect.com, How to Deliver Your Baby in an Emergency or if You're Alone , January 2025. WhatToExpect.com, What to Know About Having a Vaginal Birth After Cesarean (VBAC) , May 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Having a C-Section? Here's What You Should Know , April 2025. WhatToExpect.com, The Benefits of a Water Birth (and When to Get Out of the Tub) , September 2025. WhatToExpect.com, What to Know Before Having a Planned Home Birth , October 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Your Guide to Managing Labor Pain: What's Available and How It Helps , November 2025. WhatToExpect.com, What Is Hypnobirthing? , March 2022. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Vaginal Birth After Cesarean Delivery (VBAC) , November 2024. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Planned Home Birth , 2026. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Approaches to Limit Intervention During Labor and Birth , 2025. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Immersion in Water During Labor and Delivery , 2025. Birth , Trends and State Variations in Out-of-Hospital Births in the United States, 2004-2017 , June 2019.

Updates history

April 22, 2026

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Rebekah Wahlberg

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Having a Vaginal Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

What Happens During a Natural Birth? Here’s What to Know Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

What to Know About Having a Vaginal Birth After Cesarean (VBAC) Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

A Mom's Guide to a Hospital Birth Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

What to Know Before Having a Planned Home Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Having a C-Section? Here’s What You Should Know Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Benefits of Water Birth (and When to Get Out of the Tub) Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

How to Create a Birth Plan That Feels Empowering — And Realistic Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Why Attending Childbirth Classes Could Give You Confidence During Labor Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

How to Deliver Your Baby in an Emergency or if You're Alone Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Dealing With Childbirth Fear? Here's How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

My VBAC Didn't Work Out — and That's Okay Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Vaginal Birth or C-Section? What to Know When You’re Expecting Twins Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

Can You Have a Vaginal Birth With Twins? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window