Cute, Quirky, and Easy to Say: 19 Adorable Welsh Baby Girl Names

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

welsh baby girl names

Popular in Wales, these sweet names are still under-the-radar in the U.S. Take some inspiration for your newest arrival from among these fresh Welsh baby girl names.

Often underrated and overlooked — especially in the U.S. — Welsh baby girl names are some of the cutest around. Not only do many of them end with the oh-so-popular "-i," they're typically short, sweet, and easy to pronounce.

As with Welsh baby boy names , even if you choose a longer name, there's likely to be a built-in nickname (or two) which will give your daughter options as she grows up.

Have a read through the following Welsh baby girl names, and remember that whichever one you choose, it'll sound fresh and feminine — and probably come with a super sweet meaning too!

Want to keep searching for the perfect baby name? Check out all the fun options in the What to Expect app .

Alys. The Welsh twist on Alice, Alys (which you can also spell with an "i" — Alis) is simple but unique.

Bethan. You guessed it: Bethan is an alternative to Bethany, minus the "-y" ending. Easy to spell and intuitive to pronounce, your daughter will thank you for giving her such a bold but pretty name.

Cariad. The Welsh-language equivalent of "sweetheart" or "darling" as a term of endearment, Cariad is a strong name which offers a nice twist on the more common Carrie.

Carys. From the Welsh "to love" — caru — Carys is an adorable name that means, unsurprisingly, "beloved." (It's also the name of Welsh actress Catherine Zeta-Jones' daughter.) Cerys is an equally lovely alternative spelling.

Catrin. Catrin is bold and a touch sophisticated, while still leaving room for softer, more traditional nicknames like Cat and Kitty.

Eira. Eira is the Welsh word for "snow" — and while it's one of the more uncommon names on the list, it's also incredibly delicate and an unusual alternative to current favorites like Emma and Ava.

Eirlys. Eirlys, taken from the Welsh word for "snowdrop" and pronounced ire-liss, sounds just as delicate — and, thanks to the close-sounding iris, recalls the trend towards floral baby girl names.

Elen. Helen becomes Elen (or Elin) in Welsh, a chipper name originally derived from Greek meaning "sunshine" or "light." Elen was also the name of a Welsh saint.

Enfys. Technically unisex but used more often for girls, Enfys (pronounced en-viss) means "rainbow" — making it the perfect name for parents expecting again after a loss.

Ffion. Although the double "ff" might look confusing, it's pronounced like a single "f." Ffion is the Welsh version of an equally charming Gaelic name: Fiona.

Gwen. Very popular in the 20th century, Gwen — as in Gwen Stefani — will have people going b-a-n-a-n-a-s over it again soon! Gwen is also a shortened version of Gwendolyn and related to the French name Guinevere.

Lowri. If you like the names Laura and Lauren, Lowri is a quirkier Welsh alternative. Like those more popular variants, it also means "laurel."

Mari. If you want a classic-sounding name that will stand the test of time, consider Mari — which is also common in Scandinavia and Eastern Europe.

Meleri. A relatively unusual name with ancient roots but a modern sound, Meleri was a Welsh saint. You can shorten to Eleri and even Leri.

Nia. Both Welsh and Swahili in origin, Nia offers a bold twist on the popular baby girl name Mia. Purposeful and strong, Nia also means "light" and is the Welsh form of Niamh, a common Irish name.

Olwen. One of the more unique "-wen" names, Olwen has strong Lord of the Rings vibes without being a direct copy of the half-elven Arwen.

Rhiannon. Rhiannon is a very popular girls name in Wales but relatively uncommon elsewhere. Lovely-sounding and lyrical, it can also be shortened to Rhian or Rhi.

Seren. Who doesn't want their little lady to shine bright? Seren, the Welsh word for "star," is a sophisticated-sounding girl's name that toes the line between popular and under-the-radar.

Tegan. Almost unisex in sound, Tegan means "beloved" or "favorite" — perfect if you're planning on having just one child! You can also spell it the Irish way: Teagan.

Lauren Cocking is a Yorkshire-born, Mexico City-based writer, book reviewer and translator. She’s currently at work on her first literary translation and studying Welsh. Cocking has bylines at BBC Travel , CNN, Lonely Planet, National Geographic, OZY, LitHub, Teen Vogue, Al Jazeera and more . She writes about Latin American literature on her blog .

Updates history

September 26, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,872 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Searching for a Dashing Baby Boy Name? These 15 British Boy Names Deliver Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Gorgeous Chinese Baby Girl Names That Inspire Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window