5 Moms Describe What It's Like to Have D-MER

mom breastfeeding

It may be natural, but breastfeeding can be anything but easy. From low milk supply to trouble latching , nursing your little can come with a slew of problems. While issues with latching or pain are more well-known, some moms will experience a difficult condition that most people have never heard of during their breastfeeding journeys.

Dysphoric milk ejection reflex (D-MER) is characterized by an abrupt dysphoria, or negative emotions, that can strike for a few minutes just before your letdown. It’s a physiological (read: not mental) response to your body releasing milk, and can bring on feelings of intense sadness, despair, anxiety and more as you're starting to nurse your baby.

And while the condition is very real, research and awareness is lacking, leaving many breastfeeding moms who are suffering from D-MER in the dark. Some women accidentally stumble upon D-MER by Googling “sadness while breastfeeding,” while others might assume the feelings are related to postpartum depression or anxiety.

Though it can feel debilitating, many women with D-MER say that learning more about the condition and hearing from other moms who have it helps them cope. Below, real moms open up about their experience with D-MER, from what it feels like to what helps them manage their symptoms.

“I had never heard of D-MER before realizing I had it. I didn’t know that breastfeeding had anything to do with the panic attacks I was having until my daughter was 1 month old. I just chalked the feeling up to postpartum anxiety. But then one day, I googled 'panic attack while breastfeeding,' and D-MER was the first thing that popped up. I realized it was what I had immediately. The best way I can describe it is a mix of panic, nausea and homesickness, paired with a hollow feeling in your stomach and the occasional hot flash to boot. It’s a very weird sensation, and it made me dread nursing at times. It usually only lasts a couple seconds, but it happened every single time I had a letdown, even when I wasn’t nursing.” — Erica

“I believe I had D-MER but did not know what it was, nor had anyone I know talked about it. I always thought if breastfeeding is so easy, convenient and helps you bond with your baby (according to what everyone did tell me), then why would it be this way for me? I felt like I was going through menopause because I would feel burning-up hot, I had to make sure I had privacy (most people just expected me to do it in front of them, but it wasn't for me), I had to do it constantly, at least in the beginning, rather than other things that would have helped me to relax. And I had a C-section, so everything already hurt, plus my doctor told me my baby lost too much weight in the first two weeks. Because of that, I ended up combo feeding . I was so relieved when others could help feed.” — Jane

“I’ve had it with both my kids, although I didn’t know what it was the first time. I thought I just had weird feelings about breastfeeding. But a few weeks ago, I was researching something and accidentally stumbled across an article about D-MER and I was like, 'This! This is what is going on!' I experience feelings of shame and dread.” — Rayleigh

“[I] had it with both kids. For me it felt like a moment of intense shame and discomfort for 10 to 20 seconds and it varied in severity.” — Nicole

“I experienced D-MER and it was so crazy! When I was still in the hospital after birth, I would start feeding and feel like I wasn't even on planet earth, let alone in that room! The second day, I started breastfeeding my daughter and my husband, far on the other side of the room suddenly looked at me strangely and asked if I was all right. … Even he could feel that he was no longer in the room with the same person I had been two minutes before.” — Autumn

“Learning what D-MER is and knowing it's a physiological (not mental) response have helped me get through it. Not to mention, making sure I'm distracted while nursing is a big help — watching TV or listening to a podcast during a letdown is much more pleasant than experiencing a panic attack alone in silence with my baby. Fortunately, it’s gotten easier as time has gone on — I don’t know if the symptoms have become more manageable, or if I’m just becoming desensitized to the experience. I’m hopeful that more breastfeeding classes address D-MER so that moms are prepared if they experience the condition. You can still have a great breastfeeding journey with your baby despite D-MER.” — Erica

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. Whattoexpect.com. Breastfeeding With Dysphoric Milk Ejection Reflex (D-MER). July 2020. D-MER.org. Sadness While Breastfeeding.

What Our Community Is Talking About

Best pacifiers for breastfed baby?

Night lights?

How to get fattier milk?

There are 34,002 active discussions happening now in our Breastfeeding community group.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Breastfeeding With Dysphoric Milk Ejection Reflex (D-MER) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

15 Moms Share What Breastfeeding Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Mastitis While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Common Pumping Problems and Solutions Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Moms Who Exclusively Pump Reveal How They Make It Work Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

I Got Mastitis 3 Times in 2 Months — Here's What I Wish I'd Known as a Nursing Mom Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Most Common Breastfeeding Problems and Solutions Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How Partners Can Help Support Breastfeeding Moms Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Leaking Breast Milk Postpartum Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

11 Times Celebrities Got Real About Their Breastfeeding Struggles By Kaitlin Stanford, Contributing Writer

Why You Might Not Be Able to Breastfeed Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

How to Treat Sore Nipples and Breastfeeding Pain Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Postpartum Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

One Mom's Postpartum 'Heartburn' Turned Out to Be a Life-Threatening Condition Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Dealing With Breast Engorgement After Birth? Here's How to Soothe the Discomfort Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window