Day Care or Preschool — What's Best for Your Family?

Day care vs. preschool

Puzzled by the differences between preschool and day care — and which one is right for your budget, schedule and (of course) child? Here's what you need to know to make the best decision.

Maybe your little one is happily ensconced in day care, but you’re thinking it may be time to graduate to preschool. Maybe he’s spent his first years at home, and you’re scouting the best option for his classroom debut.

Either way, you may be wondering: Do the benefits of preschool outweigh those offered by a good day care?

Not necessarily. That’s because day care centers and preschools operate under the same general guidelines — they’re even licensed and regulated by the same state agencies. These days, day care centers often provide more than care — they also offer learning activities to prep kids for kindergarten, which means the curriculum may mirror a good preschool’s.

Plus, sending your child to day care can cost about the same as sending him to preschool. Still, there are some key differences between preschool and day care — differences you’ll probably want to consider before you turn over that (hefty) deposit. Here’s what sets them apart:

Day care vs. preschool hours

Preschools have shorter daily hours — most also close on holidays, for weeklong breaks and for the summer (though some preschools offer camp for an extra fee when the school year ends). With preschools, you usually have to choose between half-day and full-day programs. And you probably need to enroll your child for at least two days each week.

Day are centers are more flexible when it comes to hours — they tend to open early and close late to cater to working parents. Plus, they’re more likely than preschools to remain open year-round. Some day care centers allow you to totally personalize your child’s schedule (just an hour on some days so you can run errands at your pace and not your tot’s; full days on others so you can go to work).

Day care vs. preschool age requirements

Kids, from wee infants to grade-schoolers, are welcome at many day care centers. That means your tyke may get a chance to socialize with bigger kids and be around babies (a huge bonus if your only child is soon becoming a big sibling ). Downside: It also means the caregivers may be more preoccupied with the really little ones.

Preschools usually accept children ages 3 to 5. Plus, age groups tend to be separated at preschools — there’s usually one classroom for the 3-year-olds and another for the 4- and 5-year-olds, though they may mingle by the swings and slides at the playground.

Day care vs. preschool potty prerequisites

Many preschools require your child to be toilet-trained .

Day cares accept kids in diapers.

Day care vs. preschool caregivers and teachers

Preschool programs are more learning-oriented and are often based on a certain approach to teaching. Many states have higher education standards for preschool teachers and directors than for those at day care centers, so preschool staff may have more formal training. (Still, all states require a minimum amount of experience for teachers at preschool and day-care centers.)

How to decide between day care and preschool

Still stuck? Since general guidelines will take you only so far, it’s time to look closer to home. Focus on the specific centers in your area. The best program is the one that best fits you, your child, your schedule and your budget — and in your neighborhood, day care or preschool may both be strong options.

Make a chart of their individual pros and cons. Ask yourself: Which teachers are warmer? Which classroom is more inviting? Which one offers more engaging activities? Where do the children seem happier? The more on-site investigating you do, the more likely you’ll find the perfect preschool (or will it be day care?) match for your munchkin — and you.

And when choosing a child care setting for your child, do not forget to take into account this crucial factor— what is the policy concerning sick children?

To reduce the risk of becoming sick, your child, the child care providers and all the children being cared for must be up-to-date with the immunizations recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Many day care centers and preschools in the U.S. are starting to reopen to non-essential workers after being temporarily closed due to COVID-19. If you're a non-essential worker considering whether or not to send your child back to day care or preschool, make sure to review the CDC's Guidance for Child Care Programs that Remain Open during the pandemic.