Dealing With a Squirmy Baby

For someone who’s just discovering her mobility, it’s no fun taking life sitting down…or lying down for a diaper change . Luckily, older babies may be stubbornly squirmy, but they’re still easily distracted.

Distract your baby. So keep the distractions coming. In the tub, sing a special, silly bath-time song, blow bubbles for baby to pop, make a splash (if she’s game, of course), fill and empty cups, float and sink ships, or dunk the dolly.

Work fast. Work fast, too — unless your little one’s really grimy, a few quick swipes with a washcloth should get the job done with a minimum of wriggling. The less attention paid to the wriggling, by the way, the better — smiles or scolding will both reinforce the behavior you’re trying to discourage. Same holds for babies who won’t hold still for diaper changes.

Keep your baby entertained. A special stash of just-for-diaper-changes toys (rotate them so baby doesn’t get bored) may elicit a few moments of cooperation, as may a giggly round of “stinky feet” or a silly diaper ditty.

Change locations. You can also try a change of place. If your baby’s already standing up — try changing her where she stands. If the changing table has become the scene of too many struggles, move to a neutral location, like the family room floor. Wherever you’re changing, make sure you’ve gathered up all of your supplies ahead of time so you’ll be able to work faster.

Never leave your baby alone. And of course, since squirmy babies can squirm into a whole lot of trouble fast, never leave your baby’s side while she’s on a changing table or in the tub — not even for a moment.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

How to Manage a Squirmy Baby During Diaper Changes Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Change a Baby’s Diaper Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do if Your Baby Hates the Bath Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do When Your Toddler Is Fighting Diaper Changes Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Soothe a Crying Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Soothe a Sensitive Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Bathing With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do When Your Baby Hates the Car Seat, Bouncer or Stroller Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do When Your Toddler Suddenly Hates Baths Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Making Bathtime Fun for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Reasons Your Baby Won't Sleep and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Tummy Time for Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Baby Refusing to Sleep in the Crib? Here's What to Do Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's What to Do if Your Baby Is Crying in Her Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window