Delivering at a Birth Center

giving birth at a birth center

Interested in delivering your baby in a place that’s almost like home and has a knowledgeable and supportive staff? A birth center might be for you.

If you’re weighing your delivery options and don’t want the clinical atmosphere of a hospital but also aren’t interested in delivering at home, you may want to consider an accredited birth center.

With professional staff, minimal medical interruptions and cozy accommodations, a birth center is a good choice for many women. To help you decide whether it’s right for you, here’s everything you need to know about giving birth at a birth center.

What is a birth center?

A birth center is a low-tech birthing option for moms-to-be who desire a an unmedicated childbirth experience . Usually, birth centers are freestanding facilities, but sometimes they’re adjacent to or inside a hospital.

In most birthing centers, midwives (and not OB-GYNs) are the primary care providers. Besides offering a comfy place to deliver your baby, birth centers provide many services, including well-woman exams, preconception counseling, prenatal care, childbirth education, breastfeeding classes, postpartum care and support, and post-baby birth control. Trusted SourceAmerican Association of Birth CentersThe Birth Center ExperienceSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Association of Birth CentersThe Birth Center ExperienceSee All Sources

What's the difference between a birth center and a hospital?

At birth centers, care is typically led by midwives, though birth centers may work in collaboration with OB-GYNs, pediatricians and other health care professionals — meaning they consult them if the need arises.

But delivering at a birth center and giving birth at a hospital differ in a number of ways. While a labor room in a hospital looks like, well, a room in a hospital, birthing rooms at a birthing center tend to be a little more comfortable. And procedures that are standard or at least common in a hospital setting (such as continuous fetal monitoring , routine IVs and induction of labor ) aren’t routine at a birthing center.

Keep in mind, too, that most birthing centers don’t give epidurals. Instead, they turn to alternative pain relief options, such as hydrotherapy, breathing exercises, massage and acupuncture. Some centers also offer nitrous oxide gas.

What are the benefits of giving birth at a birth center?

Comfy digs. Birth centers usually have soft lighting, a queen or double bed, a television, a rocking chair, couches for family and friends and a shower, Jacuzzi tub and, sometimes, a kitchen. In many facilities, families are encouraged to personalize the room by hanging pictures, lighting candles or turning up the tunes.

Greater privacy. Birth centers always provide private rooms for expectant mothers.

More freedom. You can walk around and be as active as you like, and wear what you want. You even get to eat a light meal or snack and drink during and after labor (no food or drinks during the pushing phase though). At a hospital, on the other hand, your movements could be limited (since there can be continuous electronic fetal monitoring), food is restricted in the event you choose to have an epidural and you’ll likely have to give birth lying on your back on the bed.

A shorter stay. Because fewer medications and medical interventions are involved, recovery time is shorter than at a hospital. Most families leave the center four to eight hours after birth, compared to 24 to 48 hours at a hospital.

Reduced risk of a C-section. The rate of C-sections for women who chose a birth center to deliver is around 6 percent (compared to just under 26 percent for similar low-risk women in hospitals. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineOutcomes of care in birth centers: demonstration of a durable modelSee All Sources [2]

What are the downsides of giving birth at a birth center?

Lack of centers. The number of birth centers around the country is limited (and services may be in high demand) — especially if you live in a small town.

Possible transfer to a hospital. If there is a problem or emergency, you’ll be transferred to a hospital. Fortunately, fewer than 2 percent of transfers are due to emergencies (they’re mostly due to mom having an extremely difficult labor and/or requests for an epidural.) However birthing centers do have IVs, oxygen and infant resuscitators on hand for use during the transfer process.

Your insurance may not cover it. Some insurance companies don’t cover births at a birth center. Contact your insurance provider to discuss your coverage.

They're not for everyone. Birth centers aren't equipped for high-risk pregnancies or multiple births (more on this below).

Who can give birth at a birth center?

Birthing centers handle only low-risk pregnancies. If you have a higher-risk pregnancy, such as if you have hypertension, diabetes or gestational diabetes, your baby is in the breech position, you’re pregnant with multiples, or you have other issues that may cause complications, a birth center isn’t the right option for you. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsLevels of Maternal CareSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsLevels of Maternal CareSee All Sources

Who can be with you during labor and delivery at a birth center?

It’s totally up to you to decide who and how many people will be present during labor and delivery. Unlike the hospital experience, you’re not limited to a certain number (and kids won’t get the automatic boot when it’s time for you to push).

Of course, that doesn’t mean you should try to pack 30 people in the room! Natural birth advocates often recommend limiting the number of people who are present, as having too many people around can be a distraction and make labor take longer. Remember, those who miss the live event can catch the replay via photos or video recordings, which are welcome at birthing centers.

How much does it cost to give birth at a birth center?

The cost varies depending on where you live and the center you choose. In general, prenatal care and delivery at a birth center is about $3,000 to $4,000 (typically much less than the grand total for a hospital birth). Again, check with your insurance company to determine coverage and out-of-pocket expenses. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicinePotential Medicaid Cost Savings from Maternity Care Based at a Freestanding Birth CenterSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicinePotential Medicaid Cost Savings from Maternity Care Based at a Freestanding Birth CenterSee All Sources

How should you find and choose a birth center?

If you're interested in giving birth at a birth center, visit the Commission for the Accreditation of Birthing Centers’ (CABC) website to find a center near you that is licensed and accredited by the CABC. Once you've found one, you can arrange to tour it. You’ll be able to learn more about the facility, meet the staff and find out what you can do to prepare.

Birth centers aren’t able to handle as many deliveries as a hospital — which means you should reserve your spot as early as possible (as soon as you determine you want to deliver at a birth center — the first trimester isn’t too soon).