Diarrhea Before Labor (Prelabor Diarrhea)

prelabor diarrehea

One of the early signs of labor is diarrhea. Learn what causes the runs as you get close to the big day and what you can do about it.

If you're having diarrhea, or loose bowel movements, close to your baby's due date , you may be experiencing what's known as prelabor diarrhea.

Key Takeaways

Prelabor diarrhea is a common sign that labor may be approaching, caused by hormonal changes that loosen muscles in the uterus, cervix, and rectum and make space for your baby.

While it's uncomfortable, diarrhea before labor is typically temporary and common before delivery, along with other symptoms like cramps and back pain.

To manage prelabor diarrhea, drink plenty of fluids; eat light, easily digestible foods; and make sure you're near a bathroom. Try to stay calm as you get closer to meeting your baby!

What causes diarrhea before labor?

Your hormones change rapidly to prepare your body for delivery , which causes the muscles in your uterus, cervix and even your rectum to loosen. Some experts suspect that the emptying of your bowels is nature's way of making enough room for the baby to emerge.

Wondering if that sudden diarrhea means labor is near? Get answers and track symptoms with the My Journal tool in the What to Expect app — your go-to guide for pregnancy and delivery-day prep.

What you need to know about diarrhea before labor

Diarrhea is a common and normal part of the prelabor process, so try to go with the flow. Yes, it's unpleasant, but it can mean you're that much closer to meeting your baby.

In addition to diarrhea, you may also experience any (or all) of the following signs of labor as you enter the homestretch of your pregnancy:

Menstrual-like cramps

Heartburn

Low back pain

A warm sensation in your abdomen

Loss of the mucus plug and bloody show Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHow to Tell When Labor BeginsSee All Sources [1]

Loose-feeling joints

Fatigue

What can you do about diarrhea before labor?

There are some things you can do if you're having pre-labor diarrhea, including the following:

Make sure you stay hydrated. Continue to drink plenty of fluids — water is your best buddy right now. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsProblems of the Digestive SystemSee All Sources [2]

Eat lightly, but enough to maintain your strength. Chicken broth, toast with jam or a fruit pop will go down easily. Skip anything fatty (like something fried), protein-rich (meats), very fiber-filled (bran muffins, for example) or acidic (e.g., orange juice).

Stay calm — and near the bathroom.

Just remember that if you're having diarrhea close to your due date, it may mean the big day is almost here! So take heart in knowing that this is another short-lived symptom, as well as a sign that you'll be meeting your sweet baby very soon.