How Babies "Digest" in the Womb

Light copy changes throughout, and fact-checked and medically reviewed for accuracy.

fetal digestion development

From embryo to newborn baby, here’s a step-by-step guide to the fascinating formation of your baby’s digestive system.

What goes in must come out. Although they’re not always fun (or fragrant) to clean up, full diapers are one of the best signs that a baby’s digestive system is doing its job and the efforts to feed that tiny mouth are paying off.

That process starts long before you even give birth. Here’s how your little one’s digestive system develops in the womb, including how he gets all the nutrients he needs to grow.

When do babies start absorbing nutrients from the mother?

Babies start absorbing nutrients from their mothers about three to five days after conception. That’s when the fertilized egg meets its energy needs with nutrients secreted from Mom’s endometrium (the tissue lining the uterus). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHow Your Fetus Grows During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHow Your Fetus Grows During PregnancySee All Sources

Soon after implantation, which usually happens about eight to nine days after conception, the embryo forms a yolk sac. The yolk sac provides critical nutrition and gas exchange between mom and baby throughout most of the first trimester, until the placenta starts to take over at around week 10 of pregnancy. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineEmbryology, Yolk SacSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineEmbryology, Yolk SacSee All Sources

That means that from the beginning, your baby is getting all his nutrition from you. His own digestive system won’t take over until he’s born and starts consuming (and pooping) breast milk or formula.

In other words, what you eat throughout your pregnancy matters. So be sure to take your prenatal vitamin daily and maintain a well-rounded pregnancy diet. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsNutrition During PregnancySee All Sources [3] That means consuming plenty of foods that are rich in: Trusted SourceMarch of DimesVitamins and other nutrients during pregnancySee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsNutrition During PregnancySee All Sources

Trusted SourceMarch of DimesVitamins and other nutrients during pregnancySee All Sources

Folate (found in beans, avocadoes, leafy greens, fortified whole grain bread, and other foods), to ensure the development of healthy new cells and to help prevent some birth defects

Omega-3 (which you can get from salmon, sardines, herring, walnuts, and DHA eggs), for healthy brain and eye development

Vitamin D (in fish, eggs and fortified orange juice and cereal) to help with healthy bones, teeth, eyes, and skin

Calcium (in dairy and dairy-alternative products) to ensure strong bones and teeth as well as a tip-top heart, muscles, and nerves

Iodine (in yogurt and salmon) promotes your baby’s brain and nervous system development

Choline (found in poultry and eggs) to help prevent neural tube problems and support your baby's cognitive development

Do babies poop in the womb?

Babies pee a lot in the womb, but they usually don’t poop until after birth.

During pregnancy, a sticky greenish-black substance known as meconium starts to build up in your baby’s intestine. This is baby’s first poop . Instead of food, it’s made up of the stuff your baby collected in his intestines while in utero (like old gastrointestinal cells and skin cells), which is why it looks drastically different from the baby poop yet to come.

You’ll usually see meconium in your baby's first diapers, but occasionally it comes out while a baby is still in utero. If that happens, there’s a risk that he could breathe in some amniotic fluid stained with meconium — which could irritate his lungs or lead to a serious illness called meconium aspiration syndrome , or MAS.

So let your doctor or midwife know right away if you’re leaking green or brownish amniotic fluid. Your practitioner may decide to speed up delivery and have a pediatric team present at your delivery to evaluate your baby as soon as he arrives. Luckily, with treatment, most babies will be fine and not have lingering problems.

How your baby’s digestive system develops

During the nine months of pregnancy, your baby’s digestive system quickly transforms — from a layer of cells to a full-fledged nutrition-delivery system. Here are the basics on how the digestive system develops, trimester by trimester.

First trimester

In the first few weeks of pregnancy, the embryo develops three layers of cells. The innermost one is called the endoderm, and it will eventually become your baby's digestive system (as well as other structures, like his liver, lungs, pancreas, and gallbladder). The mesoderm, or middle layer, is the source of the sex organs, bones, kidneys, and muscles. And the ectoderm, or outer layer, develops into the nervous system, hair, skin, and parts of the eyes. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineEmbryology, Weeks 6-8See All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineEmbryology, Weeks 6-8See All Sources

At its most basic level, the digestive system is a series of tubes (like the esophagus and the intestines) leading from the mouth (the entry point) to the anus (the exit). By 8 weeks’ gestation , that tube is starting to form — along with its waiting room area (aka the stomach). For now, the loops of the intestine are too big to fit in your baby’s tiny little belly — so they bulge into the umbilical cord. (It’s only temporary!)

Fun fact: Although the kidneys are part of the urinary system, they perform a similar function in that they help to remove waste from the body. And by the time you are just 8 weeks along, your baby will have already gone through two sets of temporary kidneys, and the permanent set will be forming. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineEmbryology, Kidney, Bladder, and UreterSee All Sources [6]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineEmbryology, Kidney, Bladder, and UreterSee All Sources

By about week 10 , baby’s stomach and those new, lifelong kidneys are hard at work, starting to produce digestive juices and enzymes in the stomach and urine in the kidneys. But your baby will still get all of the nutrition he needs (and excrete all the waste he doesn’t) from you via the yolk sac.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

Your baby’s digestive system starts developing from his earliest days in the womb. During this time, all of his nutrition comes from you — a baby’s own digestive system won’t fully take over until after he’s born and starts consuming breast milk or formula.

This is why it’s so important to take your prenatal vitamin and eat healthy foods throughout your pregnancy. Make sure to fill up on key nutrients like folate, omega-3s, vitamin D, and calcium, among others.

Fun fact: By the second trimester, your baby will have developed taste buds on his tongue and can taste the flavors of foods you eat in amniotic fluid.

In the womb, babies pee a lot — but usually they don’t poop for the first time until after birth. Sometimes, though, meconium (this is a sticky, greenish-black substance that builds up in your little one’s intestines) can come out in utero, which can be dangerous. Let your practitioner know ASAP if you ever spot leaking green or brownish amniotic fluid during pregnancy.

Second trimester

Just as your own digestive system is settling down (goodbye, morning sickness !), your baby’s is ramping up. Early in the second trimester, the digestive system’s structures are fully formed and in the right places. At around the same time, the placenta is taking over fully from the yolk sac, providing all of your baby’s nutritional needs (while getting rid of waste) via the umbilical cord until your baby’s birth.

For now, it’s all about practice: Baby begins to suck and swallow amniotic fluid, and the muscles and organs that make up the digestive system are learning to contract. He also pees regularly. These are all tasks that your baby will rely on for digestion once he’s out in the world, consuming breast milk, formula, and eventually solid food.

At this point in your pregnancy, your little one has developed taste buds on his tiny tongue. The flavors of the foods you’re eating are present in the amniotic fluid your baby is swallowing every day.

Third trimester

As you head into the home stretch, fetal development focuses on growth as your baby adds weight and length. The digestive system continues to practice its duties, but it won’t be fully ready for prime time until your baby is born and starts taking all his nutrition by mouth (instead of through theby umbilical cord).

Throughout your pregnancy, your baby’s digestive system is developing and practicing for the big delivery day, when he’ll get his first taste of real food. Until then, he’ll rely on you for all of his nutrition and waste exchange, so be sure to fill up on lots of healthy and fresh foods.

And, by the way, when you do start changing baby’s first diapers, you’ll start learning a lot about newborn poop . In fact, you can find out a lot about how your newborn is doing — and digesting — from what’s in his diaper.