Do I Really Need All Those Prenatal Appointments?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Pregnant woman at prenatal checkup smiling with partner in clinic

You'll be attending a dozen or so prenatal appointments during pregnancy. Here's what to expect and how to prepare for each one.

An important part of taking good care of yourself and your baby while you're pregnant is keeping a prenatal appointment schedule. Regular visits to your health care practitioner help ensure that everything is progressing as expected — and can help spot any health issues early on, when complications are often easier to treat. Try not to skip a single one!

To help you prepare for your upcoming prenatal care visits, here's a look at when these appointments are usually scheduled, what happens at each one, and the types of tests you'll typically receive.

Key Takeaways

Prenatal visits become more frequent as pregnancy progresses. Most pregnancies include monthly appointments through week 28, biweekly visits until week 36, and weekly checkups until birth to closely monitor both you and your baby.

Every prenatal appointment helps track your baby's growth and your health. Practitioners typically check blood pressure, weight, fetal heartbeat, and signs of complications while also answering questions and offering guidance for each stage of pregnancy.

Prenatal care includes important screenings, tests, and labor prep. From first-trimester bloodwork and ultrasounds to third-trimester Group B strep screening and discussions about delivery, these visits help support the healthiest possible pregnancy and birth experience.

How often will I have a prenatal appointment?

The number of visits you'll have in a typical pregnancy usually totals about 10 to 15, depending on when you find out you're expecting and the timing of your first prenatal visit . In most complication-free pregnancies, you can expect to have a prenatal appointment with the following frequency:

Weeks 4 to 28: Once a month

Weeks 28 to 36: Every other week

Week 36 until birth: Every week

The frequency of prenatal appointments increases in the third trimester because certain pregnancy complications , like preeclampsia , are more likely to appear then. Issues with your baby's growth also tend to show up later in pregnancy, so your practitioner will want to measure your weight , belly size, and other indicators more frequently in the last trimester.

Pregnancy brain is real, mama — and between appointments, vitamins, and all those “Wait, what week am I again?” moments, it helps to have everything in one place. Download the free What to Expect app to track appointments, symptoms, baby’s growth, and all the little milestones along the way.

If you've had complications with past pregnancies, such as giving birth too early or too late, you may see your practitioner more often. You'll also have more prenatal visits if your pregnancy is considered high-risk, which means it involves any of the following:

Being older than 35

Being overweight , obese, or underweight

Having health issues before pregnancy, such as diabetes , cancer, high blood pressure , or HIV

Being pregnant with twins or other multiples

"From about 28 to 32 weeks I had two appointments a week, then four per week until I delivered at 37 weeks," says What to Expect Community mom knel3502, who was pregnant with twins diagnosed with intrauterine growth restriction. "All of the appointments are exhausting but so worth it!"

What happens during a prenatal care appointment?

You can expect a number of prenatal tests throughout your pregnancy, depending on how far along you are. At nearly every prenatal appointment, your practitioner will also do the following:

Check your blood pressure.

Weigh you. You'll step on the scale so your practitioner can make sure you and your baby are growing well. Your practitioner will assess the size of your uterus, either vaginally or via ultrasound . Later, during the second trimester and third trimester, they'll measure your abdomen and feel for the baby's size and position.

Note any swelling in your hands, feet, or face. Swelling in these spots is called edema , which is extra fluid trapped in the body's tissues. Edema can sometimes be a sign of preeclampsia or high blood pressure during pregnancy.

Listen to fetal cardiac activity. About 12 weeks to 14 weeks into your pregnancy, your practitioner may use a Doppler monitor , which bounces sound waves off your baby's tiny ticker, allowing you to hear that sweet thumping sound. After 20 weeks , your baby's heartbeat may also be audible through a stethoscope.

Discuss testing options . Your practitioner will advise you about recommended tests — such as ultrasounds, amniocentesis (to check for chromosomal abnormalities and fetal infections), and screening for genetic issues — along with the risks and benefits of each.

Offer info and guidance . Your practitioner will fill you in on any recent or upcoming changes in your body or baby, answer your questions, and offer tips to help you stay healthy and happy until delivery day.

Keep in mind that you don't have to attend these appointments alone. Your partner, a friend, or family member is welcome to join you for support, to ask questions, and to share concerns with your practitioner.

"My fiancé has been to every appointment with me even when I just go for info," says Community member ShannyMT. "I'm very thankful because how I'm functioning right now I have a tendency to forget a lot of what's said!"

What tests will I receive at my prenatal appointments?

Many different lab tests are part of routine medical care during pregnancy, including those that are measured with blood, urine, or tissue samples. Each test you receive will vary according to your risk for certain conditions and may include:

Pelvic exams.

Breast exams.

Pap smear .

Ultrasounds and Doppler scans. Between 18 weeks and 20 weeks, your practitioner will probably order an ultrasound to confirm how far along you are and to check that your baby's spine, abdomen, heart, brain, and other body parts are developing well.

Blood tests . These check your hormone levels and screen for Rh factor (a protein on red blood cells) and anemia , among other conditions.

Urine tests . You'll routinely be asked to pee in a cup so your practitioner can check for too much protein (a sign of preeclampsia) or sugar (a sign of gestational diabetes ).

Glucose screenings . These tests indicate whether you've developed gestational diabetes.

Nuchal translucency screening . This is a non-invasive check for chromosomal disorders.

Group B strep (GBS) screening . This checks for a type of bacteria that's found in 1 out of 4 women.

Nonstress tests (NST) . An NST takes place during the third trimester and measures the fetal heart rate and response to movement.

Biophysical profile (BPP) . You'll get this test if you've sailed past your due date , are carrying multiples, or have high blood pressure.

Based on your risk factors (usually your age, ethnic background, or family history), your practitioner may also recommend one of several prenatal genetic tests and screenings to check for chromosomal abnormalities that cause conditions like Down syndrome .

These screenings and tests are typically done at different stages of pregnancy and include:

Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT): any time after 9 weeks

The quad screen : Between week 14 and week 22

Chorionic villus sampling (CVS): Between week 10 and week 13

Amniocentesis: Between week 15 and week 18, though it can be done earlier or later

Be sure to discuss your options and the risks and benefits of the various genetic tests with your practitioner early on so you can decide if and when you should undergo them.

What will I talk about with my practitioner at prenatal care appointments?

A good portion of your prenatal visit will center on advice and support. During each prenatal appointment, your practitioner should:

Ask how you're doing physically and emotionally

Answer all of your questions

Offer tips on caring for yourself and your baby-to-be

Give you a heads-up about changes to expect and red flags to watch for before your next visit

As for your role in this relationship, try to show up for every prenatal appointment prepared with questions and details on any changes in your health. Faced with new information and tests at every visit, many moms-to-be forget what they wanted to ask or share — so write down anything you want to discuss with your practitioner.

What should I expect at my first trimester prenatal appointment?

Your first trimester prenatal appointment, which often takes place during the second month of pregnancy, is usually the longest one because it includes a full review of your medical, gynecological, and obstetrical history as well as your mental health history. Your practitioner will ask about any medications you take and any diseases you've been exposed to. You'll also need to provide your partner's medical details.

Next, you'll have a checkup that includes your height, weight, blood pressure, and a pelvic exam, as well as confirmation of your pregnancy. A number of tests will follow, such as urine tests, bloodwork, genetic carrier screening, STD screening, a Pap smear, and a blood sugar test.

"Honestly I'm just hoping for some sort of reassurance that everything is progressing and going well!" says Community mom c-lafountain about her first prenatal appointment.

What should I expect at second trimester prenatal appointments?

Your visits to your practitioner are on the shorter side during the second trimester, but these prenatal appointments still include checks of your weight, blood pressure, and possibly urine. Your practitioner will also track your baby's development by measuring your abdomen, listening to fetal cardiac activity, and checking whether you feel fetal movement , like kicks or fluttering.

Some prenatal screenings or tests may be offered during this time, including those for genetic or chromosomal disorders. You'll also have fetal ultrasounds to check on the baby's anatomy and relay the baby's sex (if you want to know, that is!). And you'll have blood tests to check your blood count and iron levels and to screen for gestational diabetes.

What should I expect at third trimester prenatal appointments?

You're in the home stretch now, so your third trimester prenatal appointments will become more frequent as you near your due date . Along with the usual weight, blood pressure, and urine checks, you can expect your practitioner to listen to your baby's heartbeat and ask you about any contractions , leaking fluid , or bleeding you may be experiencing.

You'll also likely be screened for GBS, and your doctor may discuss vaccinations you need , like a flu shot , tetanus shot, or Tdap vaccine. Your baby's position will also be checked to determine whether he's headfirst in the uterus, bottom-first (breech), transverse (lying sideways), or oblique, which means the head is down but angled toward one of your hips.

Now's your chance to ask those last-minute questions about labor , pain management during delivery , and how and when to call your practitioner if you think your baby is on the way .

What questions should I ask during prenatal appointments?

In addition to asking about all the changes your body is going through and what to expect each month and during labor and delivery , you should also feel free to share any concerns you have with your practitioner. If something hurts, itches, nags, or worries you in any way, bring it up at your next appointment — or sooner if it can't wait.

And if you're having your baby in a hospital , don't wait until the very end of your pregnancy to learn about the strengths and weaknesses of the facility where your doctor practices. For example, some hospitals are not well-equipped to handle very premature infants , so if you're at risk for this outcome, that type of medical facility may not be ideal.

Honesty is also critical when you're asking and answering questions during your prenatal appointments. Don't be reluctant to bring up any stress , depression , or anxiety you're feeling, or to disclose drug or alcohol use , as this information is vital for your practitioner to know and can help support the healthiest outcomes for you and your baby.

Prenatal care visits are chock-full of tests, measurements, questions, and concerns, but know that throughout the process your and your baby's well-being are the main focus. Keep your schedule organized so you don't miss any appointments, and jot down anything you want to discuss with your practitioner. Doing so can help make your prenatal visits reassuring, productive, and maybe even fun!