6 Surprising Pregnancy Symptoms — for Partners!

Updated with Ask Heidi video.

pregnancy symptoms for partners, man embracing pregnant woman

You're probably familiar with the pregnancy peculiarities of moms-to-be, but how much do you know about the symptoms their partners experience?

Supporting a partner during pregnancy? Then you're sure to relate to at least some of the following puzzlements, like this one: Your pregnant partner has a good excuse for indulging her cravings for potato chips and ice cream, but why are you digging in just as fast?

Chances are, you're not just sharing snacks — you're sharing symptoms too, along with at least half of all other non-pregnant parents-to-be . In fact, pregnancy symptom-sharing is so prevalent, researchers have dubbed it couvade syndrome, a French term meaning "sympathetic pregnancy" or, roughly, "we're pregnant."

Have you done or felt something over the past few months that made you wonder, "Wait, who's pregnant here?" Read on to see how many of these sympathetic-pregnancy symptoms resonate with you.

Anxiety

It’s not uncommon for people to experience restless nights, heartburnand bouts of fatigue while their partners are pregnant. In fact, about 11 percent of fathers experience anxiety during the pre- and postnatal period.

How can you tame the tossing and turning? Reach out to other expectant parents, many of whom may be shaking in the same shoes as you. And don't think you can turn off the nerves by shutting out the pregnancy. Being more involved can actually make you feel better prepared and in control.

Nausea

Morning sickness isn’t exclusive to mornings — or moms-to-be. While this infamous pregnancy woe is attributed to an uptick in a woman’s hormones during pregnancy, others may also find themselves reaching for the saltines (or running for the toilet).

But rather than estrogen being the culprit, these queasies are likely the result of the aforementioned anxiety as well as changes in diet, which are pretty common for those who eat to relieve stress. The cures: Get (or stay) physically active as a means to blow off steam, talk about what’s worrying you with your partner or a friend, eat right and watch your alcohol intake.

Mood swings

Thanks to surging hormones, your partner may ping-pong between joy and sadness, tranquility and anxiety, and sweetness to crankiness — and you may do the same. The fact is that while hormones intensify mood swings , the underlying cause is the same in everyone: nerves.

As you’ve no doubt realized (likely in the middle of the night), having a baby is a big deal, and your life will never be the same. In many ways, it's changing already, which could lead to less sleep and even more mixed emotions.

All this worrying is natural, and balancing out the highs and lows of becoming a new parent takes practice — so cut yourself some slack. There’s no such thing as a perfect parent, and learning to accept that now is great practice for when baby finally arrives.

Pregnancy isn’t just a journey for moms — partners go through it too. The What to Expect app can help you track your symptoms and your partner's if they're having any, plus offer expert advice, relatable stories, and a Community of other parents who get what you’re going through.

Sex drive changes

During pregnancy, a woman’s sex drive can either rev up or shift into neutral — or do both within the same week. Some mamas-to-be experience a sexual surge (especially during the second trimester), while others are too tired, uncomfortable or self-conscious about their bodies to be interested.

But your mojo is just as unpredictable right now: Some soon-to-be parents are turned on by the changes in a pregnant partner's body, while others may find the transformation an overwhelming reminder of the responsibilities looming around the corner. Some find themselves energized by the prospect of having a baby, while others are exhausted just thinking about it.

And some expectant parents are too scared about hurting the baby to even think about having sex during pregnancy . (For most couples, there’s no risk at all.)

If your sex life has stalled, try to remain intimate. Remember, sex is only one physical display of intimacy, and there are many other ways to be close without touching at all.

A few tender tactics to try: Wake up a little earlier to have a morning cup of decaf together before work, take an evening walk (hand-holding encouraged) or snuggle on the couch with popcorn and a movie. The important thing is to find ways to communicate affection with your partner and share the new feelings you may both be experiencing in and out of the bedroom.

Weight gain

A bigger belly may be a given for a mom-to-be, but why is it that a man gains an average of 14 pounds during his partner’s pregnancy? Sympathetic snacking might be one factor, but that’s not the whole story.

A more likely culprit is cortisol, aptly dubbed the “stress hormone” because it’s secreted at higher volumes during periods of anxiety. Cortisol helps control blood-sugar levels and regulates metabolism. During periods of high stress, cortisol is released into your body, giving your appetite the green light and making you think you’re hungry when you’re really not.

Plus, cortisol directs where you pack on the pounds, which is often to the belly. Take action by stocking your kitchen with healthy snacks and eating more mindfully. Also consider amping up your exercise routine, which will help both your physical and mental health.

Aches and pains

Many symptoms of couvade syndrome seem to have clear causes (read: nerves), but others are more mysterious. Toothaches, backaches , headaches, leg cramps and other pains consistently appear in various studies on sympathetic pregnancy. Some even report experiencing pains in the same places at the same times as their pregnant partners.

Researchers have yet to find any physical explanations for these simultaneous pangs, so the cause is likely psychological: Some people may be responding to subconscious feelings. They might not be carrying a child, but they’re becoming a parent too.

Whatever the case, some honest communication about the upcoming changes in your life will probably help any symptoms you’re feeling during this pre-parenthood period.