Do You Need a RhoGAM Shot During Pregnancy?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

woman getting tested for rh incompatibility

If you're Rh negative, your provider may recommend a RhoGAM shot to prevent Rh incompatibility. It's a simple, low-risk injection that protects your baby now and in future pregnancies.

Did your initial round of prenatal bloodwork reveal that you're Rh negative? That could mean that you and your baby are Rh incompatible. In that case, your doctor may suggest a shot of Rh immunoglobulin — commonly known in the U.S. by the brand name RhoGAM — during pregnancy and after delivery if you have an Rh-positive baby.

While the term "Rh incompatibility" may sound serious, the treatment is simple and low risk. Here's what to expect if you need a RhoGAM shot.

Key Takeaways

Rh incompatibility sounds scary, but it's very manageable. If you're Rh negative and your baby is Rh positive, your body could make antibodies against your baby's blood. But doctors screen for this early, and treatment is simple and effective.

The RhoGAM shot safely prevents complications. RhoGAM stops your immune system from reacting to your baby's blood, protecting your current pregnancy and helping prevent problems in future pregnancies, with minimal side effects for most moms.

Timing matters — and your provider will guide you. Most moms who need RhoGAM get it around 26 to 28 weeks of pregnancy and again after delivery, with additional doses recommended after certain procedures, bleeding, or pregnancy loss.

What is the Rh factor?

Rh factor is a type of protein often found on the surface of red blood cells, which carry oxygen throughout the body. But not everyone has it. If you carry the protein, you're Rh positive. If you don't, you're Rh negative. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsThe Rh Factor: How It Can Affect Your PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsThe Rh Factor: How It Can Affect Your PregnancySee All Sources

Most people are Rh positive. Negative Rh factor occurs in about 15% of white people, between 4% and 8% of Black people, and 0.3% of Asian people. Trusted SourceMerck ManualHemolytic Disease of the Fetus and NewbornSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceMerck ManualHemolytic Disease of the Fetus and NewbornSee All Sources

If you've ever gotten a blood test or given blood, you probably noticed the "+" or "–" at the end of your blood type. This symbol indicates whether or not the Rh factor is in your bloodstream. O+ blood, for instance, has the Rh factor, while O- blood does not.

Whether you're Rh positive or negative doesn't matter much, except when it comes to pregnancy.

What is Rh incompatibility?

Rh incompatibility happens when an expecting mom is Rh negative and her baby is Rh positive. If your baby's blood comes into contact with yours during pregnancy or delivery, your body can build antibodies against the Rh factor. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursRhesus (Rh) Factor Incompatibility During PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursRhesus (Rh) Factor Incompatibility During PregnancySee All Sources

This can lead to potential complications (especially if you become pregnant with another Rh-positive baby in the future) because your immune system will mount an attack against those Rh-positive red blood cells. That's why your doctor will test your Rh factor early on in pregnancy.

The good news is that Rh incompatibility is easy to treat with a RhoGAM shot. "They gave me a shot at 28 weeks and again just after baby was born," says What to Expect Community mom arial1234. "It wasn't a big deal at all! It sounds scary but it's really not!!"

What is RhoGAM?

RhoGAM is the injection used to prevent Rh incompatibility from developing during pregnancy. The shot contains antibodies (collected from plasma donors) that stop your immune system from reacting to your baby's Rh-positive blood cells.

In other words, it keeps Rh incompatibility from causing any possible problems should your and your baby's blood types mix at any point during your pregnancy or delivery .

Like other shots, RhoGAM is injected into your arm or backside.

Do I need the RhoGAM shot during pregnancy?

If you test Rh positive, the shot isn't necessary. If you test Rh negative and the baby's father subsequently tests Rh positive, your doctor will recommend that you get the RhoGAM shot.

Getting a RhoGAM shot is the best way to prevent any possible complications from Rh incompatibility. It protects your baby's red blood cells from attack if her blood comes into contact with yours during labor and delivery and helps prevent Rh-related complications from happening in later pregnancies.

Speaking of later pregnancies, if you're Rh negative, it's important to get the RhoGAM shot with each baby unless your provider says otherwise. (If it's determined that your baby is also Rh negative, you won't need the shot.)

"With my first pregnancy I got one after delivery," says What to Expect Community mom sunflower891. "With my second, I got one at 28 weeks and again at delivery. Plan for this baby is another one at 28 weeks and again at delivery unless baby is Rh negative," says What to Expect Community mom sunflower891, who is Rh negative with two girls who are Rh positive.

When should I get the RhoGAM shot?

If your doctor determines that you may have Rh incompatibility, you'll get a shot of RhoGAM when you're between 26 and 28 weeks pregnant and then again within 72 hours after delivery to ensure that future pregnancies are as safe as the first.

If you undergo chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or amniocentesis, if you experience bleeding during pregnancy, or if experience any trauma where you could be exposed to fetal cells, your doctor may give you the RhoGAM shot at another point in your pregnancy. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicRh FactorSee All Sources [4]

Rh Factor

If you've been told you need the RhoGAM shot, know that many moms-to-be have been there too. The What to Expect app offers expert answers, appointment tracking, and a supportive community of other women navigating the same journey. So remember, you're not alone!

"This is my fourth baby and I've gotten it around 28 weeks with every baby, again after birth, and anytime during a pregnancy if any bleeding (no matter how little) occurs!," says What to Expect Community mom mommakate.

Do I need a RhoGAM shot after a miscarriage or chemical pregnancy?

The RhoGAM shot is a good preventative measure to take any time your baby's blood comes into contact with yours, which can happen if you have a miscarriage or ectopic pregnancy . You won't, however, need a RhoGAM shot after a chemical pregnancy .

"I had a Rhogam shot with my daughter and a miscarriage. Not super fun getting a shot in your butt but overall was no biggie and it's super important," says What to Expect Community mom kristenhartszach.

Are there side effects or risks of the RhoGAM shot?

The side effects associated with the RhoGAM shot are rare and mild. They may include:

Soreness or rash at the injection site

Mild fever

Chills

Headaches

If you're worried about the potential side effects, talk to your doctor.

"I got the shot and I haven't had any side effects or negative consequences," says What to Expect Community member Amccombs. "If I had more kids I wanted them protected. Even though it's usually not life and death, I wasn't about to take that risk."

If you're worried about getting the RhoGAM injection because it's made from donated plasma, keep in mind there's minimal to no risk of contracting diseases like HIV or hepatitis because the donated plasma is thoroughly screened and treated. Know that the shot has saved hundreds of thousands of babies' lives.

Finding out that you and your baby may be Rh incompatible can be a little worrying. But the RhoGAM shot is a safe, simple, and effective way to stave off any potential problems — both now and for future pregnancies.