Am I Breastfeeding Too Frequently?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"My 6-week-old wants to breastfeed constantly. Should I be nursing my baby whenever she wants? Is it possible to be breastfeeding too frequently?"

So your breastfeeding baby is taking "feeding on demand" a little too literally? You've likely heard that frequent feedings are an infant's way of pumping up Mom's milk supply , ensuring that there will be plenty on tap to fuel a baby's growing needs in the months ahead.

And if your little one prefers to enjoy her meals at a leisurely pace, there's probably even less room in between nursing sessions for you to take a breather. But you may still wonder, "When will my baby stop breastfeeding constantly — ordering up round-the-clock meals so my breasts (and I) can get a break?"

Actually, it’s right about the 6-week mark, so snap that nursing bra up and read on for what to do.

Check in with the doctor

First, speak with the pediatrician to rule out any possible issues, like low milk supply . If your baby's weight gain is normal and she's thriving, then it's likely that your milk supply is well established. And here's the good news: You can slowly start stretching out the period of time between feedings.

Nearly nonstop nursing is perfectly on target for a newborn in the first few weeks, when kinks in the milk supply system are still being smoothed out and the two of you are getting used to the basics of breastfeeding . But now that she's reached the 6 weeks old , you can start to make some scheduling demands of your own and gradually space out feeding sessions.

Offer an alternative

If your breastfeeding baby starts fishing for another feeding soon after the last one, don't rush to offer the breast.

Crying doesn't always signal hunger: Babies cry when they're tired, bored or in the mood for some attention from anyone who's within earshot. (Remember that colic typically peaks at this age, tapering off by around 3 months or so.)

Swoop in for a diaper change , some playtime or fresh air before resorting to the breast. If your champion feeder wakes in the middle of the night or during naptime, try turning on a soothing musical toy, singing a soft lullaby or rubbing or patting her until she drifts off.

Make each meal count

When you do offer the breast, encourage her to nurse thoroughly at each one (rather than letting her take just a little from each side) so you're not playing into her snack-bar approach. Within a few weeks, you should notice that there are longer stretches between feedings and that you're spending less time nursing.

Keep in mind that a 6-week-old baby still needs to nurse about every two to three hours — even during the night (though you should be able to stretch out the night feedings a little longer) — and that she isn't likely to sleep through the night without a feeding until she's at least 3 to 4 months old or older.

Here's to giving your breasts a break,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Breastfeeding: Basics and Tips for Nursing Your Baby , February 2020. WhatToExpect.com, How to Increase Your Breast Milk Supply , July 2021. WhatToExpect.com, What Do Your Baby's Cries Mean? , June 2021. WhatToExpect.com, How to Soothe Colic in Babies , June 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, How Often to Breastfeed , November 2015. KidsHealth From Nemours, Breastfeeding FAQs: How Much and How Often , November 2019.

What Our Community Is Talking About

How to get fattier milk?

Night lights?

Best pacifiers for breastfed baby?

There are 34,073 active discussions happening now in our Breastfeeding community group.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Tips for Breastfeeding a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Cluster Feeding Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Stop Pumping Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

When Should You Stop Breastfeeding? Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Increase Your Breast Milk Supply Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is It Okay to Wake My Baby Up for Feedings? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Pumping Breast Milk Guide and Tips for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Help Me, Heidi! How Do I Get Baby to Latch After Bottle-Feeding? By Heidi Murkoff

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Here's What to Do if Your Baby Is Crying in Her Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Will My Baby Sleep Through the Night? Here's the Scoop Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When and How to Night Wean Your Baby — Without Losing Too Much Sleep in the Process Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Pumping Breast Milk for Twins Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How Much Should My Baby Eat? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfed Baby Won't Take a Bottle By Heidi Murkoff

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window