Does Fertility Massage Really Work?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

fertility massage, woman on a massage table with masseuse's hands over her face

While massage won't magically boost fertility, it may help ease stress and tension — and that can matter when you're TTC.

Trying to get pregnant can be stressful, especially if it’s taking longer than you'd hoped. As time goes by, you might be searching for something that will help and wonder if massage, specifically a "fertility massage," can help in the baby-making department.

So what is a fertility massage, and does it really work when you're trying to conceive? Here’s what you need to know.

Key Takeaways

Fertility massages haven't been proven to boost conception. There's no scientific evidence that fertility, Mayan, or self-fertility massages can directly increase your chances of getting pregnant.

Massage may help indirectly by reducing stress . While it won't improve fertility on its own, massage can lower stress hormones and promote relaxation, which may support your overall well-being when trying to conceive.

Massage is generally safe when trying to conceive . Most massages are fine before pregnancy, but avoid overly deep or painful abdominal massage. And massage guidelines change once you become pregnant.

What is a fertility massage?

The definition of a fertility massage varies from practitioner to practitioner. But it generally includes a few similar techniques.

A fertility massage can include a deep tissue massage of the abdomen intended to increase circulation, which is thought by some practitioners to boost fertility. It can also include the use of certain acupressure points around the feet, especially the inner and outer ankles, which reflexologists believe correspond to the uterus, ovaries, and other reproductive organs.

Regular relaxation techniques similar to those used in a normal massage, like shoulder and neck rubs, can also be incorporated into a fertility massage.

Can a fertility massage help you get pregnant?

Probably not. There's no research to show that massage in general, or fertility massages specifically, can directly affect fertility and increase the chance of getting pregnant.

But massage, like yoga and meditation , may help reduce stress . Some studies have found that massage decreases levels of cortisol (also known as the stress hormone) in the body and increases serotonin and dopamine, which are thought to contribute to well-being and improved mood.

Get support for your trying-to-conceive journey and connect with other moms TTC in the What to Expect app .

What is a Mayan fertility massage, and does it really work?

A Mayan fertility massage is also slightly different depending on the practitioner, which could be because it was verbally taught by traditional healers who didn’t write down their techniques.

The technique typically incorporates a massage in the areas around the uterus and ovaries. It’s supposed to pinpoint the ligaments holding the reproductive organs together, especially if they’re not believed to be properly aligned, which Mayan massage therapists theorize could cause infertility .

No definitive research shows that receiving a Mayan massage will help get you pregnant, but, like other forms of massage, if it 's relaxing, that may help your chances.

However, beware of any overly deep abdominal massage. A really vigorous one can actually cause harm (like rupturing a cyst , for example). If it's painful, ask the masseuse to ease up or stop.

What is a self-fertility massage, and does it really help you conceive?

Self-fertility massage (sometimes abbreviated to SFM) is a type of massage you give yourself to supposedly boost your fertility. It’s free and you can do it every day if you’d like, which is an added benefit. Just like the other types of fertility massage, it’s focused on the abdominal area. A self-fertility massage usually involves deep circular strokes around the stomach, along the rib cage, and above the hip bones.

While there's no research to show that a self-fertility massage helps you conceive, it can’t hurt, and if it makes you feel better, why not give it a try? But be sure to avoid this type of massage if you're pregnant. And if you feel very tender areas, apply pressure without digging in too deeply.

"I just finished doing my very first fertility massage," says What to Expect Community member MrsLightbody. "I have been TTC for only 6 months ... and figure that SFM can't hurt at all."

What are the benefits of massage when you’re trying to get pregnant?

The main benefit of massage when you’re trying to conceive is that it can lift away some of the stress that can kill the baby-making mood. Some research has found that women who are more stressed during ovulation may be less likely to conceive than women who are less stressed (or not at all) when they're ovulating.

Is there any harm in getting a massage when you’re trying to conceive?

Most types of massage are safe when you’re trying to conceive. But that isn't the case once you get pregnant. Massage is generally not advised or permitted in the first trimester , and after that only prenatal massages by properly trained therapists are recommended.

It's also best to try to minimize or avoid lying on your back for prolonged periods of time once you’re past the first trimester. You can, however, be elevated on your back during a massage. Talk to your practitioner before you get a massage, whether you’re trying to get pregnant or are already pregnant. And make sure you see a licensed massage therapist who's experienced in prenatal massage if you're expecting.

Types of massage to get when you're trying to conceive

The following kinds of massage or a combination of these techniques might be beneficial when you’re trying to conceive:

Reflexology. Reflexology uses certain acupressure points found in the feet to benefit the organs associated with reproduction. Certain points found around the ankles and on the top of the foot correspond with the ovaries, uterus, and fallopian tubes. Some massage therapists believe that applying pressure to these points at various times during your cycle can improve your chances of getting pregnant.

Abdominal massage. Whether you’re getting a Mayan fertility massage or just a regular massage of the stomach, that part of the body can feel particularly sensitive when you’re trying to conceive. Those who practice massage with fertility in mind tend to believe that focusing on the abdomen, which can be filled with tension, is key when it comes to boosting conception efforts. Keep in mind that abdominal massage should not be painful, overly deep. or vigorous. If it is, be sure to ask your masseuse to decrease the pressure so it's no longer painful.

Swedish massage. Swedish massage is the most popular and well-known type of massage. It involves a lighter touch, and it’s known for being relaxing. If the stress of trying to get pregnant is weighing heavily on you, this soft, rhythmic technique can help melt the tension away.

Shiatsu massage. This is another pressure-point massage, which can be good for hitting spots that correspond with the reproductive organs as well as those that promote deep relaxation.

Massage likely isn’t going to help get you pregnant, and fertility massages may even be misleading. But getting a massage may reduce some of the stress, anxiety, and ups and downs you might be experiencing when you’re trying to conceive. That rollercoaster of emotions can take the fun out of making babies and can make getting pregnant trickier. Plus, massages feel great, and you can probably use some pampering!