Does Your Toddler Know You’re Pregnant Before You Do?

Toddlers tell pregnancy

Your pint-size sidekick may pick up on changes you didn’t realize you were giving off.

What to Expect mom mommyofonertwo is in awe of her 2.5-year-old son, after he asked her if there was a baby in her belly an entire week before she took a pregnancy test. "Turns out he was 100% correct. Lately, he’s been saying, ‘There are two babies in there!’ I will be absolutely mind-blown if he’s also correct about this,” she says.

But do big-siblings-to-be really sense pregnancies? While toddlers and some bigger kids don’t exactly have a sixth sense to predict pregnancy, they can be highly attuned to your behaviors and routines, noticing any slight change, maybe even before you do, says Brooke Herd, Psy.D ., a licensed pediatric psychologist with The Child and Family Connection in Costa Mesa, California.

With the WTE Community buzzing about this intriguing phenomenon, let’s take a closer look at what science — and real-life experience — has to say.

Key Takeaways

Toddlers are curious, observant, and intuitive . These traits may help them sense your pregnancy, even before you do.

No true data points to your toddler being able to predict a pregnancy officially. However, they may notice that you're acting differently, even before you notice.

Evolving them in your pregnancy can be special. Help decorate the nursery or give them a recap of your last ultrasound appointment.

Can toddlers really sense your pregnancy?

No, there’s no hard-and-fast scientific evidence that toddlers can sense that a baby is on the way before you know it, but younger kiddos have been known to call a pregnancy early on because they are so tuned into your behaviors, moods, and routines, explains Nicole Taylor, M.D. , a perinatal psychiatrist and a What to Expect Medical Advisory Board member.

“Toddlers are very observant and curious,” she explains. “Pregnant women who are tired, less energetic, and having morning sickness may not be as interactive as usual. Or, if mom is more moody, due to hormones or lack of sleep, a toddler will pick up on that, even if mom hasn't even noticed that yet" she adds. It's also possible that if you are excited or anxious about something going on with the pregnancy, your toddler might sense that change, too.

Whether they share they had a dream that you’re pregnant or kiss your belly out of nowhere, toddlers might seem like they’re psychic. “It’s likely a mix of both intuition and observation,” says Sameena Rahman , M.D., FACOG, who's an OB/GYN and the founder of GSM Collective , a gynecologic care practice. “Toddlers are extremely attuned to their parents’ emotions, and those subtle cues can trigger changes in their own attachment behaviors.”

Your toddler’s behaviors may change, too

Herd herself is the mom of a 16-month-old and is expecting her second baby. Early in her second trimester, around 15 weeks, her daughter noticed her stomach before she told her that she was expecting. “She noticed my tummy and wanted to put her hand on it. Then, I was like, ‘OK, she can tell that my tummy is getting bigger, so I need to tell her,’” she recalls.

Your toddler might also mimic your pregnancy by putting a pillow under their shirt, becoming extra clingy, or even regressing in milestones like sleeping or potty training if they suspect you are expecting, says Dr. Rahman.

You might also notice they want to touch or kiss your belly, or even bring a toy bottle or food to your stomach. “It's very sweet, because they’re trying to share,” explains Herd.

Once toddlers learn about the pregnancy, they’ll take time to process what’s going on, says Herd.

How to explain your pregnancy to your toddler

Even if you think your toddler already knows you’re pregnant, it’s still important to be direct in telling them about the changes coming soon . Share the news in a way that’s simple and reassuring, says Dr. Rahman. “Normalize the changes while reinforcing security and love,” she notes, suggesting something like, “Mommy has a baby growing in her tummy. Sometimes she might feel tired or sick, and that’s normal. But I still love you just as much as always.”

You can always bring them along to an appointment if that's something that feels comfortable to you, or show them the ultrasound picture when you get home. They might enjoy helping to decorate the nursery, too.

Toddlers are curious and very observant — and watching them sense that there are changes coming can bring lots of wonderful emotions. Enjoy the ride, and be patient as everyone adjusts to the wonderful idea of expanding your family .

Nicole Taylor, M.D. , a perinatal psychiatrist and a What to Expect Medical Advisory Board member, Jacksonville, Florida. Sameena Rahman , M.D., FACOG, OB/GYN, and the founder of GSM Collective, Chicago, Illinois. Brooke Herd, Psy.D ., a licensed pediatric psychologist with The Child and Family Connection, Costa Mesa, California.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Can Your Pet Sense You’re Pregnant? 85% of Moms Say Yes Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Pregnancy Symptoms: 14 Early Signs of Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Help Me, Heidi! Can You Be Pregnant but With No Symptoms? By Heidi Murkoff

How to Help Your Child Prepare for Your New Baby By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

When to Tell People You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

Why You Don't Have to Wait Until 12 Weeks to Reveal Your Pregnancy Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Can Your Baby Feel It When You Rub Your Belly? The Sweet Science Will Melt You Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

How to Tell if Your Toddler Is Gifted Medically Reviewed by Florencia Segura, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Moms Wish They’d Known Before Potty Training Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Not Sure If You’re Ready For a Baby? The Big Questions to Ask Before You Start Trying Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

4 Signs Your Toddler May Be Stressed Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler Fact Checked by Jill Malter

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window