Creative ways to share your *pawesome* news.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

If you're a proud pup parent, your pregnancy announcement isn't just about sharing the news of your impending bundle of joy — it's about revealing that your furry friend is about to become a big sibling ! Some of the sweetest, most heart-melting announcements involve those beloved canine companions, set against a variety of charming backdrops. Whether it's a sandy beach scene with your pooch sporting a "big sis" or "big bro" bandana, or another adorable setting, the possibilities are endless.

As your family expands, incorporating your dog into your pregnancy announcement can add an extra layer of joy and excitement. Below, a few of the best ones, to help you celebrate the upcoming arrival of your newest human addition.

1. All paws on deck

all paws on deck

All you need is the sonogram , each parent’s hand and your dog’s paw to recreate this blissful black and white announcement. And @eleanorcorc’s caption says it all: “Murphy will have the shock of his life come November.”

2. Matching family PJs

matching pjs announcement

Celebrating the holidays will look a little different next year, but you can prepare your pup by snagging an extra set of matching PJs for your baby. We love how @_stephygee_ held up her sonogram while “explaining” her pregnancy to their dog Cookie (who's also donning the same adorable PJs).

3. Having a ball

having a ball announcement

Big brother Jerry is about to get a new fetch partner! To announce their big news, parents Ben and Corinne posed their pup with two of his favorite things: tennis balls.

4. Paradise pup

paradise announcement

What’s better than a beach pregnancy announcement? A beach pregnancy announcement with a dog. Professional photographer Jackie Tran snapped this sweet and sandy family photo in Laguna Beach, California. Easy peasy, adorable and oh so beautiful!

5. Personalized onesie

personalized onesie

Your dog is about to become a sibling, and you can customize a onesie that shows off your baby’s protector. For announcing, just snap a picture of the onesie alongside your furry friend (or friends!).

6. New job title

new job title announcement

Another way to phrase it? Baby’s new security is in training. This reversible bandana is made in five different sizes to perfectly fit your pup – and will be the most amazing accessory for your announcement photo.

7. Banner bandana news

bandana news announcement

This bandana says it all. Simply tie this one that says "I'm going to be a big brother" around your BFF and you won’t need a caption — just wait for the happy comments to roll in.

8. A pawesome read

banner announcement

Dogs, puns and a What to Expect reference? We are here for this digital download book cover, which you can print and attach to a book for your dog pregnancy announcement. Is there anything more adorable than a dog "reading?"

9. Flat lay fun

flat lay fun

Flat lay designs are incredibly popular among parents-to-be, and many of them are available as editable digital templates .This one features a spot where you can add a photo of your dog, alongside your sonogram, various baby items and a letterboard that says "Mom and Dad are getting me a HUMAN."

10. Family values

family values announcement

It doesn’t get much cuter than this "must love dogs" onesie, which clearly outlines your parenting priorities. Pair it with a bib, sonogram, wooden sign and dog-themed baby book for the ultimate flat-lay.

11. Sibling signage

sibling signage

As an alternative to the bandana, try a customizable sign your dog can wear around his neck. You can personalize the message, or stick with two classics: “guard dog on duty” and “official toy tester.” The real question is whether he will wear it long enough to snap a pic!

12. Dog mom must-have

dog mom announcement

Want to announce your pregnancy in person? Wear this cozy sweatshirt that says "From fur mama to baby mama" to your next family gathering, or during your announcement photoshoot .

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

Updates history

Olivia update: 6/4/24, total revamp