How to Avoid Spoiling Your Child

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates with new fact-check and image, along with copy, formatting and sourcing changes.

how to avoid spoiling your toddler, mother and toddler son doing dishes and cleaning

"I have friends who always had trouble saying 'no' to their little ones, and now they're dealing with pretty demanding older children. How do I make sure I don't raise a spoiled toddler?"

You’re one smart cookie to think about this already. Though you can’t spoil a newborn (holding and doting on younger babies creates a trusting environment), parents should know that they can start setting the stage to spoil their little ones by the time they’re 2 or 3 years old.

Showering a toddler with gifts or letting her rule the roost might avoid some immediate tears or tantrums , but if you turn to these tactics all the time, it’ll be tougher for your tot to end up good-natured and independent. Instead, she might wind up thinking that she can usually get her way and if you give in after a tantrum, then the tantrum was an effective way to get what she wants.

Here are some ways to avoid having a spoiled toddler Trusted SourceTufts Medical CenterSpoiled Children: PreventionSee All Sources [1] in your house.

Trusted SourceTufts Medical CenterSpoiled Children: PreventionSee All Sources

Stick to your rules and discipline your child

Use discipline strategies that work for your child Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsWhat%u2019s the Best Way to Discipline My Child?See All Sources [2] so she doesn’t think she can do whatever she wants and learns that there are consequences for bad behavior.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsWhat%u2019s the Best Way to Discipline My Child?See All Sources

Kids are going to test your boundaries. As hard as it is, avoid caving in to your toddler’s pleas (and pouts) to stay up later than her set bedtime, double up on treats or snacks on the regular, extend her time at the playground beyond what you wanted it to be, or watch another episode of her favorite kids’ show even though she was supposed to turn off the TV after one.

Children learn from a very young age whether you’ll stick to your limits or if whining or throwing a tantrum Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsTop Tips for Surviving TantrumsSee All Sources [3] will get them what they want, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsTop Tips for Surviving TantrumsSee All Sources

Stay consistent to demonstrate that you mean what you say and your toddler isn’t above the rules.

Give your child chores

Let your toddler help out around the house by letting her take on a couple of age-appropriate chores (putting books back on the shelf, bringing plastic dinnerware to the sink). This will help her gain a sense of responsibility and not expect everything to be done for her.

Make one of her regular jobs something the whole family benefits from, like setting the table, suggests the AAP. The point is to encourage toddlers (who are self-centered by nature) to start thinking about others’ needs, instead of just “me, me, me.”

Teach your toddler manners

Instilling good manners and how to be polite in your toddler can go a long way to prevent her from becoming spoiled. Teach her to say please and thank you, to share and take turns, and to show others respect. It also helps if you let her know which bad manners to avoid, like name calling and being a sore loser.

Let your toddler feel disappointment

As perfect as you want her world to be, shielding your cutie from all of life’s bumps and always coming to her rescue can result in a spoiled toddler.

Your little one will be bummed when a playdate gets canceled or she doesn’t get a toy she wants in the store, but in time she’ll learn how to face disappointment with grace and self-control (without turning into one of those spectacularly spoiled children from Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory ).

Teach your child to be compassionate and giving

Showing your toddler how to be kind and giving will help put the focus on people other than herself from a young age. Model compassionate, generous behavior by donating to charities, volunteering, and doing random acts of kindness with your child whenever possible.

Avoid giving a million chances

When you’re disciplining your child , follow through on any consequences you’ve threatened — and without counting “2 ½” and “2 ¾” on your way to “3.” Otherwise, she’ll think she can continue to manipulate you and others in her world.

Steer clear of bargaining

Deal-making avoids a scene, but you shouldn’t squelch poor behavior with a prize. If she’s refusing to get in her car seat after dance class, refrain from dangling an ice-cream-cone “carrot.” Otherwise, you’ll end up with a spoiled toddler who will expect a treat after every class.

Don’t say 'no' to everything

Surprisingly, not giving toddlers enough leeway can sometimes cause behavior similar to that of a spoiled child. A child who hears “no” too often might think, “My mom says ‘no’ to everything, so I’m just going to try what I want to.” Saying too many “no’s” can dilute their effectiveness and lead to your toddler tuning you out.

Or she might take all those no’s to mean that she’s seen as a bad child and so she might as well act out. So choose your battles. When a request is reasonable and made when your toddler’s on her best behavior, go ahead and reward her .

Here’s hoping your honey stays sweet,

Heidi Murkoff

Sources

Spoiled Children: Prevention

Show in the article

What%u2019s the Best Way to Discipline My Child?

Show in the article

Top Tips for Surviving Tantrums

Show in the article

10 Tips to Prevent Aggressive Toddler Behavior

How to Shape & Manage Your Young Child’s Behavior

Chores and Responsibility

Social Development: 2 Year Olds

How to Use Ignoring

Disciplining Your Toddler

Temper Tantrums

Can You Spoil a Newborn?

Toddler Temper Tantrums

7 Ways to Discipline Your Toddler

How to Teach Your Toddler Good Manners,

How to Cut Back on Saying “No!” to Your Child

Using Positive Reinforcement on Your Toddler