Dressing Toddlers

toddler clothes

You can have as much fun building a wardrobe for your one- to three-year-old as you had selecting her layette when she was a baby. Although a few of the rules change, the cute factor for dressing toddlers is the same as it was for choosing babywear.

Now that your tot is walking, running, climbing, using the potty (or learning to), and insisting on doing practically everything “all by myself,” you’ll want to keep certain factors in mind when you dress your darling, especially if you want to hone those newfound dressing skills .

What to look for when buying clothes for your toddler

When you’re shopping for toddler clothes, look for garb that:

Won’t blow your budget. While your toddler’s growth rate is a bit slower than the baby pace, you’ll still be lucky to get more than a season out of most clothing you buy, so why break the bank? Take advantage of sales, and don’t turn your nose up at consignment stores. When it comes to basic tops and bottoms, dressing toddlers in pre-worn wear makes good (dollars and) sense.

Will hold up. Not only do toddler clothes need to withstand lots of wear-and-tear (think playground to puddle and back again), they also need to make it through multiple washings and dryings.

Meets comfy criteria. A toddler’s skin is still as delicate and sensitive as a baby’s, so parents should be dressing toddlers in soft fabrics like stretchy cotton, which is breathable and super-easy to move in. Also check for well-finished seams that won’t rub and non-scratchy tags (which you can always cut out, of course), and beware of appliqués and other decorative elements that can itch or irritate.

Are a good fit. It's important to get the right size clothes for your little one so she's comfortable.

Toddler clothing sizes

Here’s how toddler clothing sizes generally break down according to a child’s height and weight:

2T: 25–27 lbs., 32–34 in.

3T: 28–32 lbs., 35–37 in.

4T: 33–36 lbs., 38–40 in.

5T: 37–42 lbs., 41–43 in.

Toddler dressing tips

Here are some other things to keep in mind when dressing your toddler:

If your child is on the short side, she may be able to wear clothing labeled in month sizes (for a baby) rather than in the T (toddler) size. Month sizes have the same weight range but a slightly lower height range.

European sizing is based on how tall tots are, so convert your child’s height from inches to centimeters (you can try this calculator ) and you’ll always know exactly which size to buy.

If the toddler size of an outfit you like is out of stock, the kid size may well fit your small fry: Kid sizes tend to be longer with less room in the seat (toddler sizes allow space for a diaper), so a tall toddler who’s totally potty trained can probably pull off a kid size.

Swimsuits typically run small, so you’ll almost always need to buy one size up from what your tot usually wears. (If you buy a bigger size in a one piece for a little girl, you may need to fasten the straps together in the back to keep them from slipping down her shoulders.)

If you want to spring for a fancy outfit from a high-end kiddie boutique (for a special occasion, say), go for it — but be aware that these tend to run small, too.

Make toddler dressing as me-do-able as possible. Most toddlers have a “me-do-it!” mentality that affects everything from pushing their own stroller to pulling on their own pants. Buy bottoms with elastic waists rather than button or zipper flies (perfect clothes for potty training as well), tops with neck holes wide enough for your child’s head to slip through easily, and shirts with buttons and snaps that are big enough for your munchkin to at least try to manipulate herself. Those who follow these tips find dressing toddlers to be a source of fun and learning, rather than frustration, for both themselves and their independent toddler fashionistas.

What to Expect the Second Year , Heidi Murkoff and Sharon Mazel. American Academy of Pediatrics, Bright Futures Guidelines for Health Supervision of Infants, Children, and Adolescents: Promoting Healthy Development .

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

How to Dress a Toddler for the Weather Fact Checked by Jill Malter

Baby Clothes Sizes Chart and Guide Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Here’s Why Your Toddler Is Taking Off His Clothes and What to Do About It Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Dress a Newborn Baby for the Weather Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Toddler Haircuts Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

What's the Right Temperature for Baby? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

8 Walking Safety Tips for Toddlers to Keep Spills and Hazards at Bay Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Bye-Bye, Diapers — How and When to Potty Train Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

All About Toddler Glasses Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Can't Toddlers Sit Still? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Potty Train Your Little Girl: Helpful Tips and More Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Clean Baby Clothes By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

When to Buy and Start Wearing Maternity Clothes Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

How to Protect Babies and Toddlers in the Cold Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window