Can You Drink Alcohol While Trying to Conceive? Here’s What Experts Recommend

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

wine glass of woman who's drinking before TTC

Is it safe to drink alcohol when you're trying to get pregnant? This is why trading in your cocktail for a mocktail is a smart move.

Do you enjoy a glass of wine with your supper or a beer with your barbecue? Can't imagine your day without a nightcap?

You probably already know that alcohol is off the menu once you have a baby on board. But do the same pregnancy prohibitions apply if you're trying to conceive?

Key Takeaways

Experts recommend skipping alcohol when trying to conceive . It's difficult to know exactly when pregnancy begins — and early exposure to alcohol matters.

Drinking can interfere with ovulation. This may make it harder to get pregnant.

Mocktails are a safe (and hydrating) alternative. You can experiment to find your favorite tasty, alcohol-free sip.

Can you drink while you're trying to conceive?

Nearly three in four women continue to drink even as they're planning to get pregnant, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). But the timing of conception isn't a precise science: It's not like you'll get a "stop drinking" bulletin from your body the second the sperm meets the egg.

And that's why experts recommend that you abstain from drinking entirely if you're trying to get pregnant. Being cautious makes perfect sense to What to Expect Community member Rainbow2325. “I personally don't drink at all when I'm TTC,” she shares.

Another reason to skip the sauce? Heavy drinking can mess with your menstrual cycle, possibly putting a crimp in your conception plans.

Trying to conceive — or already pregnant? Check out the What to Expect app for clear guidance on what's safe (and what to avoid).

Risks of drinking alcohol when you're pregnant

While hard data on the dangers of light drinking during pregnancy is hard to come by (no researcher would potentially put a baby in harm's way in the name of science), doctor groups including the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) along with the U.S. Surgeon General (who's responsible for the warning labels you see on every bottle of booze) recommend that expectant moms be total teetotalers.

Studies do suggest that even moderate drinking during pregnancy can result in birth defects and potentially lifelong physical, mental, and behavioral disabilities for a child, known as fetal alcohol spectrum disorders .

Bottom line? Now that you're in baby-making mode, check out the mocktail section on the drink menu; more and restaurants and bars have fun options. Or shake up a few of your own house virgin mixes or spritzers .

And if you do decide to take an occasional sip or two of Merlot, do so with a side of food — that'll slow the absorption of alcohol into your system.