Dry Skin in Babies

dry skin

Just like grown-ups, babies can get downright crocodilian under the right (or rather, the wrong) conditions.

Your baby's birthday suit is soft, smooth, sweet-smelling — and extra sensitive. Which means it's particularly prone to dryness, especially in the colder months.

No need to worry, though. While dry skin might not be a cute look on your little one, it's rarely cause for concern. Best of all? Relief is relatively easy to come by. Here's how to moisturize your baby's thirsty skin and keep the dryness in check. Plus, how to tell a simple case of dry skin from something that might need more attention, like eczema.

What causes dry skin in babies?

Almost every baby (and adult!) will deal with the occasional bout of dry skin from time to time. And many of the same things that make your skin dry can also leave your little one's skin thirsty.

Exposure to cold temps and dry air — especially common in winter — can sap skin of its usual moisture. Spending too much time soaking in hot baths, though soothing and cozy, can have the same effect. And your baby's thin, delicate skin makes it extra prone to becoming parched.

Some babies are also genetically prone to having drier skin than others, meaning their skin barrier doesn't keep moisture locked in as effectively.

What does dry skin in babies look like?

Roughness, flakiness, ashiness and fine lines or cracks are all signs that your sweetie's skin needs more moisture. Dry spots can strike anywhere, but they're especially common on the hands, feet, face and lips. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsDry SkinSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsDry SkinSee All Sources

Mild dryness probably won't bother your baby much. But very dry skin can get irritated, which can lead her to scratch and irritate the itchy skin further.

What's the difference between dry skin and eczema in babies?

Wondering if that dry patch is actually a sign that your sweetie might have a more serious skin issue? Dry skin and eczema (a skin condition that often appears in babies starting in the first few months of life) can have some symptoms in common. Almost all those with eczema also have dry skin, but not all with dry skin have eczema.

Always check with your child's doctor to be sure, but there are a few ways to tell which camp your child falls in.

Eczema patches have a more distinct appearance

Run-of-the-mill dry skin can look rough or scaly. But skin with eczema can also be inflamed, and can look red or pink (in children with lighter pigmented skin) or red-brown, purplish or grayish (in children with darker pigmented skin).

Skin with eczema can also develop tiny, fluid-filled pimples that eventually burst.

Eczema shows up in different spots

Both eczema and dry skin can appear on your baby's hands, feet, face and lips. But it's also common for eczema to develop in areas not typically prone to regular dryness, such as behind your baby's ears, on her scalp, in the creases of her elbows or behind her knees. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsEczema in Babies and ChildrenSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsEczema in Babies and ChildrenSee All Sources

Eczema may not just flare up when it's cold or dry

Like dry skin, eczema can worsen due to cold or dry weather or from too-warm baths. But if your baby has eczema, you might also notice her skin can become irritated by moisture (like from milk, saliva or sweat), dust, scratchy fabrics and certain soaps or detergents.

Keep in mind, however, that eczema affects every child differently.

How to treat dry skin in babies

Simple, at-home strategies are usually enough to quench and soothe your sweetie's thirsty skin.

For baby baths , think warm, not hot. Hot, bubbly soaks can strip much-needed moisture from your baby's brand-new birthday suit. Fill the tub with lukewarm water instead of hot, and opt for a fragrance-free, soap-free wash over a sudsy bubble bath. When it's time to towel off, go easy on your baby's skin by gently patting it dry instead of rubbing it. Bathe daily or every other day, and apply cream immediately afterwards to lock in moisture.

Hydrate, hydrate, hydrate. Apply a thick moisturizer right after bathtime and again once or twice throughout the day. Opt for hypoallergenic, fragrance-free creams or ointments — they're less likely to irritate your baby's skin and combat dryness better than lightweight lotions. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAvoiding Dry Winter Skin in Babies and ToddlersSee All Sources [3]

Keep your baby hydrated. Make sure she gets plenty of fluids from breast milk and/or formula. But don't offer water until getting the green light from the pediatrician — usually around 6 months, as your sweetie gets started on solids.

Adjust the indoor air. Hot air tends to be drier, so resist the urge to make your baby's room too toasty. Set the thermostat around 68 degrees Fahrenheit, and consider adding a cool mist humidifier for extra moisture.

Bundle up in the winter. Skin that's exposed to cold, dry air is more prone to dryness. Before heading out, layer up your little one with a hat and mittens and apply an ointment or balm to her cheeks and lips. On very blustery days, you can block some of the wind by putting a plastic rain cover over the stroller.

Be on drool and snot alert. Keep some cotton burp cloths on hand for patting away dribble. Excess moisture from saliva or a runny nose can lead to chapped skin, especially when you're out in the cold.

Do a post-swim dip. Rinse your baby off with warm water after swimming in the pool or ocean. Both chlorine and salt can dry out her skin, even in the summer.

Look at your laundry detergent. Opt for one made specifically for baby's sensitive skin .

When to talk to your doctor about dry skin in babies

There's a good chance that the strategies above will keep your little one's skin supple and smooth as … well, a baby's bottom. But if dry patches start to spread, crack or seem painfully itchy, consult the pediatrician. He or she may recommend special lotions , soaps or shampoos that would be better for your baby.