Due Date's Here. Baby's Not. Should You Have Sex?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Couple Holding Hands

When you're 40 weeks pregnant and still waiting, intimacy might be the last thing on your mind — or the first. Here's what to know about safety, comfort, and whether sex can help speed things along.

You made it! After 40 weeks of pregnancy — some sweet and exciting, others excruciatingly long — your due date has finally arrived. Except your baby still isn't here yet. So is it okay to have sex while you wait for her arrival? And if so, could getting busy help to speed things along?

Sex at 40 weeks pregnant can come with some big questions and unexpected surprises. Here's exactly what you need to know about getting it on at the very end of pregnancy and whether it can help get that baby out.

Key Takeaways

Yes, you can have sex at 40 weeks — if you’re up for it. As long as your practitioner hasn’t put you on pelvic rest, it’s totally safe to have sex, even on (or after!) your due date. That said, between the watermelon belly and the swollen everything, it’s also completely normal if you’d rather take a rain check.

Sex might help kick-start labor, but don't depend on it. If your body and baby are already gearing up for go-time, sex could nudge things along. But if your cervix isn’t ready? No amount of romance will override Mother Nature. (Nice try, though.)

The biggest benefit may be stress relief, not labor relief. At 40 weeks, your brain is probably on nonstop “When will this baby come?!” mode. Sex can help you relax, sleep better, and reconnect with your partner.

Can I have sex when I’m 40 weeks pregnant?

You sure can. As long as your doctor hasn't specifically told you to steer clear of sex, it's perfectly fine to do the deed at any point during your pregnancy, including at the very end. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSex During Pregnancy: What's OK, What's NotSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSex During Pregnancy: What's OK, What's NotSee All Sources

That said, just because you can have sex at 40 weeks doesn't mean that you'll want to. A belly the size of a watermelon, tender breasts, and swollen everything can be a serious mood killer — so don't feel bad if the whole idea sounds about as appealing as a trip to the dentist. In those last days of pregnancy, plenty of women just don't feel up for sex. No big deal.

"Haaarddd pass," says What to Expect Community member AlyRinehart."I'm so large and uncomfortable right now, the thought of putting something else inside my body makes me what to run for the hills."

But if you're raring to go, then go! After all, this could be the last chance for a little while. Once you give birth, it'll be four to six weeks before your doctor clears you to have sex again — and maybe longer than that before you're actually in the mood.

"Been having sex almost daily as my libido has been high!" says Community member merrygggg. "I have found the orgasms to be stellar lately, so that's been fun."

Can I have sex when I’m past my due date?

Yes, you can have sex when your due date has come and gone. As long as you keep feeling up to it, have fun!

The only reason to abstain from sex at any point during your pregnancy — even at the very, very end — is if your doctor advises against it.

Can sex at 40 weeks induce labor?

Maybe, maybe not. If your cervix and uterus are ready and labor is imminent, sex at 40 weeks could get things moving. Trusted SourceCanadian Medical Association JournalSex in PregnancySee All Sources [2] But if the conditions (and your cervix) aren't quite ripe yet, getting busy won't change anything. Sorry, Mama, but your body — and your baby — are calling the shots here.

Trusted SourceCanadian Medical Association JournalSex in PregnancySee All Sources

"My husband and I had sex daily from 40 to 42 weeks with my first two," says What to Expect Community member noles123. "Never worked, but we kept trying!"

"Everyone tells me the same way the baby got in there is a good way to get the baby out, and I'm just like... thanks but actually no thanks lol," says Community mom Kaylee02p.

Curious about other natural ways to encourage labor? The What to Expect app has expert-backed info and a space to see what’s worked (or not!) for other moms-to-be at this stage.

What are the benefits of having sex at 40 weeks pregnant?

Sex offers the same benefits at 40 weeks as it did earlier in pregnancy: It can help you feel more relaxed, improve your sleep, and even temporarily ease some of those pregnancy-related discomforts.

There's also the mental boost. Chances are you have a lot on your mind these days, and sex can be a welcome distraction — like pressing the pause button on that constant stream of questions about when the baby will arrive, how labor will feel, and whether you have enough diapers.

"Sex has been a good stress release even if I haven't always felt 'in the mood,'" says Community member melfoster2. "Afterward, I'm glad we still do it."

What are the risks of having sex at 40 weeks pregnant?

Healthwise, there aren’t any. It's perfectly safe to have sex during pregnancy, including at 40 weeks, if you have the green light from your doctor.

But that's not to say that having sex now will feel exactly the same as it did earlier on. The increased blood flow that might have made sex extra pleasurable in your second trimester may now feel more like numbness. You might also notice slight spotting if your cervix has started to soften and dilate .

It might be different for your partner, too. Extra vaginal discharge is normal these days and can create slippery conditions. Your partner might also notice or feel your cervix more easily.

What are the best positions for sex at 40 weeks pregnant?

Any positions you liked earlier in your pregnancy are still safe now. It's really all about finding ways to maneuver around your belly and stay comfortable. So give several a try and see what feels best.

Even if everything feels awkward, you might at least get a good laugh out of it. And if nothing seems quite right, remember: This won't last forever. In the meantime, stay close with cuddling, touching, kissing, or even just slow dancing in the kitchen to your favorite song.

"We're okay without it and will just start again postpartum," says Community member bbtee. "We're still intimate and affectionate in other ways."

Bottom line: Sex at 40 weeks pregnant can be a great release. But if it's not working for you — whether you're not in the mood or it just feels like a challenge physically — that's completely okay. Instead, try to savor these final days of your pregnancy and find other ways to connect with your partner, especially while you still have a little peace and quiet.