Eating Vegetarian and Vegan During Pregnancy

pregnant vegetarian woman preparing vegan meal

Here's how to get the protein and other key nutrients you need without forgoing your diet during pregnancy.

Lots of things will change with the anticipation (and eventual arrival!) of your baby — but if you've decided against eating animal-derived foods, your diet doesn't need to be one of them.

You can stick to a vegetarian or vegan diet when you’re pregnant. Here's what you should know to make sure you and your baby are still getting everything you need nutritionally.

Can I still follow a vegetarian or vegan diet when I'm pregnant?

Don't be surprised if you come across well-meaning naysayers; there are still so many misconceptions about vegetarian and vegan diets during pregnancy. In truth, vegetarians and vegans have perfectly healthy pregnancies and babies.

Why is there any concern at all? Some of the most vital baby-boosting nutrients are more easily found in meats and other animal-based products. But it's still a cinch to get them elsewhere.

What nutrients will I need to monitor when I'm pregnant and vegan or vegetarian?

You'll want to remain mindful of your protein, calcium, iron, vitamin B12 and vitamin D intake when you're expecting and adhering to a vegetarian or vegan diet.

Protein

Expecting women need more protein than ever — that's because this essential nutrient helps build cells and make hormones for your growing baby.

If you’re a dairy- and egg-eating vegetarian, you may already get what you need from potent protein sources (craving more omelets and Greek yogurt now that you're pregnant?). If you're worried you're not getting enough or adhere to veganism, there are plenty of veggie-based proteins to emphasize in your diet.

How much: at least 75 grams per day (depending on your individual needs)

Best plant-based protein sources for vegans or vegetarians to eat during pregnancy:

Split or green peas

Chickpeas

Black, navy, kidney or pinto beans

Quinoa

Bulgar, buckwheat and whole wheat couscous

Oatmeal

Whole-wheat pasta

Whole-grain cereals and breads

Nut butters

Walnuts, cashews, pistachios, almonds, Brazil nuts and pine nuts

Soy milk

Tofu

Tempeh

Lentils

Hemp seeds

Edamame

Miso

Calcium

Calcium is key during pregnancy for building your baby’s bones, muscles, heart and nerves, especially during the third trimester. In fact, it's so essential to his development that what he doesn't get from what you eat, your body will take from your bones, potentially putting you at risk of osteoporosis later in life.

If you're vegetarian, dairy products like yogurt, milk and cheese remain great options. But no matter your diet, other plant-based sources can help you get your daily recommended calcium . Your practitioner may also suggest that you add a calcium supplement for extra insurance.

How much: 1,000 mg per day

Best calcium sources for vegans or vegetarians to eat during pregnancy:

Yogurt

Milk

Cheese

Green, leafy vegetables

Soy milk

Tofu

Calcium-fortified orange juice

Iron

Your blood volume increases by nearly 50 percent during pregnancy to support you and your developing baby — and iron is required to produce more red blood cells. Not getting enough? Low iron can result in anemia , which, left untreated, may lead to preterm labor and low birth weight.

Vegetarians and vegans aren't alone in needing to be conscious of iron levels during pregnancy. Even red-meat eaters can have a hard time getting enough from their diets while expecting.

One simple way to get what you need is to take an iron supplement , which your practitioner may recommend in addition to your prenatal vitamin after week 20 (or earlier, if routine testing shows your iron stores are low). It’s a good idea to also chow down on iron-rich foods.

How much: About 27 mg

Best iron sources for vegans or vegetarians to eat during pregnancy:

Beans

Edamame

Soy products

Oat bran

Barley

Quinoa

Bulgur

Pumpkin seeds

Dried fruit

Spinach, collard greens or kale

Hemp seeds

Chickpeas

Green peas

Cocoa powder

Seaweed

Vitamin B12

Vitamin B12 partners with folic acid to aid proper fetal brain development; it’s also important for the formation of red blood cells and for building genetic material. A deficiency has been linked to neural tube defects as well as increased risk of preterm labor.

Though B12 deficiencies are rare, vegetarians and particularly vegans often don’t get enough of this vitamin, since it’s found only in foods that come from animals. Ask your practitioner if you need more than what's provided in your prenatal vitamin; he or she can recommend a supplemental B12 as well as folic acid — and ensure you're not getting too much of a good thing.

How much: 2.6 mcg per day

Best vitamin B12 sources for vegans or vegetarians to eat during pregnancy:

Vitamin B12-fortified plant milks

Fortified cereals

Fortified meat substitutes

Nutritional yeast

Vitamin D

This vital vitamin plays a role in building and maintaining healthy teeth and bones. Severe deficiency has been linked to complications including congenital rickets (a condition that causes the bones to weaken, leading to poor growth and skeletal deformities) as well as bone fractures in newborns.

How much: 600 IU a day

Best vitamin D sources for vegans or vegetarians to eat during pregnancy:

The best dietary sources of vitamin D are milk and fish. If neither are part of your diet, a few minutes of sun each day helps your body produce vitamin D — though that can be tough, especially if you have darker skin, live in less-sunny climates or don’t get outdoors a lot.

You can get some vitamin D from fortified soy milk, cereals and OJ, but usually not nearly enough. Fortunately, you can get what you need from a supplement. So ask your practitioner about testing your vitamin D levels and prescribing a supplement as needed.

How will a vegetarian or vegan diet affect my baby?

There’s every reason you can have a healthy pregnancy and baby, as long as you:

Eat a well-balanced pregnancy diet , focusing on the above nutrients.

Take your prenatal vitamin every day.

Visit your doctor for all of your regular prenatal appointments, and don’t hesitate to share any symptoms that concern you. Your doctor will monitor you for any potential issues and ensure you’re not deficient in the nutrients you need.

What if I crave meat while I’m pregnant?

Given all those changes in hormones, lots of expecting moms find that their tastes in foods change somewhat or even a lot in pregnancy. And most pregnant women have food cravings , often for meat.

If you feel okay about making an exception for meat during pregnancy, that’s perfectly fine; you can return to vegetarianism or veganism after your baby’s arrival if you choose. You may also want to consider just adding fish, eggs and dairy to your diet, if you don’t eat them already; again, it’s not necessary.

Otherwise, focus on eating your favorite protein-packed foods, which may help with cravings.

Can I stay vegetarian or vegan while I’m breastfeeding?

You can stick to your vegetarian or vegan diet if you’re breastfeeding.

However, if your diet might lack some important vitamins and minerals (B12, zinc or calcium) — and especially if your baby has health problems or was born prematurely — your doctor might recommend additional supplements.

If you decide to feed your baby a vegetarian or vegan diet once he starts solids, be extra careful to ensure he’s getting all the nutrients he needs.