I Tried the Elvie Pump and Elvie Stride: Here’s Which One I Prefer

Elvie vs. Elvie Stride Breast Pump

These two highly-rated wearable breast pumps each have unique features that make them stand out from the rest.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Before my second child was born, I decided I wanted to primarily breastfeed but also offer at least one bottle a day, as I did with my first child. Given the transformation breast pumps have undergone since I last used one, I knew I wanted a wearable breast pump that allowed for more freedom. I turned to the What to Expect app to see which ones community members recommended for easy and efficient pumping. Two options were clear favorites: the Elvie Pump and the Elvie Stride .

Both breast pumps receive rave reviews for their comfortable design and discretion in terms of size and noise. Additionally, What to Expect community members say the Elvie Pump and Elvie Stride pack impressive power comparable to most manual breast pumps. However, there are a few subtle but meaningful differences that can make one Elvie pump better for you than the other.

I’ve been fortunate enough to try both the Elvie Pump and the Elvie Stride over the last few months and have some first-hand insight to help you decide which is better for you.

Elvie Pump and Elvie Stride at a Glance

Elive vs. Elvie Stride Spec

Elvie Pump: Pros and Cons

Pros:

Discreet Design : The slim profile, lack of tubes, and quiet motor make it easy to use the Elvie Pump anywhere — even during a Zoom meeting.

Comfortable : The cup’s curve fits comfortably in your pumping bra , letting you move freely without worrying about spills.

Easy Collection : When you’re done pumping, just unclip the cups, remove the spout and valve, and pour the milk into a breast milk bag or your favorite bottle .

Easy to Clean : If you have a narrow bottle brush, maintenance is pretty straightforward.

Elvie Pump

Cons:

Limited Capacity : Despite having a capacity of 5 ounces, I found the milk would slosh and trigger the auto shut-off feature at 3 ounces.

Cost : At $550, the Elvie Pump is more expensive than other pumps. Buying a single pump instead of a double can save $321, but you won't be able to pump both breasts simultaneously.

Read my full review of the Elvie Pump .

Elvie Stride: Pros and Cons

Pros:

Powerful Suction: Because the Elvie Stride has a separate motor, it can deliver up to 300 mmHg of suction power — significantly higher than most wearable breast pumps, where the motor is built into the collection cups.

Quiet Motor: Despite its power, the Elvie Stride is blissfully quiet, so you can wear it while working without drawing attention.

Relatively Compact: The collection cups are slim, and the motor is similar in size, making it very easy to pack the Elvie Stride in your work bag, carry-on, or diaper bag.

Reasonably Priced: At $260, the Elvie Stride is comparable to similarly designed breast pumps and is significantly cheaper than fully wearable breast pumps, including the Elvie Pump.

Elvie Stride

Cons:

Not Super Discreet: Despite being a wearable pump, the Elvie Stride’s tubing and external motor make it less discreet than other wearable breast pumps.

Mixed Comfort: The Elvie Stride’s cushion inserts provided comfort in the beginning, but wore off over time.

Tedious to Clean: There are a lot of pieces, including several small ones that require thin brushes. Although the parts can be put in the top rack of your dishwasher, it’s not convenient if you’re pumping multiple times a day.

Read my full review of the Elvie Stride .

Which Is Better: Elvie Pump or Elvie Stride?

Both the Elvie Pump and the Elvie Stride have features that make them well worth the money. For me, however, the Elvie Pump was the better choice. I appreciated that it was portable, discreet, and comfortable, giving me the freedom to pump just about anywhere without being hooked up to an outlet. Although the capacity was slightly lower due to the automatic shut-off feature, I didn’t find this to be an issue since I wasn’t exclusively or primarily pumping.

If, however, you are pumping more than once a day, you may prefer the Elvie Stride. It has a powerful motor and decent cup capacity, making it ideal for moms who are hoping for a larger, more regular output. Just be mindful that it may not be as comfortable.

Where to Buy

You can purchase the Elvie Pump from Amazon and Aeroflow .

You can purchase the Elvie Stride from Amazon and Aeroflow .

Be sure to check for discounts and insurance coverage options to make this investment more affordable.

Your Next Read

7 Best Wearable Breast Pumps That Let You Pump While Doing (Literally) Anything Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Moms Love These Wearable Breast Pumps — And They're Less Than $200 By Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

Best Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

Haakaa Silicone Breast Pump Review By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is the Stokke Tripp Trapp Worth It? One Mom's Honest Review Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Moms Who Exclusively Pump Reveal How They Make It Work Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Exclusive Pumping Guide Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window