In her second trimester, Emma turns to her personal parenting pro and mama, What to Expect author Heidi Murkoff, to shed light on some of the strange symptoms she’s just starting to experience.

Emma: Hi mamas and mamas-to-be, I’m Emma. Today I’m here with my mom, who is not only my best friend, but my go-to pregnancy expert for all my questions. I’m currently in my second trimester , which means my body is literally changing every day. So, with that said, I have a lot of questions that I actually need answered right now. So let’s get to it.

Heidi: Let’s do it.

E: Russell will not even look at my belly. My belly button used to be this beautiful innie, and now it’s like half in, half out .

H: Let’s take a look.

E: Yeah. Is that going to go back to normal?

H: Well, what’s going to happen is it may continue to pop a bit, though if you have an innie it won’t necessarily pop all the way out. So yours, after pregnancy , will recede again, but it won’t necessarily be that beautiful little slit of pre-pregnancy.

E: That’s upsetting. But what also is upsetting is the fact that my belly is hairier than my husband’s — I’m not even kidding.

H: It’s a little fuzzy wuzzy.

E: It’s a little fuzzy, so…

H: It’s your winter coat.

E: It’s my winter coat. Can I take that coat off?

H: Not until after you deliver. Because pregnancy’s sort of a hairy situation, and you can grow hair in all kinds of unexpected areas.

E: Yeah, that’s happening.

H: And the belly is one of them…but it’s not the only one.

E: Haha…I know that! Another question that I have that I’m actually sure a lot of you can relate to is that I often compare my belly to other mommies-to-be. Um, what’s the deal? Am I too small? People always tell me, “Oh your belly’s really small.” Well, is it?

H: You can’t tell a baby by its cover. So it’s not what’s on the outside that counts. And you’ve got a beautiful belly on the outside, but it’s what’s on the inside that counts — and that’s the size of your baby.

E: Yes — who’s big!

H: So, you know, Mom, you could gain a lot of weight — doesn't necessarily mean you’re going to have a big baby.

E: Absolutely.

H: And, on the flip side, you could gain not as much weight and have a really big baby. And your baby, I happen to know, is growing exactly the way he should be.

E: He is. He’s actually longer than average so, long and skinny.

H: I wonder where he got that from.

E: Speaking of things growing normally, um, my breasts?

H: They’re big.

E: They’re big. Um, not only that but they are literally covered in veins. Like I am literally Spider-Man.

H: Let’s take a look, let’s see. Got milk?

E: Yeah, seriously.

H: Well, you don’t have milk yet, but that’s what the veins are doing; they’re preparing to bring milk to your baby after he’s born.

E: Yeah. They’re also on my stomach — but there’s no milk there. I’m guessing that’s just blood flow?

H: No, no, no. That’s blood flow bringing nutrients to your baby.

E: So the veins are a good thing. I should embrace them.

H: The veins are a good thing. Now they’re going to show up more on your skin because you’re very fair.

E: Yeah, that’s an understatement.

H: Lucky you. They’re a lovely color, I think.

E: Yeah, they’re a nice blue — a blue-green. Lovely.

H: Very flattering.

E: I’ll take one for the team if it helps the baby.

For more tips and tricks visit my mom and me at WhatToExpect.com .

NEXT VIDEO: More of Emma's Second Trimester Questions — Answered!