Episiotomy vs. Tearing: Which Heals Faster?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting, and new medical review.

episiotomy healing, Ask Heidi Murkoff, woman in the hospital

Do you heal faster when your doctor performs an episiotomy or when you tear naturally?

Chances are, you probably know enough about episiotomies — where an incision is made in the perineum to enlarge the vaginal opening and make room for baby's grand entrance — to know that you'd rather not have one. But you may be wondering whether you'll heal faster after having an episiotomy or a natural tear during labor .

Key Takeaways

Natural tears usually heal faster than episiotomies. Compared to an episiotomy, natural tears usually mean less pain, fewer complications, and quicker recovery.

Episiotomies aren't routine anymore. Rates have dropped significantly since the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommended against their routine use, though they're still performed in certain medical situations.

Sometimes an episiotomy is the safest choice. In cases like shoulder dystocia , large baby size , or assisted deliveries with forceps / vacuum , an episiotomy can make room and keep your baby's birth moving safely.

Episiotomy vs. natural tearing

When it comes to recovery, moms usually do better with a natural tear than with an episiotomy. Research shows less pain, fewer complications like infection or incontinence, and quicker healing overall. While natural tears can still come with some discomfort, recovery tends to be easier than healing from a cut.

What's more, episiotomies are more likely than spontaneous tears to result in more severe third- or fourth-degree perineal tears, which can extend all the way to the rectum. These types of tears take longer to heal and can sometimes cause ongoing issues, like fecal incontinence .

Until recently, midwives and doctors often performed episiotomies as a routine step during vaginal birth . The thought was that a clean cut would be easier to heal than a natural tear and might help prevent issues like incontinence later on. Some providers also worried that, without an episiotomy, a baby could face birth trauma from pushing too long against the perineum.

But research has since shown otherwise: moms and babies usually do just as well — and often even better — when birth is allowed to progress naturally without an episiotomy. These days, episiotomies are much less common.

After the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommended against their routine use, the episiotomy rate dropped by more from 33% of vaginal births in 2000 to about 12% in 2012. More recently, that number has fallen even further to just 3.4%, according to the Leapfrog Group, a nonprofit patient safety organization.

"When I tore naturally … healing was 10x better than being cut," says What to Expect Community mom Fatekap.

When should an episiotomy be performed?

That said, there are still situations where an episiotomy can be the safest choice — like when baby's head is especially large, when forceps or vacuum delivery is needed, or when shoulder dystocia (when a baby's shoulder gets stuck) occurs.

"My son was stuck so had to have an episiotomy in the end," says What to Expect Community mom DottieMama. "No one wants one but in the end you do whatever you have to for the baby to come out safely."

Other moms share similar stories. When her baby's heart rate started spiking, says What to Expect Community mom Sarahberry716, "They had to use the vacuum and give me an episiotomy. I was terrified of both and so upset that it came to that, but if it hadn't worked, I would have had an emergency C-section . So I am grateful for the episiotomy, it helped my daughter be born safely."

Want more information about what to expect during every stage of labor and delivery, as well as what to put into your birth plan? Find it in the What to Expect app, where you can track your symptoms, get expert advice, and connect with other parents.

If you do wind up with an episiotomy, your provider can tell you which activities to avoid and treatments to help ease any discomfort, like cold packs and warm sitz baths .

It's a good idea to discuss the possibility of an episiotomy with your doctor or midwife well before your due date . Chances are, they'll agree that the procedure shouldn't be performed without a very good reason.

Just keep in mind that the final decision should be made by your health care provider at the time of delivery, when that little head is crowning.

Happy delivery!

Heidi

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Can I Avoid an Episiotomy? April 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Vaginal Tears During and After Childbirth, August 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Benefits of a Sitz Bath After Birth, April 2022. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Practice Bulletin Number 198: Prevention and Management of Obstetric Lacerations at Vaginal Delivery, September 2018, reaffirmed 2025. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Ob-Gyns Can Prevent and Manage Obstetric Lacerations During Vaginal Delivery, Says New ACOG Practice Bulletin, June 2016. Johns Hopkins Medicine, Episiotomy, 2025. Mayo Clinic, Episiotomy: When It's Needed, When It's Not, August 2022. The LeapFrogGroup, C-Section Rates Hold Steady, While Episiotomy Rates Drop in New National Maternity Care Report from The Leapfrog Group, March 2025.

Updates history

September 22, 2025

Editors: Christine Gordon/Karen Miles

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

New medical review

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Can I Avoid an Episiotomy? Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Having a C-Section? Here’s What You Should Know Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Vaginal Tears During and After Childbirth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Dealing With Childbirth Fear? Here's How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Having a Vaginal Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Should You Get an Epidural for Labor Pain? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

A Mom's Guide to a Hospital Birth Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

What Happens During a Natural Birth? Here’s What to Know Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Uterine Rupture During Labor and Delivery Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Can You Have a Vaginal Birth With Twins? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

What Really Happens to Your Vagina After Birth Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Here's How Your Body Changes After Having Twins or Multiples Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Vaginal Birth or C-Section? What to Know When You’re Expecting Twins Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

C-Section Scars: Types, Care and Healing Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Postpartum Recovery Timeline Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window