Eric Surrey

Eric Surrey, M.D.

About Eric Surrey, M.D.

Dr. Eric Surrey is a board-certified reproductive endocrinologist and fertility specialist who practices at the Colorado Center for Reproductive Medicine (CCRM) in Lone Tree, Colorado.

Dr. Surrey completed his residency and fellowship training in the Department of OB/GYN at the UCLA School of Medicine in Los Angeles, California.

Board certifications

Dr. Surrey is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Surrey is affiliated with Sky Ridge Medical Center in Lone Tree, Colorado.

Other relevant positions

Prior to joining CCRM in 1999, Dr. Surrey was an associate clinical professor of OB/GYN at UCLA and had been director of the Division of Reproductive Medicine at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and the Assisted Reproductive Technologies Program at Century City Hospital in Los Angeles.

He is past president of the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology, Society of Reproductive Surgeons and the Pacific Coast Reproductive Society, and currently serves on the Executive Council of the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology.

Dr. Surrey has authored more than 125 peer-reviewed articles and invited publications, and he has presented on more than 135 abstracts at national and international meetings on the subjects of infertility, endometriosis and assisted reproductive technologies.

Awards

Dr. Surrey has been named a Castle Connolly Top Doctor in Reproductive Endocrinology in 2017 and 2018 and was also selected as one of America’s Top Doctors for Women by Women’s Health Magazine in November 2008.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window