Everything to Know About Your 6-Month-Old’s Sleep Schedule

6-month-old's sleep schedule

Your baby's snooze patterns are changing like crazy these days. Here's how to help your 6-month-old sleep better at the half-year mark.

By the 6-month mark, your baby is — let's be honest — off-the-charts cute and clever. Her focus is turning outward, and she engages everyone around her with eye contact, gummy smiles, non-stop giggles, and lots of delightful babbling.

Held upright, your child can now practice standing and doing mini-squats. During playtime, she may have swapped plushies and toe pulling for toys and games that support her rapidly developing motor skills. Her teeth are starting to come in, if they haven't already, and her appetite is kicking into high gear. You may have added solid food (portions of pureed fruits, vegetables, and cereal) to her usual diet of breast milk or formula.

As her personality develops, so do her sleep habits. She may still be a cat napper, power sleeper, night owl, or morning glory, but her sleep needs are changing. Here's what you need to know about your 6-month-old's sleep patterns.

Key Takeaways

Your 6-month-old will need at least 15 hours of sleep per day, including two to three naps and nine to 11 hours at night. Some little ones may drop from three naps to two around this age, though sleep patterns can still be unpredictable.

Developmental milestones, teething, and the 6-month sleep regression can cause night waking, early rising, or fussiness. Keeping a consistent bedtime routine and maintaining age-appropriate naps can help improve her rest.

At this age, babies can begin learning self-soothing. Sleep training methods such as Ferber can work for some families. Staying active during the day and maintaining a calming pre-sleep routine also support better sleep.

How much should a 6-month-old sleep?

Your 6-month-old should sleep about 15 hours a day, fitting in two or three naps in addition to the nine to 11 hours of sleep she's logging at night.

If she dozes like a dream, sticks to a schedule and all is calm in your household, congratulations. It's also perfectly normal if your 6-month-old's routine continues to be a little unpredictable, especially because another sleep regression can rear its head this month.

Some babies naturally transition from topsy-turvy newborn sleep patterns into a regular schedule. But it's not uncommon for her half-year sleep routine to resemble an abstract painting: a thing of beauty to her, but baffling to everyone else.

If she's often cranky, finicky at meals, or showing other signs of mild sleep deprivation — all quite common for this milestone, particularly if she's going through the 6-month sleep regression — know that you're not alone, and there are a few steps you can take to improve her sleep.

Sample sleep schedule for a 6-month-old

What's the best schedule for your 6-month-old baby? While there's no one-size-fits all sleep routine , your child may be in the process of dropping a nap around the half-year mark. Depending on whether she's taking three or two naps, here are sample schedules you can adapt to her preferences.

Sample sleep schedule for a 6-month-old taking three naps

7:00 a.m.: Awake

8:45 a.m.: Nap

10:45 a.m.: Awake

12:30 p.m.: Nap

2:00 p.m.: Awake

4:00 p.m.: Nap

4:30 p.m.: Awake

6:30 p.m.: Bedtime routine

7:00 p.m.: Bed

Sample sleep schedule for a 6-month-old taking two naps

7:00 a.m.: Awake

9:30 a.m.: Nap

11:30 a.m.: Awake

2:00 p.m.: Nap

4:00 p.m.: Awake

6:30 p.m.: Bedtime routine

7:00 p.m.: Bed

What is the 6-month sleep regression?

Has your 6-month-old seemingly forgotten everything she learned about sleeping through the night and settling down for naps without protest? She may be going through yet another sleep regression .

Many babies experience a sleep regression at the 4-month mark , but they can happen anytime, especially during the first year. These phases — temporary interruptions in your baby's sleep routine — often coincide with developmental milestones.

“The 6-month regression was so much worse for us than the 4-month and it’s so much less talked about,” said What to Expect Community user healthymom96. “My baby had a really bad sleep regression from 5.5 to 6.5ish months, it was the worst sleep of his life. I had never been so exhausted in my life. I tried everything, then one day he randomly went back to sleeping through the night or just waking up once.”

At 6 months, your baby is experiencing a whole host of changes — mastering rolling over and learning how to sit up, babble, and maybe even crawl. The whole situation may have her feeling pooped out and revved up at the same time, and she may be so excited to practice her new skills that she struggles to fall asleep. Plus, she may be teething , which can also contribute to sleep troubles.

With all these changes happening at once, it's no wonder some babies decide to leave their former sleep schedules in the dust. To get your baby back on track, continue to follow a bedtime routine (such as giving her a bath, reading a book together, and listening to music). If she fusses during the night, wait a few minutes before you respond to give her a chance to self-soothe.

Can you sleep train a 6-month-old?

When your baby was a newborn, she slept and woke up randomly. Starting around 6 weeks, you both probably fell into more of a rhythm, with naps and bedtime preceded by rituals of feeding, rocking, and a quick diaper change. Now that she's reached the half-year mark, your little one is old enough to learn how to self-soothe, and sleep training can help.

It's not necessary to sleep train your baby, but it may teach her how to become a better sleeper, especially if she often struggles to fall asleep at bedtime or during naps. There are a few different sleep training methods, including the well-known cry it out method (CIO), which recommends no parental intervention, and the Ferber method , which suggests some parental soothing that gradually diminishes over the course of a few nights.

Studies show that sleep training works for many families, but it's not for everyone. Talk to your pediatrician if you have any concerns about sleep training or if your little one isn't sleeping better after a few weeks. Either way, be assured there are no long-term risks to your baby if you decide to try it.

6-month-old sleep tips

Prep for sleep. You're probably so exhausted that you could fall asleep on the back of a truck on a gravel road. Not your 6-month-old, though. Continuing to follow her bedtime routine will help ensure she's sleepy enough that shut-eye can take over.

Keep the bedroom cozy. Remember that time she conked out in your arms during a dinner party? Those days are likely over. Your 6-month-old is now more aware of her environment, so make sure her space is dark and quiet (a white noise machine can help), and the temperature hovers between 68 and 72 degrees so she doesn't get too hot or too cold.

Don't skimp on naps. She may nap less often, but the time she does sleep during the day is still important. Try to adjust your schedule so you're ready for your baby's nap when she is, and encourage crib naps whenever possible.

Stay active. Your baby's energy is soaring, and so is her need to practice all those fun new skills she's mastering. The more active you keep her when she's awake, the better the chances she'll hit the hay without protest. Try to fill her days with plenty of tummy time , peek-a-boo, crawling practice, and supported sitting.

6-month-old sleep problems

It's normal for your adorable 6-month-old to turn into a scrappy brawler when it comes to sleep. She may be restless at night and fighting naps during the day for a whole host of reasons, many of them due to her stage of development. That doesn't mean you should give up trying!

Here's how to troubleshoot some of the most common 6-month-old sleep problems .

Teething

Teething pain can keep babies awake even if you don't yet see the telltale pearly whites.

If she's drooling, pulling her ears, or just plain cranky, offer teething rings . If those don't do the trick, ask your pediatrician if you should try baby acetaminophen.

Night waking

You thought this ended, but now it's back! Waking up in the middle of the night is a common problem at 6 months as your baby adjusts to all the mental and physical changes happening to her.

If you've decided to try sleep training, these methods may help her learn how to settle back down with less help from you.

Early morning waking

If your child is up at the crack of dawn when she should be asleep, it could be light peeping through the curtains or shades. At 6 months, her natural schedule is starting to respond to nature.

If this is the case, make sure her room is dark (and maybe invest in blackout curtains ).

General fussiness

Being 6 months old is tons of fun, and your baby probably never wants playtime to end, even when bedtime rolls around.

If she's babbling, kicking, and generally signaling "I'm awake" at night, recommit to a consistent step-by-step sleep routine that ends with her feeling drowsy.

Still struggling with sleep challenges? The What to Expect app has tons of tips to help you track your little one’s sleep and implement a schedule, plus a community of parents who have been there.

Your 6-month-old is going through many changes, and shifting sleep patterns can be challenging for parents. Understanding what's going on developmentally at this age and responding to her new set of needs can help you both get the sleep you need right now.

More sleep schedules for babies: