Exercise in the Third Trimester

exercise in the third trimester, pregnant woman walking her dog

Needs some motivation to keep moving? Here's how to stay active in the final stretch of your pregnancy.

You don't need anyone to tell you that exercising during pregnancy does a body good. But you also don't need anyone to tell you that a pregnant body is a tired body — especially in the third trimester.

It's not surprising that when you engage in exercise in the third trimester, your body messages you to get off the treadmill and onto the couch. After all, who deserves to put up those feet more than you do?

But before you get too settled on that sofa, consider this: The right kind of prenatal exercise can actually give you back a bit of the get-up-and-go that you were sure had pretty much gotten up and went. That, in turn, can provide you with a much-needed physical and mental health boost.

But that doesn't mean you need to plop yourself onto the treadmill. A 10-minute walk three times a day counts just as much as a solid 30-minutes on the elliptical.

Still sound like too much? Push yourself to sneak a little extra walking into your day: Walk to the next bus stop instead of catching the one closest to your home, set a timer and take a short stroll around your office every hour, park your car in the farthest spot from the store, or walk to the deli to pick up your lunch instead of ordering in.

Skip high-impact workouts, which can feel uncomfortable and potentially strain your joints. A kinder, gentler form of exercise in the third trimester: A prenatal yoga class , which needn't be strenuous and can be more relaxing than lying around. Plus it gives you a chance to practice the breathing techniques you'll soon need.

A few slow, easy laps in a pool can also be invigorating — plus, swimming while pregnant takes some pressure off your swollen ankles for a little while and reminds you what it's like to feel weightless.

As long as it's not too hot, exercise outside. The fresh air may give you enough lift to get you going. And don't forget to grab a light snack — think protein and complex carbs, like hard cheese and whole wheat crackers — and some water before you lace up your sneakers.

And while feeling sluggish is one thing, if you feel dizzy, are short on breath, or develop a headache or chest pains, it's time to throw in the towel (and, in the case of the latter, give your doctor a call).

Realistically, there will be plenty of days during the final weeks of your pregnancy when even shoulder stretches and neck rolls feel like too much hard work for your weary body — and that's no big deal. Just take advantage of the energetic days, keeping in mind that even a little exercise in the third trimester just may bring you more of them.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises You Can Do While Expecting , July 2021. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Physical Activity and Exercise During Pregnancy and the Postpartum Period , April 2020.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Fitness Fatigue During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

10 Benefits of Exercise During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises That Keep You (and Baby!) Feeling Great Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

These Are the Exercises You Should Avoid During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Why You're So Fatigued in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Walking for Two: How This Simple Workout Helps You (and Baby!) Stay Healthy Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Stretching During Pregnancy: 9 Feel-Good Moves Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The Ultimate Third Trimester Checklist: Everything to Do Before Your Baby’s Birthday Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Pregnancy and Meditation Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Fatigue During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

10 Things I Wish Someone Had Told Me About the Third Trimester of Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

7 Exercises to 'Induce' Labor Medically Reviewed by Kristin Cohen, DNP, CNM, WHNP-BC

Postpartum Fitness Tips for New Moms Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Working Out While TTC: Safe Exercise Tips Before Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window