Exercise and Breastfeeding

Breastfeeding and Exercise

On their own, both moderate exercise and breastfeeding have proven health benefits. Paired together, they’re even better for you — which makes working out while nursing a big win for you and your baby.

So you’ve gotten the post-baby green light from your practitioner and you’re ready to hit the treadmill — or the yoga mat, or maybe even the barre. No matter how you get moving, exercising while nursing is a great way to feel your best while nourishing your little one. Enjoy the proven benefits of exercise post-baby with these tips and guidelines.

Does exercise affect your breast milk supply?

Despite rumors and myths to the contrary, exercise does not impact your milk production. You’re free to break a sweat to your heart’s content without fear that exercise will impact your breast milk supply.

But because staying hydrated is so important for nursing, breastfeeding moms need to make sure that they’re drinking enough water before and after working out, according to experts from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsPhysical Activity and Exercise During Pregnancy and the Postpartum PeriodSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsPhysical Activity and Exercise During Pregnancy and the Postpartum PeriodSee All Sources

Nurse your baby or pump just before exercising to avoid the uncomfortable feeling of engorgement or fullness during your workout. Post-exercise, lactic acid levels in your breast milk may temporarily change, which can alter your milk’s flavor but will not impact its nutrition.

Benefits of exercising while nursing

You know that breastfeeding and exercising are both really good for you, but did you know that together they’re even more beneficial? A few good reasons to get moving:

More energy. Being a new mom can be exhausting, and exercise helps build your energy stores when you’re up breastfeeding into the wee hours of the night.

Improved mood. Getting enough exercise post-baby may help prevent postpartum depression . Unfortunately, PPD impacts about one in eight moms, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionDepression Among WomenSee All Sources [2]

Weight management. Breastfeeding already burns between 300 and 500 calories daily — and combining that with exercise can help with postpartum weight loss .

Baby bonding. Exercise improves your mood, which combined with nursing, strengthens your bonding potential with your baby.

Best exercises for breastfeeding women

Some of the best workouts for nursing moms include:

Postpartum yoga

Pilates

Barre

Brisk walking

Swimming

Biking

Bodyweight exercises, including push-ups, lunges, planks and sit-ups

Weight training, starting with light weights and increasing intensity

According to ACOG, moms should ideally shoot for 150 minutes of moderate aerobic exercise per week with two strength-training sessions. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsExercise After Pregnancy FAQSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsExercise After Pregnancy FAQSee All Sources

In the beginning, when you’re recovering from birth and caring for a newborn, you may have less time and stamina for working out. That's okay. Start with a shorter exercise routine and add duration and difficulty as you feel up to it. Prioritize your overall well-being — including your mental health — during this busy and sleepless time.

Not sure where to begin? Look for "mommy and me" exercise groups in your area to help you ease back into an exercise routine while introducing you to new parent friends in the process (a nice bonus!).

Making time to exercise while breastfeeding

Juggling responsibilities as a new mom is tough — the struggle is definitely real. Breastfeeding alone can take up much of your day, and that’s before you even add in chores, errands or going back to work.

If tacking on weekly workouts sounds like too much, start with exercises that are easy to do at home while your baby is napping, or pick up a good jogging stroller so she can snooze while you break a sweat.

All moms need some "me time." See if you can leave your little one with your partner, a relative or a caregiver to hit the gym on your own. (Some gyms even offer child care !) Exercise can be just the healthy break you need — and it’s good for both you and your baby.

When not to exercise while breastfeeding

If you experience abdominal pain, bleeding or other fluid leakage stop exercising and talk to your doctor.

Remember that while your body is capable of amazing things (like childbirth!), it’s okay to be patient with yourself. Some women can return to exercise right after birth while others, especially those who experienced more complicated births or C-sections, might need to wait a little longer.

It's common to experience diastasis recti — a thinning and widening of your abdominal muscles — and pelvic floor weakness in the first few months after birth. Ask your doctor about exercises you can do to safely strengthen your abs and pelvic floor muscles .

What to wear to work out while breastfeeding

When it comes to working out as a breastfeeding mom, a good sports bra is your best friend. Choose a sports bra that’s supportive enough that you don’t feel uncomfortable and one that’s not so tight that it could cause a blocked duct . Avoid clothing that’s too tight up top for the same reason.

You might want to wear breast pads in case of leakage.

Above all, dress for comfort and functionality while working out. You’re taking care of yourself while caring for a baby, and that’s a huge accomplishment.