Experts Say More Than a Third of All Moms-to-Be Struggle With Pregnancy Hemorrhoids — Will You?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

A bunch of grape contained in a glass beaker

It's a literal pain in the butt. Here's how to prevent or relieve them.

Hemorrhoids are common during pregnancy due to increased pelvic pressure, blood flow, and constipation. While they often go away after delivery, they can also show up after birth, thanks to the pushing you did during labor. Hemorrhoids can be uncomfortable but are usually manageable with simple steps like staying hydrated, eating fiber, avoiding straining, and using soothing remedies.

Learn more about hemorrhoids during pregnancy and how to get some relief.

Key Takeaways

Hemorrhoids are common during pregnancy. More than half of pregnant women experience them, typically in the second or third trimester, due to increased pelvic pressure, blood flow, and constipation.

Constipation and straining are major triggers. Hormonal changes, a growing uterus, and hard stools can all contribute to swollen rectal veins — and pushing during labor can make hemorrhoids appear or worsen postpartum.

Simple habits can bring real relief. Staying hydrated, eating more fiber, moving regularly, avoiding straining, and using soothing remedies (like warm baths or witch hazel pads) can help ease discomfort — but check with your health care practitioner if you notice any bleeding.

What are hemorrhoids?

Hemorrhoids are varicose veins in the rectum. They're also known as piles because of the resemblance these swollen veins sometimes bear to a pile of grapes or marbles (now you know why they're no fun to sit on).

Hemorrhoids can be itchy, uncomfortable, and downright painful.

When do hemorrhoids start during pregnancy?

Hemorrhoids are especially common in the mid-second trimester to third trimester of pregnancy, although they can appear at any time. About 30 to 40% of pregnant women deal with hemorrhoids.

Keep track of your symptoms, get more expert advice, and connect with other moms-to-be with similar concerns in the What to Expect app .

What causes hemorrhoids during pregnancy?

Pressure from your enlarging uterus starting around week 25 , plus increased blood flow to the pelvic area, can cause the veins in the rectal wall to swell, bulge, and itch.

Constipation can aggravate, or even cause, hemorrhoids. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsProblems of the Digestive SystemSee All Sources [1] When stool is hard, the extra straining you'll need to eliminate it can put pressure on the veins in your rectal area and cause them to swell and bulge.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsProblems of the Digestive SystemSee All Sources

Hemorrhoids may also develop postpartum as a result of pushing during labor .

"I got pregnancy hemmies with my first," says What to Expect Community mom Nanabanana435. "Only got worse with constipation and then pushing!"

How can I get some relief from hemorrhoids while I'm pregnant?

Hemorrhoids are no fun, but there are plenty of things you can do to minimize and treat them. Here are some tips:

Stay regular. The best hemorrhoid treatment during pregnancy is to stay regular, so drink plenty of water , and up your fiber intake to avoid constipation . Trusted SourceMayo ClinicWhat Can I Do About Hemorrhoids During Pregnancy?See All Sources [2]

Do your Kegel exercises. In addition to preparing your perineal floor for birth, Kegel exercises can help prevent hemorrhoids by improving circulation to the area.

Sleep on your side. Avoid snoozing on your back, which you shouldn't be doing anyway after your first trimester . This reduces pressure on the affected area. You can also try lying down on your left side a few times a day to relieve the pressure on your rectal veins.

Keep moving. Don't sit or stand for long stretches at a time. Try taking a brisk five-minute walk every hour or so to improve circulation to the area and flush things out. And if you have your doctor's okay, keep up safe pregnancy exercises right until your due date .

Don't force it. Don't strain or linger on the toilet.

Stay clean as a whistle. Use warm water and white two-ply toilet paper to wipe after bowel movements. Don't wipe too hard, either, which can irritate sensitive tissues. Try wipes if toilet paper is too harsh for your sensitive backside.

Take a warm bath. A 10- to 15-minute soak in the tub will help you stay clean and may help reduce discomfort. "Sitting in a bath with Epsom salt is what really helps," says Community mom michigandreamer. "I did that multiple times a day."

Try witch hazel pads, wipes, or ice packs. These can help soothe the sting of hemorrhoids . "I take a jar and fill it halfway with witch hazel liquid and the other half with water. Pop it in the fridge, soak a cotton ball or two, then place them on your hemorrhoids for about 10 minutes," suggests Community mom Kiwi1025. "It can be pretty relieving."

Get a donut-shaped pillow. If sitting is really uncomfortable, it can ease the pressure. "I had a donut pillow postpartum and it helped relieve pain from hemorrhoids while sitting," says Community mom jellyfish55.

Talk to your practitioner about hemorrhoid treatments. Your practitioner may recommend a stool softener or topical cream or ointment to relieve the itching and pain. You can purchase many of these over the counter.

Forget about your grandma's cure — downing a spoonful of mineral oil — since it can carry valuable nutrients right out the back door.