Explaining a New Baby to a Toddler Is Hard — These TV Episodes Make It Much Easier

tv box

Watching their favorite characters become an older brother or sister is a helpful way for toddlers to understand the upcoming transition. Add these to your queue before baby’s arrival.

When Melissa R. was just about 20 weeks pregnant, she sat her 3-year-old son on the couch to watch Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood. In the episode, Daniel’s mom and dad tell him that he is going to become a big brother . “I paused the show and told my son that he was also going to be a big brother soon,” Melissa says. “Watching a familiar character process this news was a very helpful way for us to start a conversation about all of the big changes to come for our family.”

TV shows can be a great tool to model social situations in an age-appropriate way for young kids, says Brook Choulet, M.D. , a child and adolescent psychiatrist and toddler mom. She’s currently five months pregnant with her second and turning to Max and Ruby to help her own child. "[Fictional TV characters] can help normalize different feelings such as excitement, confusion, jealousy, and more.”

There are actually a lot of great age-appropriate shows with sibling story lines. Here, we pulled the best episodes you can watch with your tot and share how to use them to start a conversation with your kids.

1. Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood: Season 2

Daniel tiger

In episodes one through three of the second season, Daniel is learning about becoming a big brother and what it means to be the “big helper” in his family. Baby Margaret arrives in the next episode, and Daniel and his family navigate how their parents will need to divide their attention between them. “It does a great job of explaining life changes with a sibling ,” shares one What to Expect mom .

“Daniel Tiger offers a gentle and developmentally appropriate intro to becoming a big sibling,” Dr. Choulet says. “These episodes help normalize the many emotions toddlers may feel — such as excitement, confusion and jealousy — and provide emotional vocabulary children can use.”

Questions to ask your toddler:

“How do you think Daniel felt when the baby arrived?”

“What are some ways you can be a helper when your baby sibling comes?”

“Do you think it’s okay to feel a little sad when mommy and daddy are busy with the baby?”

Where to watch: Amazon Prime

2. Peppa Pig: “The Big Announcement”

Peppa Pig

Mummy and Daddy Pig reveal to Peppa and George that they’re expecting a new baby. They ask lots of questions, including when the baby will arrive , and how big the baby is. From there, they take out fruits and veggies (not unlike the ones you’ll see on the What to Expect app!) to visualize how big the baby will be through each month of Mummy Pig’s pregnancy.

“This episode frames the news of a new sibling with curiosity and play,” Dr. Choulet says. “The baby's growth is signified by using fruits and vegetables to make an abstract concept more tangible for toddlers.”

Questions to ask your toddler:

"Do you want to guess how big the baby is today?"

"What questions do you have about the baby?"

“Can you think of something fun to teach the baby when they grow up?”

Where to watch: YouTube

3. Bluey: “It’s a Baby Race”

Bluey

Chilli rewinds to when Bluey was a baby, and how different babies reach milestones at various stages. Bluey started flipping earlier than other babies, but some sat or crawled before she did. The episode highlights how all babies do things at their own pace, and it can give your sibling-to-be an idea of what their little sibling will be up to in the coming months.

“This episode is great for continuing to introduce the idea that all babies develop at their own pace,” Dr. Choulet says. “It lightly addresses the comparison trap and promotes patience and understanding.”

Questions to ask your toddler:

“What do you think your baby sibling might be able to do when they’re really little?”

“Do you remember learning something that felt hard at first?”

“Can you help the baby learn things, just like Bluey did?”

Where to watch: YouTube

4. Max & Ruby: “Max and Ruby and the New Baby”

Max and Ruby

Ruby is eager for her new sibling’s arrival and wants to help pick a name . Meanwhile, her younger brother, Max, is a bit more trepidatious, wondering how this new member of the family will change their lives, especially when his friends warn him to hide his toys so the baby doesn’t get them, and that he might get less attention.

“This episode presents both excitement and uncertainty through different sibling perspectives,” Dr. Choulet says. “Max’s apprehension mirrors common toddler fears like losing attention and changes in routine in addition to promoting healthy conversations about it.”

Questions to ask your toddler:

“Do you think Max was worried?"

“What do you think will stay the same when the baby comes?”

“What can we do together to get ready for the baby?”

Where to watch: YouTube

5. Caillou: “Big Brother Caillou”

Max and Ruby

Caillou looks back on welcoming his baby sister, Rosie. She cried a lot (especially when he pinched her cheeks) and required a lot of attention. The 2.5-year-old wanted his new sister to play with him, but his dad explained that she was too little. By the end of the episode, he warms up to the idea of being a big brother, and after some encouragement from his mom, finally holds his baby sister.

“This is one of the most realistic portrayals of the toddler-sibling transition,” Choulet says. “It addresses jealousy and the desire for attention, while also showing the evolution into a nurturing role.”

Questions to ask your toddler:

“Have you ever felt left out, like Caillou did?"

“What do you think Caillou learned about babies?”

“Would you like to help me when it’s time for a diaper change or feeding?”

Where to watch: YouTube

6. Dora The Explorer: “Big Sister Dora”

Dora the Explorer

Dora’s mom is having a baby, and her trusty partner, Boots, assures Dora that she’ll be a great sister. Her dad gives her a phone and calls to tell her she has a new adventure: She needs to head back home to meet her sibling. After venturing along the route, she eventually meets her new baby sister and brother. She peeks in the crib to find her twin siblings, and introduces herself (“Hola, soy Dora”) before rocking them to sleep.

“The episode makes the arrival of a new sibling into something fun and adventurous,” Dr. Choulet says. “Dora’s excitement is contagious, and the show emphasizes positive identity-building as a big sibling.”

Questions to ask your toddler:

"What adventure do you think you’ll go on with your baby sibling?”

“What do you want to say to the baby when you first meet them?”

“How can you show the baby love, like Dora did?”

Where to watch: Paramount+

7. Blue’s Clues: “The Baby’s Here!”

Blue's Clues

Steve, Blue and Paprika go to the hospital to meet Paprika’s new sibling. She introduces herself to the doctor as Big Sister Paprika, asks about the baby's size and wonders why babies cry. Together, they learn more about the other newborn babies at the hospital. She’s then reunited with Mr. Salt and Mrs. Pepper, and finally meets her little brother, whom she names Cinnamon.

“This episode is ideal for preparing toddlers for what to expect at the hospital and at home,” Dr. Choulet says. “It helps them understand baby behavior, like crying or sleeping a lot, and reinforces inclusion by giving Paprika a meaningful role.”

Questions to ask your toddler:

“What do you think it’s like to meet a baby for the first time?”

“Do you have any name ideas like Paprika did?”

“Why do you think babies cry so much, and how can we help them feel safe?”

Where to watch: Paramount+

Other ways to prepare your toddler for a new sibling

Beyond encouraging your little one to listen to what Daniel Tiger or Peppa Pig has to say, Dr. Choulet recommends regularly talking about this new chapter and giving your child extra praise for becoming an older sibling, too.

“Toddlers do well with consistency and predictability, so it’s helpful to talk about the baby often, as well as what your child can expect,” she says. “Saying positive things like, ‘You’ll be such a great, big helper,’ will instill pride and excitement rather than animosity."

She also suggests allowing your older child to help set up the baby’s nursery. She says, “Explain that the room is where their new sibling will be sleeping, and allow them to help with small, baby-related tasks.”

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

Is Drop-Off a Nightmare? These Toddler TV Shows Can Help Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Help Your Child Prepare for Your New Baby By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

7 Low-Stimulation Toddler Shows That Won’t Make You Want to Hit Mute Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

When Can Babies and Toddlers Watch TV? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Prepare Your Toddler to Share a Room With Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Deal with Stranger Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Losing a Pet — How to Help Your Toddler Deal With Death

Imaginary Friends and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Blankets, Loveys, and Separation Anxiety: What’s Normal for Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

From One Child to Two: 23 Secrets of Second-Time Parents Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

7 Books to Help Your Toddler Transition to Their Big Kid Bed Medically Reviewed by Kelley Yost Abrams, Ph.D.

'I Had "Big Brother Day" When My Younger Child Was Born — And We All Loved It' Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Breastfeeding a Baby With a Toddler in the House Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window