Fact vs. Fiction: 8 Pregnancy Myths You'll Hear — and What's Actually True

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

pregnant woman looking at tablet during yoga and meditation, pregnancy myths

Does heartburn mean your baby will be born needing a haircut? Can spicy foods induce labor naturally? Test your knowledge of some of the most common pregnancy myths and truths.

Pregnancy myths are about as common as pregnancy itself, and you'll start hearing them almost as soon as you announce your big news. But how do you separate fact from fiction?

Here are some of the most common pregnancy myths and truths people may tell you about what's going on in there with your baby and what's in store once your little bundle is born. Plus, find out whether they're the stuff of fairy tales or the real deal.

Key Takeaways

Many popular pregnancy myths — like predicting a baby’s sex from heart rate, avoiding arm-lifting, or eating spicy food to induce labor — are false and not supported by science.

Some pregnancy myths have a grain of truth, though. Severe morning sickness is more common with girls, and heartburn may be linked to babies born with more hair, according to limited studies.

On the other hand , safe exercise (like running) and sex during pregnancy are usually fine unless advised otherwise, and labor rarely starts with dramatic water breaking as movies suggest.

You can find out your baby's sex just by listening to that little heart beat

Baby boys' heart rates are slower than baby girls' heart rates, the story goes, so if your little one's heart is beating 140 beats a minute or higher, it's a girl, and if it's below 140 a minute, it's a boy.

Trouble is, there's no truth to this favorite pregnancy myth. Scientists have actually studied whether fetal heart rate can be predictive of baby's sex but have found no significant differences. Trusted SourceWiley, Obstetrics & GynaecologyGender does not affect fetal heart rate variationSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceWiley, Obstetrics & GynaecologyGender does not affect fetal heart rate variationSee All Sources

There's no solid proof for other common predictors of baby's sex either, like how you carry, whether you're plagued with pregnancy acne, or if your face fills out.

Also beware that if you get the boy-or-girl news during your 20-week ultrasound , technicians can make mistakes — especially if the relevant body parts aren't on their best display.

The most accurate way to find out your baby's sex is still through chorionic villus sampling (CVS), amniocentesis , or non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), all of which analyze your baby's genetic makeup, including sex.

Severe morning sickness means you're more likely to have a girl

This one tends to be true. A number of studies throughout the years have shown a link between being pregnant with a girl and increased chance of hyperemesis gravidarum — which is an especially severe form of morning sickness — possibly because of the hormones female fetuses produce. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineThe sex ratio of pregnancies complicated by hospitalisation for hyperemesis gravidarumSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineThe sex ratio of pregnancies complicated by hospitalisation for hyperemesis gravidarumSee All Sources

Just keep in mind that not all moms-to-be with hyperemesis gravidarum go on to have girls.

"Definitely not true!" says What to Expect Community user Inevera0. "I had two HG pregnancies that were girls and I’m on my third HG pregnancy with a boy and this time, it was way worse! I’m on more meds with my boy and had a hospital stay."

If you have heartburn, your baby will be born with lots of hair

Believe it or not, this one may be true, though much of the evidence is anecdotal. If a bad case of heartburn is plaguing you during pregnancy, there is a good chance your baby will be born with a healthy head of hair.

Researchers have linked the two, noting that the same pregnancy hormones that relax the esophageal sphincter (causing heartburn) may also regulate fetal hair growth. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicinePregnancy folklore revisited: the case of heartburn and hairSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicinePregnancy folklore revisited: the case of heartburn and hairSee All Sources

Have more questions about what to really expect during pregnancy? Open the What to Expect app for a detailed guide to every stage and trimester, from the early weeks to labor to postpartum.

Running could cause early labor

Don't worry if you're the runner or treadmill type, because this myth is just that: a myth and therefore false. For most moms-to-be, exercise during pregnancy is not only safe — it's recommended and encouraged, in whatever way works for you.

If you like to run (and did so regularly before conceiving), keep at it unless your doctor tells you not to. Your baby is well-protected inside your uterus. Just make sure not to overdo it and talk to your practitioner about what intensity works for you. Generally, light to moderate levels of exercise will get the okay.

You might have the best sex of your life during pregnancy

This may wind up being true, though it's different for every woman and every pregnancy.

Once the morning sickness and fatigue of the first trimester wear off, you could find yourself with an increased sex drive . What's more, with the extra blood flow throughout your body — including to your clitoris — you might have mind-blowing orgasms to match.

If you're one of those lucky ladies, enjoy the ride! Unless your doctor tells you to avoid penetration or orgasms (usually due to pregnancy complications), there's absolutely no reason to refrain from sex because you're worried about miscarriage or poking the baby.

Lifting your arms over your head can cause your baby's umbilical cord to wrap around her neck

Don't worry; there's absolutely no truth to this one. There's simply no connection between your arm muscles and joints and the umbilical cord, which connects your baby to your placenta .

Spicy foods can help you go into labor

If only it were this simple. But alas, this is solidly a myth, with no truth to it whatsoever or science backing it up. Spicy food has no effect on your chances of inducing labor naturally — so if you do go into labor after that Thai or Mexican takeout, it's purely a coincidence and you would have started those contractions regardless of what you last ate.

On the other hand, there are some things rumored to kickstart labor that actually may do the trick, though they're also not proven safe during pregnancy and have unpleasant side effects, so never try these unless your doctor has told you it's okay.

For instance, both castor oil and red raspberry leaf tea have been shown to trigger labor contractions. But castor oil also causes contractions in your intestinal tract, leading to diarrhea, upset stomach, and cramping. Its efficacy and safety are in question too. Red raspberry leaf tea, similarly, can lead to gastrointestinal and other issues and may not be safe to drink during pregnancy at any stage.

Bottom line? Best to steer clear of any so-called "natural" ways to bring labor on and let labor happen truly naturally (unless you have a scheduled induction or C-section for medical reasons).

Your water breaking (most likely in public) will be the first sign you're in labor

This one is definitely fiction. Contrary to what you've seen in nearly every movie and TV show, there's actually less than a 15% chance that your water will break in some dramatic way before you go into labor.

Actual signs of labor you can count on? Contractions that get stronger and more frequent, bloody show , and abdominal cramping and pain, to name a few.