Feeding a Sick Baby

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

Sick baby with no appetite? Follow these feeding guidelines to nurse your sick baby back to health.

It's normal for a child who's under the weather to lose her appetite — along with her sunny disposition. And it's not always a bad thing.

For instance, if her tummy is ailing her, an eating slowdown will give her stomach and intestines a chance to recover, especially if she's been vomiting. It's also very common for many infections that cause fever to cause a decreased appetite, too.

As long as your little one is still drinking and peeing, not eating as much as usual is okay for most minor illnesses; no special diet is necessary. Follow these general guidelines for feeding your sick baby:

Encourage her to drink. If your baby has a fever, a respiratory infection such as a cold or the flu, or a gastrointestinal illness with diarrhea , it's important that she drinks plenty of fluids to prevent dehydration . Babies who are on breast milk or formula alone should eat as often as they like, unless the doctor recommends otherwise. For an older baby who has started solids but is refusing milk, offer clear liquids and foods with high water content like juices that have been half-diluted with water, gelatin, soups and popsicles (if they've been introduced). Offer fluids frequently throughout the day, and remember that any amount — even a few sips at a time — is a good thing. Try to get back to the usual milk once she's been tolerating clear fluids for some hours. If your baby has been experiencing a lot of diarrhea or vomiting, your doctor may recommend a rehydration (electrolyte) fluid made especially for kids. Just don't buy the sports drinks at the store; they contain a lot of sugar, which may make diarrhea worse. You'll know you're on the right track with ensuring she's getting enough fluid if she's making plenty of wet diapers; if she seems to have fewer wet diapers, check in with your pediatrician.

Serve up her favorites. When your baby is sick, certain foods look appealing while others don't — just like when you're sick. In this case, bland is often better. Think: crackers and pasta made from refined white flour. However, there's no need to restrict her diet to only bland foods if she can tolerate more. Be especially respectful of your baby's likes and dislikes when illness makes her appetite iffy. If that means nothing but breast milk or formula and pears for three days, so be it.

Don't pressure her to eat. Sometimes, a sick child might better tolerate smaller and more frequent meals. But if she still refuses to eat , don't force it, even though it may go against your maternal instincts. Even if she hasn't taken a bite in 24 hours, know that the fast won't last — though, let your pediatrician know about her eating strike, just to be safe. Babies tend to take what they need when they need it, and once they recover from their illness, their appetites usually recover, too — big time. In fact, once your baby's bug goes bye-bye, don't be surprised to see her become a little power-eater.

Here's to your baby's quick recovery,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Stomach Flu (Rotavirus Disease) in Babies , January 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Dehydration in Babies and Toddlers , January 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Fever in Babies and Toddlers , October 2020. American Academy of Pediatrics, Surviving the Stomach Bug: Truths and Tips for Parents , November 2015. American Academy of Pediatrics, Fever Without Fear , April 2016. KidsHealth by Nemours, Fevers , September 2018. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline Plus, When Your Baby or Infant Has a Fever , October 2019.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Dehydration in Babies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Diarrhea in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Is My Baby or Toddler Vomiting? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When to Call the Doctor If Your Child Is Sick

Baby Self-Feeding Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Nutritional Needs of Babies: the First 12 Months Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Feeding Schedules & Baby Food Chart for the First Year Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Introducing Solid Foods to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

8 Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Can Babies Drink Water? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How Much Should My Baby Eat? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Picky Eater Problems: What to Feed a Picky Toddler Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

When Pregnancy Kills Your Appetite Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window