Gavage Feeding, Preemie Formula and Other Ways of Feeding Your Preemie

feeding premature baby a bottle, feeding your premature baby

Preemies require a little more care when it comes to feeding than full-term babies. Here’s how your premature baby will get the vital nutrients she needs.

Learning to eat outside the womb takes work. Even for a full-term baby, the suck-swallow-breathe thing can be tricky. And for a baby who was born premature, feeding can be even more challenging, since preemies sometimes can’t suck well (or at all) and have underdeveloped intestines as well as lungs (which means they may require assistance breathing, at least for a little while).

The good news: With your help and the care of the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) staff, your dreams of holding your baby close while feeding her should soon come true.

Feeding your preemie in the NICU

Generally, there are three types of feedings in the NICU. How your baby eats depends on how early she was born and her medical condition.

IV feeding

Since babies usually can’t coordinate sucking and swallowing before 32 to 34 weeks of gestation , those born before 28 weeks as well as those who are very ill typically receive their first nutrients through an IV.

Called total parenteral nutrition (TPN) or hyperalimentation, this method bypasses your preemie’s immature digestive system and goes straight to the bloodstream.

What’s in the IV? On the first day, it may just be water, sugar and protein building blocks called amino acids. After that, though, your baby will receive a blend of protein, fat, sugar, vitamins, minerals and fluids calculated specifically for her.

At this point, your baby can't digest breast milk. But if you plan to breastfeed, start pumping and storing milk in your freezer as soon as possible after giving birth. This allows you to build up your supply so that you’ll have more than enough when your baby is ready for it.

And as long as your baby can maintain her body temperature outside of a warming isolette, the NICU nurses will likely encourage you to cuddle skin-to-skin with her (known as kangaroo care ) as much as you want.

Gavage feeding

Babies born before 32 to 34 weeks of gestation may not suck and swallow in a coordinated way, so they can't feed by mouth.

However, babies born between 28 and 34 weeks of gestation can generally tolerate gastrointestinal feedings and may not need IV nutrition. Those infants (and those who started out on TPN but who can now tolerate milk feedings) may receive food directly in their stomachs via a tube, called gavage feeding.

A thin, flexible tube is inserted into the baby’s mouth or nose and passed down to the stomach. Your baby will receive pumped breast milk, fortified breast milk or formula specially designed for preemies through the tube every few hours. Your baby’s doctor will determine how much and how often.

Here’s something you’ll likely be glad to hear: You can get involved with this type of feeding. Your baby’s nurse may show you how to hold the tube while your baby is feeding, and you can give her kangaroo care while she eats. You can even give her a finger to suck on so that she gets some practice and begins to associate sucking with getting a full tummy.

Breast and bottle-feeding

This is a huge milestone! Your baby’s neonatologist will look for signs that your baby is ready for breastfeeding or bottle-feeding — though when that happens can vary from baby to baby.

Some little ones are ready as early as 30 to 32 weeks, while others may not be ready until 36 weeks. A few clues:

Her vital signs are stable

She can suck on a pacifier effectively

She’s no longer on a ventilator

She stays awake for longer periods

There are no signs of abdominal distension or infection

She has passed meconium (her first stool)

If all is good, you’ll likely get the go-ahead to begin feeding your baby directly at your breast or by bottle. Try offering the breast first, even if you're planning to feed by both bottle and breast. Studies show that low-birth-weight babies take to the breast more easily than the bottle.

When you do bottle-feed, your baby will use a special small plastic bottle marked in cubic centimeters (cc) or milliliters (ml). These specially designed nipples have the proper flow rate for preterm babies.

Ask a nurse to show you the correct position for bottle-feeding your preemie, since it might differ slightly from that of a full-term infant.

Since nipple feeding can tire out such a tiny baby, at first, you’ll only breastfeed one or two times a day with gavage feedings in between. But her ability to eat will gradually improve until gavage feedings are a thing of the past.

Preemie formula

While the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends breastfeeding exclusively for your baby's (and preemie’s) first six months of life, and then ideally in conjunction with solid foods until your child's first birthday, for some moms and babies, breastfeeding isn’t the best fit.

Either it’s not physically possible, or for one reason or another it’s just not working . In the end, fed is best, so formula-feeding your tiny new addition can work just as well.

Doctors do recommend investing in formulas made specifically for premature babies because they contain more protein, a higher fat content and more vitamins and minerals than regular formulas, all of which are important for very low-birth-weight preemies who need to catch up on the growth chart .

Premature babies also have GI issues more often, which means they may need a more easily digestible formula that could alleviate some of their tummy troubles. Talk to your doctor about which formula is best for your preemie.

Breastfeeding your preemie

When baby is born early, your body produces milk that’s specially designed for her needs: It has a higher amount of protein, minerals, fat and other important nutrients than it would contain if your baby were born full-term.

And breast milk boasts lots of other benefits to boot: It enhances baby’s brain development and is easier for her little tummy to digest. It’s also jam-packed with antibodies and other substances from your body that help your baby fight infections — especially beneficial for premature babies, who are more susceptible.

Those antibodies decrease your baby’s chances of developing necrotizing enterocolitis, a severe intestinal infection that affects mostly preemies, as well as ear infections, urinary tract infections and lower respiratory infections (like croup or pneumonia). Breastfed preemies also have a lower risk of allergies later in life.

All this means that as soon as your baby can feed from breast or bottle, your milk is just what the doctor ordered. So make sure the hospital staff knows if you intend to breastfeed , since they can offer extra support if you need it.

Pumping tips for mom

Though almost all women find pumping milk for their preemie tiring and time-consuming, many who commit to it find it well worth the effort knowing it can contribute to the health and well-being of their babies.

A few tips to make the most out of pumping for your preemie:

Begin expressing milk as soon after delivery as possible, using a hospital-grade pump if you can.

Pump at least six to eight times a day to stimulate milk production — about every two to three hours during the day and every three to four hours at night.

Don't cut back if you feel that you're pumping too much milk. Regular pumping now will help establish a plentiful milk supply later.

Don't be discouraged by fluctuations in your supply. It's completely normal — and something you wouldn't even be aware of if you were nursing your baby.

Know that it's normal to have a drop in production after several weeks. Baby will ultimately stimulate your milk supply much more efficiently than the most efficient pump, increasing your supply quickly.

Preemie feeding challenges

Preemies are more prone to some feeding difficulties. Here are a few of the most common:

Sleepiness

Feeding is hard work for any baby, but especially preemies — and it’s not uncommon for them to fall asleep while nursing. Your baby needs frequent feedings so she can catch up on growth. So if your baby dozes off while eating, here are some ways to get the feeding going again:

Burp her

Change her position

Change her diaper

Sing an upbeat song or talk to her

Rub her forehead with a cool towel

Dribble a little milk on her lip

Lightly jiggle your breast or the bottle while it’s in her mouth

Change the scenery to an atmosphere that’s (believe it or not) less stimulating, not more. If too much is going on, your baby may “tune out” by closing her eyes and falling asleep. Feed in a quiet place and make sure the lights aren’t very bright (but don’t go too dark either).

Oral aversion

After having tubes inserted in the mouth, it’s no surprise some preemie babies develop a strong dislike for having anything in or around their mouths — milk included.

If your baby has an oral aversion, try replacing her unpleasant oral associations with pleasant ones when she’s in relaxed state:

Lightly stroke around her mouth

Give her your finger or a pacifier to suck

Encourage your baby to touch her own mouth or suck on her fist or thumb

Sometimes preemies forget to breathe while eating, which can be frightening for you. If your baby hasn’t taken a breath after a few sucks, remove the nipple from her mouth and let her breathe.

It may help to get in the routine of doing this for a while to be safe. And if you’re ever worried about your baby’s breathing, contact the pediatrician.

Reflux

A preemie’s immature digestive system makes her prone to gastroesophageal reflux (GER, or acid reflux) or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) , a severe form of acid reflux. GER is pretty normal, and spitting up during the first year of life that usually doesn’t bother most babies. But GERD causes more symptoms, including:

Severe spitting up, or spitting up after every feeding

Projectile vomiting

Sudden or inconsolable crying as if in discomfort

Gurgling, congested or wheezing sounds during feedings

Arching of the back during or shortly after feeding

Refusal to eat

Gagging, choking or having problems swallowing

Poor weight gain

To reduce your baby’s reflux:

Hold her upright during and after feedings

Burp her often

Feed her smaller amounts more frequently

If you use a bottle, try a different nipple to see if she swallows less air

If your baby has symptoms of GERD, or if she seems to be in pain, is refusing feedings , isn’t gaining weight, or is losing weight, talk to your doctor. And if you need additional breastfeeding assistance, your hospital can help arrange for a visit from a lactation consultant . Or you can contact the La Leche League International for support.

Feeding your preemie at home

If you're breastfeeding exclusively by the time you get home together, your breast milk supply will continue to grow with your baby. If you're formula-feeding (or doing a combo), you may or may not need to continue using formula specifically designed for preemies once you've left the hospital.

It'll depend on your baby's progress, and your doctor will advise you on the right formula and how much you need to give your baby.

Just remember, how you ultimately end up feeding your baby — whether from your breast, a bottle with pumped milk or a bottle with formula — is less important than the side of nurturing attention you serve up with nourishment.

No matter the method, feeding is the ultimate means of bonding with your preemie, whether you’re in the NICU or snuggling in your baby’s nursery at home.