Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"Every time I see a crying baby, I freak out about being a mother. I'm not sure I can handle it all."

Unlike our friends in the animal kingdom, the how-to's of baby care don't always come naturally to us. A first-time mother dog knows precisely how to lick her pups clean, while we first-time human moms struggle with those early baths (and we get to use a washcloth!).

But while we need a little help (and a lot of baby books ) to help us figure out how to care for our young, what does come naturally to us is the instinct to care about them (and just the fact that you're already worrying is a sign that this important instinct has already kicked in).

Key Takeaways

Your parenting instinct is already there, even if the "how-to" stuff isn't. You may not know how to bathe a newborn or change a blowout diaper yet, but the fact that you're already worrying about doing a good job shows your built-in urge to love and protect your baby is fully switched on.

Feeling nervous about being a mom is completely normal. Almost every parent-to-be worries they won't be able to handle it all, but with each feed, diaper change, and late-night cuddle, those skills start to click and mothering begins to feel like second nature.

You can absolutely "study" for motherhood and make the learning curve easier. Reading up on baby care, spending time with friends' babies, or taking a class can boost your confidence so you're not learning everything on the fly once your little one arrives.

Even if you were never the type to fawn over friends' newborns, melt at the sight of miniature T-shirts in the layette department, or coo at every passing stroller — and even if you were voted least likely to strap on a baby sling (ever) — once you give birth to that precious little bundle, you'll be surprised how quickly you start feeling like a parent. And how quickly you start fawning, melting, and cooing with the best of them.

That said, the trepidation you're feeling now — especially when your baby is still doing somersaults in your womb instead of being cradled in your arms — is completely normal. So normal, in fact, it's shared by just about every mom (even those veteran ones) at some point in pregnancy.

"I know this is easier said than done, but I always try to focus on how far I've made it than how much I have to go," suggests What to Expect Community mom ashleyo2014.

Will you be able to handle it all? Realistically, it may take a while to get those how-to's honed (wash eyes from center to side, wipe bottoms from front to back, save shampoo for last … and repeat).

Get step-by-step baby care guidance, expert tips, and real-mom support by downloading the What to Expect app .

As for freaking out? It's not totally out of the question in those first few weeks (when the stove's boiling over, the phone's ringing, there's a delivery at the door, and you just realized that (a) your baby just had a major diaper blowout and (b) you're out of diapers). But before you know it, mothering will indeed become second nature.

Meanwhile, get as far ahead of the game as you can — before the game has even begun. Read up on baby care (I know a book you might like: It's called What to Expect the First Year !), spend time with friends who have babies (and ask for some practice sessions), or take a class, if you can. The more you know, the less you'll have to learn on the job!

Wishing you a lifetime of happy mothering!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Anxiety During Pregnancy , November 2024. Mayo Clinic, First Trimester Pregnancy: What to Expect , February 2024.

Updates history

November 26, 2025

Editor: Colleen de Bellefonds/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Laughing, Crying, Cleaning the Window Sills? 11 Pregnancy Emotions You May Have When You're Expecting Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Anxiety During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

I'm Struggling With Separation Anxiety During My Pregnancy. It Turns Out I'm Not the Only One Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Dealing With Childbirth Fear? Here's How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Postpartum Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Cope With Baby Shower Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Shari Lusskin, M.D.

The Parent-Baby Bond: What If It Doesn’t Happen Right Away? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do and How to Cope When Your Preemie's in the NICU Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window