Feeling Overwhelmed After Coming Home With Baby

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

If you're feeling overwhelmed after coming home with your newborn baby, know that you're in good company — and this parenting thing will become second nature before you know it.

"In the hospital, the nurses changed my baby's diaper, gave him a bath and told me when to nurse him. Now that I'm home with him, I feel lost. I don't think I'll ever be able to handle taking care of my son."

But you will! Sure, babies aren't born with how-to's written on their cute dimply skin (somebody definitely missed the boat on that one!), but they do come home from the hospital with instructions from the staff about feeding, bathing and changing diapers.

Already lost those — or maybe they ended up smeared with mustardy poop the first time you tried to change baby's diaper (while simultaneously trying to read the instructions for diaper changes)? Not to worry; there's a wealth of information out there to help you tackle your new job as new mom (including my personal favorite, What to Expect the First Year ).

And you've probably already scheduled the first visit to the pediatrician , where you'll be armed with even more information (and answers to your 3,000 questions — that is, if you remember to write them down and bring them along).

Of course, it takes more than information to make a parenting expert out of a new parent. It takes patience, perseverance and practice, practice, practice. Parents aren't born — they're made on the job: one dirty diaper, one marathon feeding session, one bath, one outing (including one outing where you forget to pack diaper wipes, and you suddenly need them, big time), one sleepless night at a time.

Luckily, babies are forgiving as you learn. They don't care if you put the diaper on backward or forget to wash behind their ears at bathtime . They're also not shy about giving you feedback: They'll certainly let you know if they're hungry, tired or if you've made the bathwater too cold. Best of all, since your baby's never had another parent to compare you with, you stack up really well in his book. In fact, you're the best he's ever had!

Still suffering from a crumbling of confidence? What might help most — besides the passing of time and the accumulation of experience — is to know that you're in good company. Every mom (even those seasoned pros you doubtless eye with envy) feels in over her head in those early weeks, especially when postpartum exhaustion (teamed with nightly sleep deprivation, and the recovery from childbirth) is taking its toll on her, body and soul.

So cut yourself plenty of slack (and cut yourself a piece of cheese and maybe a slice of bread, too — low blood sugar can contribute to that overwhelmed feeling), and give yourself plenty of time to adjust and to get with the program of parenting. Pretty soon (sooner than you think), the everyday challenges of baby care won't be so challenging anymore — in fact, they'll come so naturally, you'll be able to do them in your sleep (and will often feel as though you are).

You'll be diapering, feeding, burping and soothing with the best of them — with one arm tied behind your back (or at least, one arm stirring a pot, folding laundry, catching up on e-mail, pushing a vacuum cleaner, reading a book or otherwise multitasking). You'll be a mother — and mothers, in case you haven't heard, can do anything.

Here's to you, Mom!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect The First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. KidsHealth.org, Bringing Your Baby Home , June 2018.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The Parent-Baby Bond: What If It Doesn’t Happen Right Away? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Postpartum Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

What to Do and How to Cope When Your Preemie's in the NICU Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When My Babies Arrived, the Blissful Connection Didn't. Here's the Truth No One Talks About Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

15 Moms Share What Breastfeeding Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Postpartum Insomnia Keeping You Up More Than Baby? Here's How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Avoid Getting Completely Burned Out When You Have a Toddler and a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Soothe a Crying Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 4 Signs of Maternal Burnout and How to Recover Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Postpartum Symptoms You Might Experience After Giving Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window