Should You Try Fenugreek If You're Breastfeeding?

fenugreek and breastfeeding, cups of tea aerial view

Can fenugreek seeds boost your milk supply when you’re breastfeeding? Learn more about fenugreek benefits and side effects.

Making sure your breastfed baby is getting enough to eat is one of the most stressful aspects of being a new mom. And for some moms who worry that they’re not producing enough milk, fenugreek has become a mainstay. It seems that everyone on parenting blogs and websites and within the lactation community is talking about the herbal supplement that promises to boost milk production.

But does it really work and is it safe to try when you're nursing? Here's what you need to know about fenugreek and breastfeeding.

What is fenugreek?

Fenugreek is a spice specifically used in the Indian spice blend garam masala. It’s also known for tasting like maple syrup. It was used historically to treat digestive issues and induce labor .

Today, fenugreek is used as a dietary supplement for a wide variety of conditions, including low milk supply , diabetes and eczema.

Should you try fenugreek seeds if you’re breastfeeding?

If your lactation consultant recommends the supplement, it may be worth a try, but talk to your doctor first. Fenugreek is generally recognized as safe by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

Most people tolerate it well, and it hasn’t been shown to have any negative impacts on infants, though some moms report that their babies are a bit gassy when they take it. But at the same time, it’s not known whether fenugreek actually increases milk supply.

Can fenugreek really boost your breast milk supply?

The science on fenugreek is unclear, and the research is not definitive. Many of the studies done on fenugreek aren’t high-quality enough to prove that the supplement effectively boosts breast milk production. Many studies are too small and others looked at its impact in teas rather than as a stand-alone ingredient. So it isn't confirmed whether it’s fenugreek, not another ingredient, that’s stimulating milk production.

Researchers think its impact could also be mostly psychological. However, some research has shown that it does boost early milk supply while it has less of an impact on mature milk.

If you're drinking fenugreek tea, the extra hydration might also play a role in boosting your supply.

Fenugreek benefits

Fenugreek has been found to increase milk supply in some women, especially in the early days of breastfeeding. If drinking fenugreek tea helps you drink more water overall, the extra hydration might also increase your supply.

While fenugreek may have a purely placebo effect, if it works for you — and you’ve gotten the go-ahead from your practitioner — there's no harm in taking it. But never try any remedy, herbal or otherwise, without talking to your doctor first while you're pregnant or breastfeeding.

Fenugreek side effects

Some common and less common side effects have been reported with this supplement, including:

Gastrointestinal issues

Flatulence

Perspiration, urine or breast milk oddly smelling of maple syrup

Nausea

Vomiting

Liver toxicity (in some very rare cases)

Worsening asthma symptoms

Risks of trying fenugreek supplements

Fenugreek supplements are not regulated by the FDA for safety and effectiveness. They should not be taken during pregnancy because of the risk that they could cause contractions. In fact, fenugreek has been used for centuries to induce labor.

Fenugreek may act like estrogen in the body, so it should not be taken by women with a history of hormone-sensitive cancers. And it may negatively interact with the blood thinner warfarin to cause internal bleeding.

Ways to consume fenugreek

There are a number of forms fenugreek can take for consumption purposes, including:

Fenugreek seeds

Fenugreek tea

Fenugreek oil

Fenugreek supplements

Fenugreek leaves

Fenugreek powder

Fenugreek sprouts

Fenugreek baked into cookies and other baked goods

When to call the doctor

It’s best to talk to your doctor before you start taking fenugreek, especially if you’re taking any other herbal supplements or prescription drugs, because of the risk of a negative interaction. Also talk to your doctor if you’re experiencing any of the more serious symptoms listed above.

In most cases fenugreek is considered safe, but remember that there is no scientific evidence that it actually boosts breast milk production and it hasn't been approved by the FDA as being a remedy for low milk supply.

But if your milk production is low, consider tried-and-true methods like drinking more water and power pumping . Your lactation consultant also may recommend fenugreek or Mother’s Milk tea (which includes the ingredient). And if your doctor gives you the thumbs-up, you might want to give it a try.