Ready to Conceive at 35 (or Older)? These Tips Can Help You Feel Confident and Prepared

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Unrecognizable woman talking to a doctor

What to know about your odds of getting pregnant if you're over 35, including tips and managing potential risks.

"I'm 37 years old, and I want to have a baby. What are my chances of getting pregnant? And are there special concerns for women my age that I should be aware of?"

Key Takeaways

You can absolutely still get pregnant — it may just take a little longer. While fertility does dip with age, plenty of people conceive in their late 30s and beyond.

A few smart pre-TTC moves can boost your odds. Book a preconception visit; learn your cycle so you can time sex around ovulation; and focus on the basics: good food, solid sleep, regular exercise, and a prenatal vitamin.

Once you’re pregnant, expect a little extra monitoring — and lots of reassurance. Your provider may keep a closer eye on things like blood pressure and gestational diabetes and offer additional prenatal testing, but with good care and healthy habits, most 35+ pregnancies go smoothly.

Welcome to the 35-plus club! You won't be the only one in the maternity ward (or, down the road, on the elementary school PTA) in her late 30s or 40s. With birthrates soaring for women 35 and up, there's never been a more popular — or safer — time to be pregnant at any age.

While it may take a bit longer to get pregnant if you're 35 or older, the average time it takes to conceive is still high. Women under 25 have a 25% chance of conceiving per cycle, compared to 15% among women between 35 and 39 years old. The rate drops to 5 to 1% by age 40.

Ready to make a baby? Be sure to take a few important steps to boost your odds of conceiving:

Make a preconception appointment with your practitioner to make sure all is well.

Know your cycle, so you know when to take advantage of baby-making opportunities.

Stay healthy by eating well, getting enough sleep, exercising regularly, and taking a prenatal vitamin .

If you try for more than six months without success, seek advice from your doctor. Even if a fertility issue is discovered, there's still an excellent chance that it can be resolved so that you can become pregnant.

Once you do conceive, your practitioner will monitor you closely for common, treatable pregnancy-related problems including high blood pressure and gestational diabetes (which occur slightly more frequently in older moms-to-be), and offer up a slew of prenatal tests to check on your baby's health (just to be on the safe side).

Rest assured, given healthy habits and the right medical care, women over 35 can and do have easy, healthy pregnancies as well as smooth deliveries. With any luck, the worst thing you'll have to worry about is being identified by your practitioner as someone of "advanced maternal age" (yuck!).

Good luck,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect Before You're Expecting , 2nd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Ovulation Symptoms: 10 Signs of Ovulation to Know , July 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Fertility Fact Check: What Can Help You Conceive (and What's Just Hype) , January 2026. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Fertility Awareness-Based Methods of Family Planning , February 2025. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Having a Baby After Age 35: How Aging Affects Fertility and Pregnancy , April 2025. American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Fertility in the Aging Female , 2026. March of Dimes, Pregnancy After Age 35 , February 2025. Mayo Clinic, How to Get Pregnant , October 2024. UpToDate, Effects of Advanced Maternal Age on Pregnancy , April 2025.

Updates history

January 23, 2026

Editor: Colleen de Bellefonds/Rebekah Wahlberg

Updates to copy and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

Too late for acupuncture?

Testing out trigger

First time IVF

There are 11,393 active discussions happening now in our Fertility Treatments community group.

Your Next Read

How to Boost Your Chances of Getting Pregnant (Starting Today) Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Yes, You Can Have a Baby at 45 — Here's What It Might Be Like Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

How Long Does Getting Pregnant Usually Take — and What Affects Your Timing? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Why Can't I Get Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Pregnant at 40: Why It’s More Common (and Safer!) Than Ever Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Secondary Infertility: Why Getting Pregnant Again Can Take Longer — and What Can Help Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

A Dozen Tips for Getting Pregnant Fast Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Pinpoint Your Fertile Window: How to Track Ovulation and Boost Your Chances of Getting Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Fertility Fact Check: What Can Help You Conceive (and What's Just Hype) Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

Your Pre-Pregnancy Check List: How to Get Your Body, Budget, and Life Ready for Baby Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

How Late Ovulation Impacts Conception Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Not Sure If You’re Ready For a Baby? The Big Questions to Ask Before You Start Trying Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Ovulation Calculator Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Thinking About Baby No. 2? What to Consider Before You Hit the TTC Restart Button By Heidi Murkoff

Trying to Get Pregnant Made Me Anxious — These 3 Steps Helped Me Feel in Control Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window