Fetal Alcohol Syndrome in Babies

fetal alcohol syndrome in babies

Fetal alcohol syndrome is entirely preventable. Find out why you should nix alcohol consumption during pregnancy and how to get help for a baby who is affected.

If you drink while you're pregnant, you're putting your unborn baby at serious risk of fetal alcohol syndrome and the array of complications that come with it. The good news is, it's totally avoidable. Here's what you need to know.

What is fetal alcohol syndrome?

Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is the most serious of the fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs) and encompasses a range of mental, physical and behavioral problems that babies develop when their moms drink heavily during pregnancy.

What are the symptoms of fetal alcohol syndrome?

Fetal alcohol syndrome is a leading cause of intellectual disability, and drinking during pregnancy can also lead to miscarriage and stillbirth . There are a host of other complications babies with FAS might be prone to, including premature birth, low birth weight, deformities in the arms and legs, and difficulties in coordination.

In general, the signs and symptoms of kids with FAS include problems with their eyesight and hearing, specific facial features, speech and language delays, and behavioral problems like short attention span, hyperactivity, anxiety and poor impulse control.

Fetal alcohol syndrome symptoms tend to fall into three categories: physical, behavioral and social, and neurological. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicFetal Alcohol SyndromeSee All Sources [1] Here's a breakdown:

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicFetal Alcohol SyndromeSee All Sources

Physical

Problems with vision or hearing

Smaller heads and brains

Problems with heart, kidneys and bones

Slower rate of growth before and after birth

Deformed joints, limbs and fingers

Specific facial features, including smaller-than-typical eyes, a shorter and upturned nose, a thinner upper lip, and a smoother band of skin between the upper lip and the nose

Behavioral and social

Lack of or poor impulse control

Lack of focus and trouble switching from task to task

Problems in school

Difficulty adapting to change

Poor concept of time

Neurological

Learning and intellectual disabilities

Memory problems

Developmental delays

Attention difficulties

Trouble processing information

Poor balance and coordination

Hyperactivity

Poor judgment, reasoning and problem-solving skills

Mood swings

Problems judging the consequences of actions

What causes fetal alcohol syndrome in babies?

When a pregnant woman drinks liquor, beer or wine, it lingers in the fetus's system much longer than it does in the mother's because a fetus is unable to metabolize alcohol the same way an adult can.

While no one knows how many drinks cause FAS, the more alcohol a mother drinks, the higher the chances that her fetus will have tissue and organ damage, including brain damage. Binge drinking — which is defined as having four or more drinks at one time — may make it worse.

Even drinking small amounts of alcohol — at any point during a pregnancy, including before a mother knows she's pregnant — can disrupt or harm fetal development. That's why experts discourage pregnant women from drinking anything alcoholic, since no one really knows what a safe limit is. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAlcohol Use in PregnancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAlcohol Use in PregnancySee All Sources

Keep in mind, however, that drinking alcohol during pregnancy doesn't necessarily mean that a baby will have FAS. Genetics, nutrition and environmental factors can all influence what effect alcohol has on a fetus.

How common is fetal alcohol syndrome?

Experts aren't sure how many people are affected by FAS, but they believe that fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol spectrum disorders are under-diagnosed, and there's no good data on how many children have FAS.

Research by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) shows that in certain areas of the United States, 0.2 to 1.5 cases of fetal alcohol syndrome occur for every 1,000 live births. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionFetal Alcohol Spectrum DisordersSee All Sources [3] The most recent CDC study found 0.3 out of 1,000 children ages 7 to 9 years old have FAS.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionFetal Alcohol Spectrum DisordersSee All Sources

Can you detect fetal alcohol syndrome?

There's no test that's used to diagnose fetal alcohol syndrome during pregnancy. For example, FAS can't be detected with an ultrasound or blood test.

Doctors typically make FASDs diagnoses after a child is born by looking for certain facial features, such as a thin upper lip and low nasal bridges. Later on, they might also look for behavioral problems like hyperactivity and poor coordination.

Many of these signs and symptoms also occur in children with other conditions, so your pediatrician may refer you to a specialist if he or she suspects your child has FAS.

The latest treatments for fetal alcohol syndrome

The earlier the diagnosis, the faster a child with fetal alcohol syndrome can get help from specialists. FAS is impossible to reverse entirely, but fetal alcohol syndrome treatments can help. These treatments include surgeries to correct physical characteristics (such as heart surgery for heart problems) as well as therapies and medications to address behavioral issues such as inattention, hyperactivity, anxiety and depression.

Early intervention and physical therapy, along with behavioral and speech therapy, can help little ones with FAS and increase the chances of living a better, healthier life.

There are also some alternative treatments that have been shown to help kids with FAS, like biofeedback, acupuncture , animal-assisted therapy and yoga. Talk to the doctor about alternative treatments and whether they’re right for your child.

You can find out if your child qualifies for free early intervention services by visiting the CDC's early education services database or by asking your pediatrician.

What are the other types of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs)?

Fetal alcohol syndrome is considered the most common and the most serious of the fetal alcohol spectrum disorders. The other types of FASDs include:

Alcohol-related neurodevelopmental disorder (ARND)

Babies with ARND don't have atypical facial features or growth problems, but they might go on to have behavioral problems and learning disabilities. They may lack impulse control and have trouble in school, specifically with attention span, memory and math.

Alcohol-related birth defects (ARBD)

Infants born with ARBD typically have defects of the heart, kidneys or bones, or all of the above. An ARBD can also affect a baby's vision or hearing.

Neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure (ND-PAE)

A child born with an ND-PAE could ultimately experience memory problems, behavior problems (including mood disorders and very severe tantrums), attention issues (including trouble shifting focus from one thing to another), and difficulties with the tasks of daily living, like bathing, dressing appropriately and playing with other children.

How can you prevent fetal alcohol syndrome?

While the effects of fetal alcohol syndrome can be severe, 100 percent of FASDs can be prevented by not drinking during pregnancy. Increased awareness of the dangers of drinking while pregnant can help to decrease the number of babies born each year with these conditions.

If you're pregnant and want to stop drinking, visit Alcoholics Anonymous , the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Substance Abuse Treatment Facility Locator .

If your baby is born with FAS, you can find resources and support through the National Organization on Fetal Alcohol Syndrome . Whie FAS is a lifelong condition, early interventions — such as speech therapy, medications and surgeries — can help your child reach her full potential.