Fewer Cramps and a Happier Heart: How Having a Baby Can Actually Improve Your Health

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

health benefits of pregnancy, two young sons kissing pregnant mom's belly

There are plenty of perks to having kids, besides the most obvious (those precious babies). But did you know some of the changes that come with childbirth are actually good for your body, your brain and even your sex life?

Having a baby is an amazing experience, but who knew it could be good for your health too? Sure, you’ll sleep (a lot) less, and eating right and staying fit can be tough, but the health benefits of pregnancy and motherhood can make up for these temporary challenges (which will ease up anyway, as your child gets older).

One of the biggest perks: an opportunity to really focus on your own well-being. Once you’re expecting, prenatal exams allow your doctor to keep close tabs on your body to make sure it’s as healthy as it can be.

Once your baby arrives, postpartum checkups are a great time to focus on your health going forward, especially since so much has changed so quickly. Finally, scheduling yearly check-ins with your doc can help you stay in tip-top shape and take advantage of the many physical benefits of having kids. Read on to find out what they are.

Key Takeaways

Motherhood = better health. Pregnancy and breastfeeding can actually earn you health perks, including a lower risk of breast, ovarian, and endometrial cancers.

Your heart and mind are helped too. Nursing has been linked to a lower risk of stroke and pregnancy hormones, and baby bonding can help improve your mood.

See your doc for even more benefits. Keep up with your regular doctor appointments before, during, and after pregnancy so your health can be monitored regularly.

Easier periods

Good news for women with bad cramps: Having babies may bring you some relief in the long run. Many women find that their menstrual cramps are much less painful — or even nonexistent — after the birth of their first baby.

Doctors aren’t sure why, but women who have vaginal births report more relief than those who have C-sections , a factor that points to the stretching of the uterus during delivery as a possible mechanism for this pregnancy perk.

If your cramps are severe and don’t get any better after your baby’s birth (or if you're concerned about any change in your period), talk to your doctor, who may want to test you for an underlying problem like pelvic inflammatory disease or endometriosis .

Lower risk of breast cancer

The health benefits of pregnancy extend to breastfeeding too, since studies show both can lower a woman’s risk of breast cancer. There are two reasons why: First, more pregnancies mean fewer periods, which in turn limit your exposure to estrogen and progesterone. These hormones, which are produced by your ovaries, stimulate cell growth and can increase a woman’s risk of breast cancer.

Second, the changes that breast cells undergo during pregnancy and breastfeeding may make them more resistant to transforming into cancer cells. Pregnancy’s protective benefit diminishes by the time you hit 30, which is why older moms are urged to breastfeed for as long as possible so they can take advantage of the breast-cancer protection nursing provides.

Lower risk of other cancers

Lowering your breast cancer risk isn’t the only cancer-fighting benefit to having kids. The hormonal shifts that occur during pregnancy and breastfeeding also protect against ovarian and endometrial cancer, and the more full-term pregnancies you have, the greater the benefit. Scientists are investigating how carrying a baby can reduce a woman’s risk of other cancers too.

But don’t feel as if you need to have lots of babies to maximize your health benefits. The best ways to lower your risk of cancer remain the same: Don’t smoke and avoid secondhand smoke, exercise regularly, eat a healthy diet (including plenty of veggies), and keep drinking to a minimum.

Check out the What to Expect app to track your pregnancy week-by-week and learn more ways motherhood can boost your health — now and in the years to come.

Better sex

Pregnancy hormones are responsible for some pretty miserable symptoms, including bloating, heartburn, weird skin rashes, and excess facial hair. But there’s one side effect that ought to make you smile: Testosterone and estrogen, sex hormones produced by your baby-to-be, and progesterone, which your body ramps up during pregnancy, might just boost your sex drive .

And during the first and second trimesters, all that extra blood flow pumps up your pelvic region, making it feel more sensitive — which may make it easier for you to reach orgasm.

Although the pleasures of lovemaking can fall off in the first few months of mamahood (when breastfeeding hormones, lack of sleep, and baby-care duties take their toll on your libido) doing your Kegels can help keep the blood flowing down there. Do them everywhere, day and night (and don't forget to do them when you're doing “it” too).

Reduced risk of MS

Multiple sclerosis , which affects the nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord, may be on the rise — in part, experts think, because many women have fewer kids. But having a baby cuts your risk of developing this autoimmune disorder in half, according to a small Australian study. And each pregnancy offered even more protection, with mothers of four or more kids slashing their risk by an astonishing 95%.

During pregnancy, a woman’s immune system adjusts to avoid attacking the baby, and experts think this lower immune activity may reduce the inflammation that causes nerve damage. After childbirth, some of your baby’s cells remain in your body and may keep immune-system activity — and MS risk — down. Although doctors used to advise women with MS not to have babies, they now believe pregnancy actually reduces the risk of a relapse.

A lower risk of stroke

Stroke is a leading cause of death in women in the U.S., but one study found that postmenopausal women who breastfed were less likely to have a stroke than those who never breastfed. In fact, breastfeeding just one baby for at least six months can lower your risk of heart disease, diabetes, and high blood pressure .

One theory: The oxytocin released during nursing may have heart-healthy properties that ward off stroke.

A boost in mood

Pregnancy might be a hormone-powered roller-coaster ride of emotions, but once you become a mom those moods tend to stabilize — at least after the first few weeks (and if they don't, check in with the doc, who may screen you for postpartum depression ).

But you're also likely to feel surges of love and other good feelings whenever you hold or nurse your little one , thanks to the hormone oxytocin, which plays a big role during bonding. The takeaway: The perks of pregnancy and motherhood will continue for years to come.