Fibromyalgia During Pregnancy

Updated and medically reviewed to ensure accuracy.

fibromyalgia during pregnancy, tired woman sleeping on couch

Here’s what you need to know to take care of yourself and your baby-to-be when you’re dealing with fibromyalgia during pregnancy.

If you have been diagnosed with fibromyalgia, you’re already used to the challenges the condition comes with, including pain and fatigue. For some women, these challenges can be even more difficult during pregnancy, but the good news is that your baby won’t be affected at all by the condition.

Here’s what you need to know to manage your symptoms if you have fibromyalgia and enjoy a happy, healthy pregnancy.

What is fibromyalgia?

Fibromyalgia (FM) is a chronic condition characterized by pain, a burning sensation and muscle aches. The accompanying fatigue, sleep and memory problems can be draining.

An estimated 10 million people in the U.S. live with fibromyalgia. The condition is most prevalent in women; in fact they make up 90 percent of all cases. While this number is extremely high, the condition often goes unrecognized in pregnant women, possibly because the fatigue , weakness and psychological stress it causes are all considered common symptoms of pregnancy .

What are the effects of fibromyalgia on pregnancy?

Studies and anecdotal evidence suggest pregnancy is extra tough on a woman who has fibromyalgia. This could be because the added physical and emotional stress of having a baby can cause symptoms to flare up or become exacerbated. Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office on Women's HealthFibromyalgiaSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office on Women's HealthFibromyalgiaSee All Sources

Meanwhile, if your practitioner misdiagnoses fibromyalgia symptoms as simply a normal part of your pregnancy, you may not receive the treatment you need to feel better. That’s why it’s so important to learn everything you can about your condition so you can make sure you get the care you need while you’re pregnant.

Some pregnant women with fibromyalgia report feeling more tired than usual, especially in the first trimester when exhaustion hits particularly hard. Along with fatigue, there are the aches and pains that suddenly appear in more parts of the body than is the case for an expectant mom who doesn’t have fibromyalgia, especially during the third trimester.

That said, ironically some lucky women actually feel better during pregnancy, so you can definitely hope for that.

How do you treat fibromyalgia during pregnancy?

Ask your practitioner about the best ways to minimize your symptoms. Your doctor may suggest some of the following strategies:

Trying to reduce the amount of stress in your life as much as possible

Eating a well-balanced diet

Taking warm baths (not hot)

Exercising moderately (without overdoing it) , and doing safe stretches and conditioning exercises (such as yoga or water exercises) that may have helped you before your pregnancy

If you suffer from overwhelming fatigue, aches or faintness, make sure you rest and take breaks multiple times a day — or however many times your practitioner recommends.

Seek support from family members and friends, and don’t be afraid to ask for help — for example, a home-cooked meal, a ride to a doctor’s appointment or words of encouragement — if you need it.

What medications can be taken for fibromyalgia during pregnancy?

Because the symptoms of fibromyalgia are often treated with antidepressants and pain suppressants, you’ll need to make sure your doctor and prenatal practitioner are in contact with each other and only keep you on medications that are safe for use during pregnancy.

It’s also recommended you discontinue any naturopathic treatments. The science still isn’t there to back up any unintended consequences to your developing baby.

Treatments like massage, exercise, yoga, acupuncture and meditation are likely safe as long as your practitioner gives you the green light. Trusted SourceFibromyalgia News TodayThe Challenges That Come With Pregnancy When You Have FibromyalgiaSee All Sources [2] If you haven’t taken advantage of these options before pregnancy, now might be the perfect time to try them out.

Is there postnatal care for women with fibromyalgia?

Pain, fatigue, mood swings and other difficult symptoms are part of the postpartum period for many women, and for those with fibromyalgia, the weeks and months after giving birth can be even more challenging.

Try to line up some help for after you give birth to assist with your baby or other household tasks like errands, cooking and cleaning — you’ll be glad you did.

Pregnancy isn’t easy no matter what, and it can be even more challenging for moms-to-be with fibromyalgia. But being aware of your condition and knowing how to manage your symptoms actually gives you a head start that many women don’t have. And besides, that cuddly reward — the beautiful baby you’re working so hard for — can make all the challenges more than worthwhile.