Fierce and Fearless: 9 Baby Names for Girls With Superhero Energy

Minor copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

strong baby girl smiling with head up on arms

Inspired to raise a leader — or even a superheroine? Choose one of these strong girl names.

No question, the world is a better place because of all the strong women who raise, lead, and inspire us. Expecting a baby girl and still haven't settled on a name just yet? Consider a moniker for the baby girl who will grow up to wield her own superpowers...like strength, wisdom, and compassion .

Here are superheroine-inspired baby name choices for the little girl who's about to change your world for the better.

1. Diana. Diana Prince is the fearless alter ego of one of the first major female superheroes, Wonder Woman. This classically beautiful Greek name, meaning "divine," is timeless and powerful. And of course, long before Diana was Wonder Woman, she was the Greek goddess of hunting and the moon.

2. Jean. Jean Grey is an empathetic and intelligent telepath from Marvel's X-Men series, and one of the leaders of the original X-Men. The name Jean, which has both French or English origins, means "graciousness."

3. Kamala. The 2014 re-launch of the old-school Ms. Marvel comic series introduced a Muslim-American teenager with superpowers named Kamala, a Sanskrit name that means "red" or "lotus." This beautiful name is also shared with Kamala Harris.

4. Kara. This Italian name, meaning "loved," is the alias of Supergirl, the ever-popular character created in 1959. Supergirl Kara Danvers has soared through dozens of reincarnations, including as the protagonist of the Supergirl TV series on the CW network.

5. Munroe. Another high-flying member of Marvel's X-Men squad, Ororo Munroe, aka Storm, is one of the most recognizable superheroines these days. The Scottish name Munroe is a subtle homage to the classic character, and a clever choice for a girl born to take the world by storm.

6. Mysa or Mhysa. In the Legion of Super-Heroes comic books of the 1960s, the White Witch was an otherworldly sorceress (real name: Mysa) who fought and flew alongside the likes of Lightning Lad and Saturn Girl. Mysa is a pretty name that evokes both a skilled superheroine from a vintage comic book era, as well as the powerful, dragon-riding Daenerys Targaryen of Game of Thrones , called "Mhysa" by her adoring subjects.

7. Sage. Meaning "wise one," Sage is a strong, lovely name for a girl in its own right. The comic book star Sage is a lesser-known but powerful character from the X-Men universe with the mind capacity and analytical ability of a supercomputer.

8. Scarlet. The Avengers re-introduced The Scarlet Witch, a mysterious and magical heroine with telepathic, telekinetic, and seemingly tele-everything-else abilities. She's an old-school comic book star who has enjoyed a recent resurgence in popularity — just like the name Scarlet, either with or without the second -t, a strong name with a long history that came back from near obscurity in a big way.

9. Selina. Batman met his match in Selina Kyle, aka Catwoman, a fierce and formidable character who's been around since the 1940s and has been alternately a superhero and a supervillain. (It's complicated.) Selina, a baby name of French origin, has an equally layered meaning: It's derived from the Greek word selene , meaning "the moon" or "moon goddess," but perhaps also from the Latin word caelum , the word for "the skies."

Still looking for the perfect baby name? Open the What to Expect app for the top 1,000 names — plus get week-by-week updates on the tiny human you’re naming.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Updates history

September 28, 2025

Editors: Kathleen Felton/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Minor copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,922 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Gorgeous Chinese Baby Girl Names That Inspire Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

14 Baby Names That Mean Peace, Strength, and Wisdom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

26 Baby Names Inspired by the British Royal Family Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Cute, Quirky, and Easy to Say: 19 Adorable Welsh Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window