Finding the Right Power Pumping Schedule for You

power pumping schedule, mom adjusting a breast pump

Want to try power pumping? There are a few different strategies for incorporating the method into your busy day.

If you're breastfeeding and your supply isn't as high as you'd like it to be, power pumping can help. The pumping method, which involves expressing breast milk in several short, almost back-to-back sessions, taps into the supply-and-demand nature of milk production — sending your body the signal to make more.

The catch? Since power pumping happens in addition to your usual nursing or pumping routine, you'll need to squeeze it into your schedule (which is probably already pretty busy!). Thankfully, there are a few different ways to incorporate the strategy into your day.

Here's what the experts recommend, plus how to manage your power pumping schedule when it's just you and your baby.

What is the best power pumping schedule?

Power pumping sessions usually take about an hour, though you can cut it back to 30 minutes if needed.

Either way, "the best time of day to power pump is when a mom has time," says Lauren Crosby , M.D., a Beverly Hills pediatrician, spokeswoman for the AAP, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board.

Some moms prefer to power pump in the morning, since that's when milk production tends to be highest. But nights are often more convenient, especially if your baby is already asleep or your partner can be on baby duty while you pump.

"I tend to do mine in the evening so I can chill, read, watch Netflix, whatever," says What to Expect Community mom eeekabat. And you don't have to stick with just one or the other: It's fine to go back and forth or do different times on different days.

No matter which time of day you choose, try to power pump directly after breastfeeding your baby. That'll help ensure you have enough milk for your little one when her next nursing session rolls around, recommend experts at the Fed Is Best Foundation. Trusted SourceFed Is Best FoundationPower Pumping: Does it Work?See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceFed Is Best FoundationPower Pumping: Does it Work?See All Sources

Power hour: power pumping for one hour

Despite the name, you're not actually pumping for an entire hour. (Phew.) Instead, you'll pump for three brief sessions and take breaks in between. That typically looks like this:

Pump for 20 minutes

Rest for 10 minutes

Pump for 10 minutes

Rest for 10 minutes

Pump for 10 minutes and you're done

After your power pumping session, continue to nurse or pump as you normally would for the rest of the day.

Express power pumping

If you don't have a full hour but still want to power pump, don't stress. You can still get a supply boost by doing two 30-minute express sessions at different times of day — like in the morning and at night, Dr. Crosby says.

Here's what an express pumping session would look like:

Pump for 10 minutes

Though it's unlikely to happen, if milk is still being expressed at the 10-minute mark, continue pumping until milk stops

Rest for 10 minutes

Pump for 10 minutes and you're done

Between and after your power pumping sessions, continue to nurse or pump as you normally would for the rest of the day.

The best time of day to power pump is when a mom has time.

Dr. Lauren Crosby, Pediatrician in California and Member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

Balancing multiple power pumping sessions

If you're power pumping for an hour, one daily session should be enough to boost your supply (usually within three to seven days). Since express sessions are shorter, you'll see the best results if you do them twice a day.

Ideally, you'll want to spread those two sessions out over the course of the day — like one in the morning and one in the late afternoon or evening.

"Spreading them out will give your body more time to adjust and respond and keep your nipples from getting too sore," Dr. Crosby says. It also ensures that you'll have enough milk for your baby when she gets hungry.

Also, you can save a little time by using the fridge pump hack, recommends What to Expect Community mom butterflybabegirl. "You store your [pump parts] in the fridge so you don't have to constantly wash after each session," she says.

Just check with the pediatrician first to make sure they're okay with it, and always wash your pump parts after your final pumping session of the day.

How to manage power pumping and taking care of your baby

Power pumping can feel like a juggling act because you're trying to squeeze it in alongside regular feeding or pumping sessions and tending to your sweetie. Follow these tips to make it more manageable:

Be strategic with your timing. Pumping right after nursing your baby doesn't just ensure she gets enough milk, it also ups the odds that she'll be content to just hang out while you pump, Dr. Crosby points out. You can also pump after putting your baby down for a nap or once she’s asleep for the night.

Wait until you have help. Pump when your partner or another support person is around so they can be with the baby.

Use a hands-free pump. It's a solid option for when you know your baby will probably want to be held, or if you want to pump while getting chores done when your baby is napping.

Remember your own needs. Make sure you're drinking plenty of water, try to eat healthy foods, and carve out some baby-free time when you can, recommends the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsLow Breast Milk Supply: 5 Steps That Can HelpSee All Sources [2] Even though you're focused on pumping, you still need to take care of yourself.

Ultimately, the best time to power pump is the time that's most convenient for you. Doing several short spurts over the course of one hour is the typical go-to method, but you can also break it up into two 30-minute sessions if you're pressed for time.

Key Takeaways

Do what you can, when you can when it comes to power pumping. The best time to power pump is the time that works for your schedule.

It's okay to break up your power pumping sessions. If you can squeeze in a single 60-minute pumping session, great. But two 30-minute sessions spread throughout the day can also get the job done.

Get help with taking care of your baby, if possible. Having someone else around makes power pumping easier. If you're alone with the baby, try to do it right after a feeding or when she’s sleeping.