When Should Baby Visit the Dentist for the First Time?

smiling baby with teeth, baby at first dental appointment

Not sure when to schedule baby's first dental visit? Find out when it's time to get a dentist's care for those tiny teeth.

Whether your toddler has a mouth full of teeth or only a few poking through, it’s never too soon to start thinking about how to keep his adorable smile healthy. Sure, baby teeth don’t hang around forever (they generally start to fall out by age 6 or 7), but it’s still important to keep those tiny teeth — and gums — in tip-top shape while they’re saving the spots for grown-up teeth.

How do you make sure those pearly whites stay pearly? First, brush your baby’s teeth and next, book his first dentist appointment, if you haven’t already.

When to schedule baby's first dental visit

It might sound early, but aim to schedule your baby’s first dentist appointment at a pediatric dentist (or one who's good with children) within 6 months of the time he sprouts a tooth or turns a year old, whichever comes first, according to the latest guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD).

If you suspect a problem, or even a cavity already, be sure to bring it up at the visit. A history of cavities in the family — or a habit of falling asleep with a bottle or while nursing — may give your baby a higher chance of developing early tooth decay. Other changes worth a mention include: any white spots on the teeth, ulcers or lesions in the mouth, bluish bruises where a tooth is trying to grow, grinding, or tongue issues.

Keeping baby teeth healthy is important, even if they are temporary. The back teeth actually stay in the mouth until kids are about 10 to 12 years old.

How to choose a dentist for your child

When it comes to choosing a dentist, many people take their tot to their own — and this is often a good choice, particularly if your dentist has experience with young children.

You may also want to consider taking your child to a pediatric dentist — someone who has additional training in caring for children’s oral health. Another bonus to choosing a pediatric dentist: He or she'll be prepared to deal with any squirming or crying in the dental chair, and will have a waiting room filled with distractions such as kids’ books and toys.

What happens at baby's first dentist visit

Most first dentist visits are quick and straightforward by design. The dentist will greet your little one, count your baby’s teeth and examine his gums, lips, tongue and the inside of his cheeks. Most pediatric dentists expect a parent to stay in the room while little patients have their mouths checked.

Your baby’s dentist will also talk with you about teething and family dental history as well as oral hygiene, pacifier use, feeding and sleeping habits — and give you the chance to ask any questions you may have about toddler teething , thumb-sucking, tooth-friendly foods and anything else that pertains to your toddler’s oral health. The dentist will additionally evaluate your child's bite and suggest when you should schedule your next appointment.

You may also want to bring a list of your questions to the appointment so that you remember them when you’ve got the dentist’s attention.

Tips to make your child’s dentist visit easier

Before you assume that getting your toddler into the dentist’s chair will involve either a tantrum or bribery, remember that your child doesn’t harbor any ill will toward the dentist — yet. For him, that first visit could be as much fun as a stop at the local amusement park (the chair goes up and down, back and forth!). So keep your own negative feelings in check (if you have any) and let your child enjoy his first dental visit with the same enthusiasm as a visit to Grandma’s.

To help alleviate any potential anxiety, here are a few tactics to try before and during the appointment:

Read up and role play. Read picture books about visiting the dentist, and encourage your toddler to play “dentist” with a stuffed animal or doll — opening wide, looking inside and giving teeth a polish.

Use positive language. Explain to your sweetie that a dentist is a doctor who helps build healthy, strong teeth, but avoid getting into much technical detail about the visit, which may confuse more than it clears up.

Come prepared. Bring along comfort toys and distractions for the waiting room and the dentist’s chair, but skip messy snacks (like powdery cheesy puffs) that can coat the teeth.

Plan a treat. Something as simple as a trip to the playground after the dentist can help your toddler stay focused on the positive.

Stay relaxed. Your own stress or anxiety about the dentist may be more noticeable than you think, especially for a perceptive and sensitive toddler . If you’re cheerful and calm, you set the tone for your child to be too.

Be a good cheerleader. Congratulate your kiddo whenever you can (“Good job opening wide!”), and try to be supportive, not critical, if your child has a hard time cooperating. And remember: Even if he has a meltdown mid-checkup, it’s nothing an experienced pediatric dentist hasn’t seen before.

How often to visit the dentist

Based on how your toddler’s teeth look, your dentist will let you know when to make the next visit. Most experts recommend that toddlers see the dentist about every six months — as long as there are no major problems. So don’t forget to schedule your child’s second appointment on your way out the door!