Your Baby's First Holiday Season

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"My daughter was born in the summer, so this will be my baby's first holiday season. Any tips for how we should celebrate this year?"

Having a little elf in the house makes the season even more magical, but before you go overboard with gifts and decorating, take a breath. A holiday on steroids will likely lead to less joy and more jangled nerves, for your baby and for you.

Here's why: Babies tend to get overwhelmed by too many changes to their routines and surroundings, and they aren't shy about letting you know it (with plenty of crying and tons of crankiness). A better plan: Make your baby's first Christmas , Hanukkah or Kwanzaa memorable instead of stressful with these ideas for the holidays.

Rein in the hoopla.

Keep your baby's first holiday experiences intimate and low-key. Avoid bringing her to parties and crowded spaces. Germs and viruses like COVID-19 still pose a threat to her vulnerable immune system (and the many new faces and noises probably wouldn’t go over so well either). Of course you want to show off your snow angel, but stick to virtual holiday celebrations on FaceTime and Zoom until it’s safer to host larger, in-person gatherings.

Start your own holiday traditions.

Your favorite holiday tradition may be wonderful, but is it baby-friendly? For example, this might not be the year to make that cross-country trip to see your parents or trudge through the snow to pick the perfect tree.

But your baby's first holiday is the perfect time to create new family traditions, like taking an evening stroll to check out the neighbors' light displays or dropping off gifts at your local shelter. Keep in mind that it's okay for traditions to change as your family does, so don't be afraid to nix (or adapt) a ritual as your child gets older.

Slow the flow of gifts.

Gearing up with a sleighful of Christmas gifts or a present for each of the eight nights of Hanukkah? Not so fast. At this stage of the game, too many presents will confuse rather than delight your little one. Pare down the gift list to just a few toys for your baby's first holiday (and the next few seasons to come).

Then spread the gift-giving over the course of the day instead of a ten-minute frenzy in the morning. Or, consider one or two evenings of Hanukkah presents instead of all eight. If relatives go overboard with toys for your tot, stash a bunch to take out one by one over the next several months, especially when your cutie's got a case of the crankies or you're stuck indoors on an icky day.

One more thing: Keep holiday safety in mind, and keep choking hazards such as bows, ribbons, wrapping paper and small toys out of a baby's reach.

Think small.

This isn't the year to whip up an Iron Chef–worthy holiday dinner or host an open house for the entire neighborhood. Instead enjoy the special little moments of the season — like reading The Night Before Christmas aloud or just cuddling on lazy winter mornings. If you slow down and relish your time together as a brand-new family, you'll be able to make your baby's first holiday season a beautiful one for everyone.

Wishing your baby (and you) a happy holiday,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Is It Safe to Visit Family for the Holidays During the COVID-19 Pandemic? , December 2020. WhatToExpect.com, First Aid for a Choking Child , February 2019. WhatToExpect.com, What Do Your Baby's Cries Mean? , June 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, Choking Prevention , September 2019. American Academy of Pediatrics, Are Holiday Gatherings Okay During the COVID-19 Pandemic? November 2020. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Small and Large Gatherings , August 2021. Mayo Clinic, Crying Baby: What to Do When Your Newborn Cries , March 2021.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

Easy-to-Take Holiday Photos You’ll Cherish for Years to Come By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

What to Pack When Traveling With Baby Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Your Guide to a Calmer, Cozier Holiday Season During Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Traditional Baby Naming Ceremonies Are Getting a Modern Twist — Here's How to Plan Your Own Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Smart Tips for Getting Your Baby to Sleep Anywhere (Yep, Even on Vacation) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Yes, It's Worth Having a "Newborn Bubble" — Here's How to Do It Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

This Is Your Sign to Have a Valentine's Day Photo Shoot With Your Baby By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window