First Year

Everything you have to look forward to now that you have a baby, from milestones to baby's growth, plus tips to make life easier.

First Year Landing

Go to Your Baby's Age

First Year Tools & Resources

Baby Month By Month

Track Baby's Growth Month by Month

Baby Milestones

Explore Baby Development Milestones

Newborn sleep

Baby Sleep

WTE Community

Join the Discussion: Transitioning Baby For Their Own Room

First Year Topics

Feeding

Whether you use breast or bottle, you'll have questions. From tips & tricks to problem-solvers & picking products, here are the answers you'll want.

Health and Safety

Keeping baby safe and healthy is your #1 priority. This is what you'll want to know before you visit the pediatrician, vaccinate and put baby to sleep.

Postpartum Recovery and Tips

In the midst of taking care of your new baby, you have to remember to take care of yourself too. Here's what you may go through after giving birth.

Baby's Development

That first year is packed with milestones both cute and challenging. Here's the info you need to get from cooing to crawling and everything in between.

Baby Basics

Here are all the basics you need when you're bringing baby home, from changing diapers and caring for baby to soothing cries and getting your little one to sleep.

Community Groups

Feel like you could use a little help with this whole parenting thing? You’re not alone.

Latest Articles, News & Blogs

You Don’t Have to Navigate Hearing Loss Alone — Here’s How to Build a Strong Support Team

3 Subtle Signs Your Baby's Hearing Might Need Another Screening (Even If They Passed at Birth)

Popular Target Baby Wipes Recalled Due to Possible Bacterial Infection Risk

Rohini Test Page May 2026 - TEST1

312 Samples, 16 Brands: The Largest Baby Formula Study in U.S. History Is In

Expert Tips on Safely Storing and Prepping Baby Formula

Nearly 90,000 Bottles of Children's Ibuprofen Recalled for Foreign Substance

More Than 45,000 Popular "Magic" Sleepsuits Recalled for Choking Hazard

Here's Your Baby's Vaccine Schedule So You Know What Shots to Get When

I Got Mastitis 3 Times in 2 Months — Here's What I Wish I'd Known as a Nursing Mom

Should Your Baby Get the Hepatitis A Vaccine?

Why the Rotavirus Vaccine Matters for Your Baby

On the Outside, I Looked Like a Happy New Mom. But I Was Breaking on the Inside — And My Camera Caught the Truth

When Should Your Baby Get a Flu Shot?

7 Books to Help Your Toddler Transition to Their Big Kid Bed

This Is Your Sign to Have a Valentine's Day Photo Shoot With Your Baby

The Breastfeeding Trick That Saved My Sanity With a Newborn

What I Wish I Knew About Intrusive Thoughts as a New Parent

How to Introduce Your Dog to Your Newborn Baby

Sweet Monthly Photo Shoot Ideas for Every Family

What Parents Should Know About the Hepatitis B Shot

Why I Tell Everyone I Know to Try a 'Sleep Divorce' Postpartum

Easy-to-Take Holiday Photos You’ll Cherish for Years to Come

Remembering Baby's Feedings, Diaper Changes, and Sleep Details Is Hard. Let Our Baby Tracker Help You

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window