Fisher-Price Recalls Snuga Infant Swing After Infant Deaths Reported

fisher price snug swing

The swing should never be used for sleep and can increase risk of suffocation. Here's what to know if you have this gear in your home.

Fisher-Price is recalling its popular Snuga Swing line after five infant deaths were linked to the devices. The recall impacts 21 different swings, including the My Little Snugabunny Swing and My Little Snugapuppy Cradle 'n Swing. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionFisher-Price Recalls More than 2 Million Snuga Infant Swings Due to Suffocation Hazard After 5 Deaths ReportedSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionFisher-Price Recalls More than 2 Million Snuga Infant Swings Due to Suffocation Hazard After 5 Deaths ReportedSee All Sources

Fisher Price shared the news of the recall on Instagram . "The swing should never be used for sleep and bedding materials should never be added to it," the company wrote in the caption. "If the product is used for sleep or bedding material is added, the headrest and body support insert on the seat pad can increase the risk of suffocation."

Key Takeaways

Fisher-Price is recalling 2.1 million Snuga swings that were sold in the U.S. The recall comes after five infant deaths were reported.

The Consumer Product Safety Commission calls for parents to remove both the headrest and body support insert from the swing. Parents can then receive a $25 refund.

The swing should not be used for sleeping. The American Academy of Pediatrics advises that infants only sleep on their backs on a firm, flat surface with no added bedding.

The news sparked a flurry of comments from concerned parents, including some who spoke about how much their children loved the swing. I know the feeling: I used the My Little Snugabunny Swing with my youngest child when I needed two hands free in the kitchen — she was obsessed with its gentle rocking motion, sweet songs and comfortable seat.

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Fisher-Price (@fisherprice)

The recall asks parents to immediately remove the headrest and body support insert if they choose to continue using the swing. Here's what else you need to know about the recall.

What to know about the Snuga swing recall

Fisher Price is recalling 2.1 million Snuga swings that were sold in the U.S. The impacted swings were sold at Amazon, Toys "R" Us, Walmart, Sam's Club and Target from October 2010 until January 2024. The recall is being issued over suffocation concerns, according to a notice from the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSafe SleepSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSafe SleepSee All Sources

"In most incidents, the infants were unrestrained and bedding materials were added to the product," Catherine Frymark, chief corporate communications officer for Mattel, which owns Fisher-Price, told What to Expect.

The full list of recalled products, along with corresponding product numbers, is in the CPSC recall notice . If you're not sure which swing you have, look for the model number and name printed under the swing.

All of the impacted swings move from front to back and side to side. They have 90 degrees of rotation, two seat back positions and fold up for storage. There are "minor differences" in fabric colors and toy accessories between them, per the CPSC.

The CPSC stresses repeatedly in the recall notice that the swings should not be used for sleep. For safe sleep , place infants flat on their backs in a crib, bassinet or portable play yard with a firm, flat mattress and a fitted sheet, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) advises. "Avoid sleep on a couch or armchair or in a seating device, like a swing or car safety seat, except while riding in the car," the AAP's guidance reads.

What should parents do if they own this swing?

The CPSC advises that parents modify the swing if they want to continue to use it safely.

"Consumers should immediately remove both the headrest, by cutting the tether, and the body support insert from the seat pad before continuing to use the swing," Patty Davis, press secretary for the CPSC, tells What to Expect. "Fisher-Price will provide a $25 refund to consumers who remove and destroy the headrest and body support insert." (More specific instructions on how to do this can be found at www.service.mattel.com .)

To get the $25 refund, you'll need to fill out a form on the Mattel Global Consumer Support website and upload a photo of your headrest and body support insert with the word "recall" written in permanent dark-colored marker directly onto the back of each of the cut-out pieces.

"Once the photo is validated, they will receive $25 through their choice of PayPal or paper check," Frymark says.

Again, you can continue to use your Snuga swing after the headrest and infant body insert are removed. However, Fisher-Price and the CPSC stress that the swings should never be used for sleep.

Sources

Fisher-Price Recalls More than 2 Million Snuga Infant Swings Due to Suffocation Hazard After 5 Deaths Reported

Show in the article

Safe Sleep

Show in the article