Fitness Fatigue During Pregnancy

fitness fatigue during pregnancy, pregnant woman sitting on exercise ball

Is pregnancy making you too tired to exercise? Here's how to get moving and feeling better in no time.

Exercise does a body good — especially when that body is pregnant. But what happens when your pregnant body is just too tired to get off the sofa, never mind hop on a treadmill?

The fact is, pregnancy fatigue can be a huge struggle for many expectant moms — especially during the first trimester and the last month of pregnancy. And while that physiological reality is a perfectly good reason to take it easier until you're feeling more energetic, it's not such a good reason to write yourself a pass on the gym for the rest of your pregnancy.

Hard as it may be to believe when you're feeling flat-out exhausted, exercise can actually leave you feeling more energized than lying down. Besides being good for you and your baby , working out during pregnancy can even give you back some of that get-up-and-go that you're pretty sure had gotten up and left.

Remember that exercise during pregnancy doesn't have to be exhausting to be effective. In fact, the right kind of pregnancy exercise shouldn't leave you dragging. A prenatal yoga or Pilates class can be even more relaxing than a stint on the sofa. Gentle laps in the pool can be invigorating, especially since swimming allows you to feel spectacularly weightless.

Another tip: When possible, do your exercise outside — the fresh air may give you just enough lift to get going. Keep your energy up by having a light, healthy snack — think protein and complex carbs, like string cheese and a pear — before you strap on your sneaks. And drink plenty of water before, during and after exercise to stay hydrated.

Don't have time to actually take that walk? Build it into your day instead. Walk to the next bus stop instead of catching the one closest to your office, park your car in the farthest spot from the store, or walk to the deli to pick up your lunch instead of ordering in. A 10-minute walk three times a day counts just as much as a 30-minute cardio workout at the gym — even more so if you're more likely to actually do it.

Realistically, there will be days during your pregnancy when even neck rolls and leg lifts feel like too much for your tired body to contemplate. If you can't muster the energy to budge, it's no big deal. Just take advantage of the energetic days — and you will have them! — and remember that exercising regularly may actually bring you more. Really!

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises You Can Do While Expecting , July 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Benefits of Exercise During Pregnancy , November 2021. American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Exercise During Pregnancy , July 2019. American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Physical Activity and Exercise During Pregnancy and the Postpartum Period , April 2020.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Fatigue During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Exercise in the Third Trimester Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Why You're So Fatigued in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises That Keep You (and Baby!) Feeling Great Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Best Energy-Boosting Pregnancy Foods to Sustain Your Strength Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

10 Benefits of Exercise During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

These Are the Exercises You Should Avoid During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Is It Pregnancy Fatigue or Heat Exhaustion? How to Tell the Difference Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Fibromyalgia During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Stress During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shari Lusskin, M.D.

Pregnant and Exhausted? How to Tell If It's Normal — or Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Strength Training in Pregnancy: How to Safely Lift Weights While Expecting Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Bed Rest During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Working Out While TTC: Safe Exercise Tips Before Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window