How to Get Flexible Hours at Work During Pregnancy

Updated to reflect the PWFA has gone into effect.

flexible hours pregnancy, pregnant woman standing against desk in office

New legislation is helping expectant moms get the accommodations they need — from schedule changes to extra break time to closer parking.

Being pregnant can feel like its own job thanks to juggling doctor's appointments, learning new pregnancy-specific medical lingo, and doing your best to go about your usual routine while dealing with a slew of bodily changes. To handle all of that while working a professional job certainly isn't easy, especially if you have pregnancy complications.

New legislation designed to help went into effect nationwide on June 27. It's called the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act (PWFA), and it grants expectant moms a bunch of benefits that can make a pregnancy journey a little easier — on the work front, at least. Among other things, pregnant women can ask for flexible hours and other reasonable accommodations.

There's a lot to unpack with this legislation. Get the lowdown, plus advice from employment lawyers on getting the accommodations you need.

What is the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act?

Signed into law late last year, the Pregnant Workers Fairness Act is legislation that grants "reasonable accommodations" to covered employees during pregnancy.

"It means women can ask for changes to their job to make it easier for them to succeed at work and also protect the health and safety of their pregnancy," says Daphne Delvaux , attorney and owner of Delvaux Law, the country's first law firm dedicated to helping women at work.

The PWFA applies to private and public employers with at least 15 employees. It also covers people who work for Congress, federal agencies, employment agencies and labor organizations.

The Pregnant Workers Fairness Act "supplements existing laws related to pregnancy," says Larry Stuart, an employment lawyer at the Houston-based law firm Stuart PC and an adjunct professor at the Jones Graduate School of Business at Rice University. For example, it addresses issues related to pregnancy and childbirth that the Americans with Disabilities Act does not necessarily cover.

Can you ask for flexible hours at work when you're pregnant?

Yes, you can ask for flexible hours at work when you're pregnant, and you're entitled to them in certain situations thanks to the PWFA.

"You can ask for flexibility if you have a pregnancy-related condition that makes your current schedule difficult to follow," Delvaux says. That may mean coming in later than usual if you struggle with morning sickness or adjusting your schedule if you have an ultrasound during work hours.

Just keep in mind your employer only has to grant accommodations if it can make them happen.

"It will be easier for women working computer jobs to receive these rights than for women who work in industries like health care and education," Delvaux says.

How to ask for flexible hours at work when you're pregnant

Before speaking with your boss, check in with your doctor first.

"Go to your provider, and explain the physical or mental challenges you are experiencing," Delvaux says. "Then, with a doctor's note in hand, approach your employer and ask for what you need."

Having this documentation will improve the odds your request gets granted.

Can you ask for remote work when you're pregnant?

You can ask for remote work, but the PWFA doesn't explicitly name it as a reasonable accommodation. Whether your employer will grant a work-from-home request depends on the type of work you do, Stuart says.

Factors include the type of business, what you do there, any specific pregnancy or childbirth-related limitations, and the availability of other reasonable accommodations, he says.

The PWFA does require that employers treat employees with pregnancy and childbirth-related medical conditions the same as it does other similarly-situated employees, he explains.

"If an employee experiencing back pain or chronic headaches unrelated to pregnancy or childbirth is allowed to work remotely when so afflicted, the PWFA would likely require the employer to accommodate individuals experiencing those conditions in connection with pregnancy or childbirth," Stuart says.

The reverse is also true: If your company has not let employees with other health conditions work remotely, it's not obligated to permit remote work for pregnant workers.

How to ask for remote work when you're pregnant

Just like with flexible hours, you should talk to your doctor before requesting remote work, Delvaux advises.

"You have the best chance of getting your accommodation granted if you also attach a doctor's note confirming your need for the accommodation," she says.

Specifying a definite time frame and other details is another good tactic.

"Your employer is not obligated to accommodate an infinite leave," Delvaux adds. "Accommodation requests with specific needs that spell out specific solutions during a specific window have the highest chance of being granted."

Other accommodations you can ask for when you're pregnant

The PWFA covers more than just flexible hours. Other accommodations expectant moms can request include:

Getting time to sit or drink water

Receiving closer parking

Receiving appropriately-sized uniforms and safety apparel

Receiving additional break time to use the bathroom, eat and rest

Taking leave or time off to recover from childbirth

Being excused from strenuous activities and/or activities that involve exposure to compounds not safe for pregnancy

The legislation also means a covered employer can't force you to take time off or quit when an accommodation would allow you to continue working, Stuart adds.

Again, the PWFA builds upon existing legislation to give pregnant workers more protection. Other laws also entitle you to specific rights.

The Family and Medical Leave Act protects unpaid leave and job security for qualified family and medical reasons (including pregnancy and childbirth). The PUMP Act requires employers to grant accommodations to pump breastmilk at work . And now, moms get one more layer of legal protection with the PWFA.