Florencia Segura

Florencia Segura, M.D., F.A.A.P.

About Florencia Segura, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Dr. Florencia Segura is a board-certified pediatrician and a fellow of the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) who works at Einstein Pediatrics in Vienna, Virginia.

After graduating from the University of Notre Dame with a Bachelor's degree in pre-professional studies and anthropology, Dr. Segura studied medicine at the George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences. Dr. Segura completed her pediatric residency training at Children's National Medical Center in Washington, D.C.

She practiced as a primary care pediatrician at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP), teaching residents and medical students before returning to her hometown and joining Einstein Pediatrics. She specializes in new parenting, newborn care, childhood nutrition, and teen health, among other areas. Dr. Segura lives in Northern Virginia with her husband, a local dermatologist, and their three energetic young children.

Board certifications

Dr. Segura has been board-certified by the American Board of Pediatrics since 2015 and is a Fellow of the American Academy of Pediatrics.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Florencia Segura is affiliated with Inova Children's Hospital in Falls Church, Virginia.

Other relevant positions

As a continuity clinic preceptor and primary care lecturer, Dr. Segura mentors and teaches new pediatricians undergoing training at the Inova Children's Hospital's Pediatric Residency Program in Falls Church, Virginia.

Awards

Dr. Segura has been recognized as a "Top Doctor" in Washingtonian and Northern Virginia magazines from 2020 to 2023.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window