Foods to Induce Labor: The Truth About What Works — and What's Unsafe

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Foods that Bring On Labor

From castor oil and dates to pineapple and spicy foods, here’s what experts say about the most talked-about labor-inducing foods.

Certain foods — including castor oil, evening primrose oil, red raspberry leaf tea, pineapple, spicy foods, dates, eggplant, and balsamic vinegar — have a long-standing reputation for helping to kick-start labor. There's no good evidence most of them work, but it's understandable to be curious, especially once your due date arrives.

The key is knowing which foods are safe to try and keeping expectations realistic. Read on to learn what the research says about the foods and drinks most commonly believed to induce labor — and whether they’re safe during pregnancy.

Key Takeaways

There's not much solid research supporting the use of foods or beverages to induce labor . Many so-called labor-inducing foods may simply irritate the intestines and cause cramping or contractions — often with uncomfortable side effects.

Some remedies may carry risks or unpleasant side effects during pregnancy. These include castor oil, evening primrose oil, and red raspberry leaf tea. Always check with your health care provider before trying any herb, food, or beverage as a labor-induction method.

Foods like dates, pineapple, spicy dishes, and eggplant parm are generally safe to eat in moderation during pregnancy . But the evidence that they actually get labor going is limited.

Can certain foods really induce labor?

Unfortunately, there is no miracle food proven to bring induce labor . (Old wives' tales are a different story!)

So why do so many moms swear that eating a particular food kick-started their labor? Many of the foods rumored to induce labor may actually work by irritating the intestines, causing cramping , diarrhea , or contractions.

If your body is already close to labor, those contractions might get the process started faster … but often with uncomfortable side effects ranging from the uncomfortable (hours in the bathroom) to the unsafe ( dehydration ).

So before trying any food, herb, or supplement purported to help bring on labor, get your practitioner's okay. While some options are harmless in moderation, others may not be safe during pregnancy.

We know you're eager to meet your baby! Download the What to Expect app for expert-backed tips on natural ways to prep for labor — plus daily updates on your baby's progress and what to expect in the final weeks.

"Really random things put me into labor," says What to Expect Community mom agordonj. "First was a frozen Coke and my second was honey barbecue chicken wings. I don't really think those things did, but those were the last things I ate prior to labor. Babe comes when babe is ready."

What foods and drinks are commonly thought to induce labor?

Here are some of the foods and drinks commonly thought to induce labor and what you should know about them:

Castor oil

Castor oil is one of the few substances that research suggests may help trigger contractions. Multiple studies have found that it may induce labor within 24 hours in some women who are already at term .

But there’s a catch: Castor oil is a powerful laxative. Side effects can include:

Diarrhea

Nausea

Vomiting

Cramping

Dehydration

Because of these unpleasant side effects, many doctors no longer recommend castor oil for labor induction.

If your practitioner gives you the okay to try it after your due date , follow dosing instructions carefully and drink plenty of water. Experienced moms also suggest taking castor oil with orange juice to mask the taste, and glugging the stuff in the morning, so you’re not up all night in the bathroom.

Evening primrose oil

Evening primrose oil is sometimes used to help soften the cervix and prepare the body for labor, though studies haven’t shown that it effectively induces labor.

Why? Evening primrose oil contains an omega-3 fatty acid called gamma linolenic acid, or GLA, a precursor to prostaglandins. Prostaglandins, also found in sperm, are hormone-like substances that help soften the cervix in preparation for birth — one reason sex is a touted as a natural way to induce labor .

Some women take evening primrose oil orally or insert it vaginally, but side effects can include:

Nausea

Diarrhea

Upset stomach

Always check with your provider before trying it.

Red raspberry leaf tea

Red raspberry leaf tea has long been used as a traditional remedy to strengthen the uterus and stimulate contractions.

While it's reputed to strengthen and stimulate the uterine muscles, research on its effectiveness is limited, and studies have not shown that it reliably induces labor.

Experts also can’t say for sure that it’s completely safe during pregnancy, especially before term, since it may stimulate uterine muscles and potentially pose a risk of preterm labor .

In addition, raspberry leaf tea can have laxative and diuretic effects — meaning extra trips to the bathroom.

Pineapple

You may have read that eating a whole pineapple can start labor due to the enzyme bromelain, which is thought to help soften the cervix and trigger contractions. Again, this theory has yet to be supported by clinical evidence.

Researchers believe this may be because digestive acids break down bromelain before it can have any effect. Plus, most bromelain is found in the pineapple core — not the fleshy fruit most people eat.

"I at an entire pineapple in less than 24 hours and it didn't work for me," says Community mom LoveBuninTheOven. "It was fresh, too."

Still, pineapple is a healthy pregnancy snack packed with vitamin C, folate, and fiber.

Spicy foods

Spicy foods are a very popular labor-inducing myth. The theory is that spicy foods can irritate your intestines, much like castor oil (albeit more gently), which may cause cramping and uterine contractions for women who are already dilated. That said, there’s no evidence to support the theory that spicy food induces labor.

One thing spicy food is very likely to cause? Heartburn — which you’ve probably already had more than enough of during pregnancy.

"I made a spicy Indian eggplant and tomato dish for dinner the night before my due date and went into labor the next morning," says Community mom eb9745.

"I tried spicy foods with my first … I was up alllllll night long on the toilet, but that was it!" says Community mom desiremedestiny.

Dates

Dates may be one of the more promising foods on this list.

In one small study, women who ate six dates per day in the month leading up to their due dates were more likely to go into labor on their own and had greater cervical dilation when admitted to the hospital.

Other research suggests dates may help support labor progression, though not necessarily start labor itself.

Dates are naturally high in fiber, however, and a sudden increase in the amount of fiber can cause bloating, cramping, and digestive discomfort.

Eggplant

Eating eggplant to induce labor has not been studied, so there’s no medical proof that it works.

Eggplant’s reputation as a possible labor kick-starter is most likely due to a famous eggplant parmesan dish at a now-closed restaurant near Atlanta, Georgia, called Scalini’s, known for its "eggplant babies." According to lore, when pregnant women ate the dish, they went into labor within two days.

Balsamic vinegar

Balsamic vinegar also has a labor-inducing reputation thanks to a restaurant dish.

Some moms swear by the secret sauce in the famous "maternity salad" at Caioti Pizza Café in California, but no research supports the claim that balsamic vinegar can start labor.

Is it safe to eat foods that may induce labor?

Most of the foods credited with kick-starting labor, such as pineapple, dates, eggplant parm, and spicy dishes, are perfectly safe to eat in moderation during pregnancy.

However, herbal products should only be used with your practitioner's approval. These include:

Castor oil

Evening primrose oil

Red raspberry leaf tea

Should you try to induce labor yourself with certain foods?

Be gentle and patient with your body — as hard as that might sound — and talk to your practitioner about natural ways to get labor started once you’ve reached your due date.

While the last days of pregnancy can be frustrating and uncomfortable, it’s important to play it safe and keep yourself healthy, well-rested, and well-hydrated … pretty much the opposite of how you’d feel after a bout of GI distress brought on by eating a crate of pineapples.

Are there foods to avoid before labor?

In addition to the better-known list of foods to avoid during pregnancy , such as unpasteurized dairy, undercooked meat, raw seafood, and deli meats , some foods have been linked to preterm labor or other pregnancy risks .

Licorice root

A chemical in licorice root called glycyrrhizin has been linked to preterm births and potential long-term health risks for babies when consumed in large quantities during pregnancy.

Black or blue cohosh

Black cohosh has long been suggested as a uterine stimulant to help kick-start labor, but studies have not shown it to be effective in getting labor started.

Like all herbal supplements, black cohosh should be used with caution during pregnancy. Blue cohosh, which is made from a different plant, should be avoided entirely. It has been linked to serious health complications in both pregnant women and babies.

When should I call the doctor?

Talk to your practitioner before trying any herbal supplement or remedy intended to induce labor.

And seek medical attention immediately if you experience:

Vaginal bleeding

Severe abdominal pain

Persistent cramping

Low back pain

Signs of dehydration

Most importantly, don’t try to induce labor before 40 weeks without guidance from your provider.

There’s no proof that any specific food will start labor before your body — and baby — are ready.

While some foods and herbal remedies may help prepare the body for labor or trigger contractions in certain situations, the evidence is limited, and some methods can cause unpleasant or even risky side effects.

So if you’re still waiting for labor to begin, try to be patient and make the most of these final days before your baby arrives.