5 Foods That Might Help Boost Your Breast Milk Supply

foods to boost breast milk supply, bowl of oatmeal with milk being poured in

Chances are you've heard that eating certain things may help you produce more milk during breastfeeding. But do they actually work?

Make sure your position and latch are good, sneak in a few pumping sessions, and above all, nurse often. When it comes to increasing your breast milk supply, you’ve likely heard these valuable tips before. But if you’re trying them all and still worry that you aren’t making enough milk, can eating certain foods give you an extra boost?

Many cultures have long relied on foods and herbs to promote an ample milk supply . And chances are, you’ve heard another breastfeeding mom talk about how her own supply shot up after she started eating oatmeal for breakfast or drinking fenugreek tea.

There’s no shortage of anecdotal evidence on galactagogues — foods thought to encourage breast milk production. But the truth is, there’s not much high-quality research out there to say for sure whether eating the right stuff can really increase milk supply.

That said, there's no harm in giving them a try with your doctor's approval. Here's a look at five foods thought to help boost breast milk production — and the science behind those claims.

Fenugreek

These aromatic seeds are often touted as potent galactagogues. They contain estrogen-like compounds that are thought to enhance milk flow, and one small study did find that women who drank fenugreek tea three times a day produced significantly more milk compared to those who didn’t.

But there's no widespread evidence to suggest that fenugreek works to increase breast milk supply, so some pediatricians don't recommend fenugreek.

Another thing to keep in mind? Some moms who use fenugreek report that it seems to make their babies gassier. Fenugreek can also exacerbate asthma and it could interact with medications, so check with your doctor before trying it.

Oatmeal or oat milk

Whether in the form of a bowl of old-fashioned oatmeal, a trendy oat milk latte or an oat-filled lactation cookie, breastfeeding moms have long relied on oats to help them make more milk.

Why? The whole grain is a source of iron (half a cup of dry oats has close to 2 milligrams of iron, or around 20 percent of what breastfeeding moms need per day), and low levels of the mineral are known to inhibit milk supply. There aren’t any studies that show eating oats actually helps milk production, though, so this is just one hypothesis.

Fennel seeds

The crunchy, licorice-flavored seeds are another traditional milk booster, and they’re commonly found in lactation cookies and teas.

Like fenugreek, fennel seeds contain estrogen-like compounds that are thought to enhance milk supply. And indeed, a handful of small studies have tied fennel seed consumption to greater milk volume and fat content, as well as infant weight gain. But large-scale research around their supposed breastfeeding benefits is lacking.

Lean meat and poultry

Lean beef, pork, lamb and poultry are top sources of iron. So if getting enough of the mineral promotes a more robust supply, filling up on these foods could be helpful. But again, there’s no direct evidence or research tying meat consumption to increased milk production.

Garlic

The one study looking at the link between garlic and milk supply found that supplementing with the aromatic ingredient didn’t make a difference. But plenty of moms swear that it helps their production — and a clove or two makes almost any savory food more delicious (and healthy). So why not try it?

All in all, there’s not a lot of evidence to support the idea that you can increase your milk supply by eating the right foods. But a handful of studies suggest that certain ingredients might be beneficial — and plenty of breastfeeding moms believe they make a difference. So if you feel like your milk production could use a little help, feel free to try adding a few galactagogues to your menu.

But if you're struggling with milk supply, be sure to bring up your concerns with your doctor (and lactation consultant , if you have one). He or she can evaluate you and your baby for any other underlying issues that may be at play. They can help you pinpoint what might be affecting your milk production and, if necessary, offer other solutions to help ensure your little one gets all the nutrition she needs.