Should You Avoid Certain Foods While Breastfeeding?

foods to avoid when breastfeeding

Here’s the good news: Your postpartum diet isn’t nearly as restricted as when you were expecting. Still, there are a few foods you may want to limit or avoid if you’re nursing.

Eating for two has been on your mind for many months — so when your baby finally arrives, you’re no doubt thrilled to dive into a few spicy tuna rolls and a glass of wine. Indeed, your post-delivery food options are now a good bit wider, but if you’re nursing your infant (whether at the breast, via a pump or both), there are some items you may want to limit or even skip right now. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicBreastfeeding Nutrition: Tips for MomsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicBreastfeeding Nutrition: Tips for MomsSee All Sources

Fortunately, this list is short (yay!) and there are lots of other delicious foods you can and should enjoy to fuel the daily care of your bundle of joy. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow a Healthy Diet Helps You BreastfeedSee All Sources [2] To help you eat as healthfully as possible, read on to learn which menu choices need a critical eye if you're nursing, as well as why certain foods may be linked to sensitivities in some newborns. Bon appétit!

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow a Healthy Diet Helps You BreastfeedSee All Sources

Do you have to avoid certain foods while breastfeeding?

While the ‘food rules’ definitely aren’t as strict as during pregnancy, it’s a good idea to limit and even avoid a few foods while you’re breastfeeding. The reason? Certain items may contain substances that can be passed to your baby through your breast milk.

As you strive for a well-balanced, nutrient-dense diet while nursing, be aware of the foods below. Trusted SourceWest Jefferson Medical CenterBest (and Worst) Foods to Eat While BreastfeedingSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceWest Jefferson Medical CenterBest (and Worst) Foods to Eat While BreastfeedingSee All Sources

Foods to limit or avoid while breastfeeding

1. High-mercury fish

While fish offers important nutrients while pregnant and nursing, there are certain ocean-swimming types that contain too much of the toxin mercury. And freshwater fish may harbor harmful chemicals known as polychlorinated biphenyls or PCBs. Check local warnings about fish from lakes and rivers so you can make a safe choice.

Varieties to skip while breastfeeding include: Trusted SourceFood and Drug AdministrationAdvice About Eating FishSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceFood and Drug AdministrationAdvice About Eating FishSee All Sources

King mackerel

Marlin

Orange roughy

Shark

Swordfish

Bigeye tuna

Tilefish from the Gulf of Mexico

Better choices include anchovies, black sea bass, catfish, clams, cod, crabs, crawfish, flounder, haddock, hake, herring, lobster, oysters, salmon, sardines, scallops, shrimp, skate, squid, tilapia, trout, freshwater Tuna and canned light tuna (including skipjac).

Unlike when you were pregnant, sushi isn't off-limits when you're nursing. Raw and undercooked seafood are considered safe for nursing moms — just look to add one of the lower-mercury varieties to your plate.

2. Alcohol

When you consume alcohol, small amounts can pass through your breast milk, which may pose a risk to your baby's health and is why the Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends avoiding alcohol if you're nursing.

Other reasons for caution? Alcohol can change the flavor of your milk, which may result in your baby drinking less of it, and heavy drinking while nursing might also decrease your supply.

That said, occasional alcohol consumption is considered okay for breastfeeding moms, especially if it’s timed correctly. If you are going to drink alcohol, the AAP recommends doing so just after you nurse or pump, then waiting at least two hours after your last drink before breastfeeding again. This way, your body has enough time to metabolize the alcohol before the next feeding. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAlcohol & BreastmilkSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAlcohol & BreastmilkSee All Sources

Expressing breast milk and discarding it (also known as "pumping and dumping" ) does not get alcohol out of your system any faster. However, it may be helpful if you're engorged during a regular feeding time but the alcohol hasn't had time to metabolize yet.

3. Excessive caffeine

As with alcohol, caffeine can also be passed to your baby via breast milk, though the trace amount is usually too small to have an effect. Still, most experts recommend keeping an eye on your caffeine when nursing , just as you did while pregnant, since some babies may be sensitive to it.

Although the guidelines vary slightly depending on the source, generally up to 200 to 300 mg of caffeine a day is considered fine when you're nursing. That’s about two small cups of coffee or one 12-ounce cup a day. (And remember that sodas, some tea drinks and chocolate can also contain caffeine.)

4. Some herbal supplements and teas

Because the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) doesn’t regulate herbal supplements before they go to market, it’s best to check with your doctor before taking any if you're nursing.

The same holds for certain teas and special brews that purport to increase milk production. Read the labels carefully so you can choose tea types that are safe to enjoy while nursing.

Can your baby react to the foods you eat while breastfeeding?

It’s possible for your baby to have a reaction to a food or drink you’ve consumed while breastfeeding. Alcohol is known to change the taste of breast milk, causing some infants to drink less of it. And some premature babies may be more sensitive to caffeine.

It is also possible that certain foods may result in symptoms like extra gas or fussiness in your baby. However, most of the time, breastfeeding mothers can eat whatever they like without any problems.

Do you have to avoid foods with strong flavors while breastfeeding?

There is no reason to avoid foods based on flavor, even strongly flavored ones like garlic, onions or spicy dishes. But if you find that when you eat a particular item it causes irritability, a rash or diarrhea in your baby, ask your pediatrician if you should consider nixing it for a week to see if your child's symptoms improve.

Do you have to avoid foods that can make babies gassy while breastfeeding?

Alas, gas in babies happens. And while some research has found that the foods in a mom's diet might make breastfed babies gassy (particularly cruciferous vegetables like cabbage, cauliflower or Brussels sprouts), the evidence is far from conclusive. Other factors can also contribute to these uncomfortable bubbles, such as swallowing air when feeding or crying.

If your baby has gas that's not improving with home remedies , ask your pediatrician if eliminating cruciferous veggies from your diet for a week is worth trying.

When to talk to your doctor if you think your baby is reacting to something you’re eating

Call the doctor if you’re concerned about more-than-usual gas, fussiness or an allergic reaction in your breastfed baby (rash, diarrhea, wheezing) that might be related to the foods you eat. Your pediatrician may suggest keeping a meal diary to pinpoint potentially problematic foods (which might include dairy, soy, corn, peanuts, fish, wheat and cruciferous vegetables) to see whether removing one helps with the symptoms.

Most importantly, try not to worry too much about your diet when breastfeeding. Keep in mind that as long as you stay hydrated, continue taking your prenatal vitamin and aim to eat nutritious and varied meals , both you and your baby will be on a healthy postpartum path.

Sources

Breastfeeding Nutrition: Tips for Moms

Show in the article

How a Healthy Diet Helps You Breastfeed

Show in the article

Best (and Worst) Foods to Eat While Breastfeeding

Show in the article

Advice About Eating Fish

Show in the article

Alcohol & Breastmilk

Show in the article

Eating Fish During Pregnancy: What Varieties are Safe?

The Breastfeeding Diet

Pump and Dump: What It Is and When You Should Do It

Caffeine While Breastfeeding

Have a Gassy Baby? What to Know About Infant Gas Symptoms, Remedies and Causes

Breastfeeding: AAP Policy Explained

Foods for Nursing Parents

Maternal Diet