Easy Freezer Meals for New Moms

Freezer meals for new moms

Freezer meal prep can be a gamechanger for new parents.

You spend nine long months prepping for baby, and while much of that time is spent debating names and setting up the nursery, the rest is all about you — from regular prenatal appointments to closely monitoring your diet. Then you give birth, and your daily focus becomes one thing and one thing only: your new baby.

Suddenly, you’re staying on top of elaborate poop and feeding schedules but can’t remember the last time you ate a proper meal. As for going to the grocery store and actually making dinner… just the thought of it is honestly exhausting. Enter make-ahead freezer meals, the saving grace of new moms everywhere.

Why you might want to prep freezer meals

Freezer meals are a simple yet genius way to make things easier on yourself once baby comes — so long as you remember to prepare and store them in the weeks leading up to your due date (when you actually still have time!).

Think of freezer meals as a little insurance for your future mom self — she'll be oh-so-appreciative when she's getting zero sleep and trapped under an infant 24/7.

According to prenatal nutritionist Ryann Kipping, R.D.N., it can be all too easy for new moms to forget to take care of themselves once their little one arrives, but doing so couldn’t be more important. “If you are breastfeeding, even some, you are still supplying nutrition to your baby,” Kipping says. “So, what you eat is just as important during this time as it was during pregnancy.”

Giving birth, she adds, has even been compared to running a marathon. That’s why it’s so important to replenish your nutrient stores — not just from the physical stress of delivering baby, but also from those nine months of pregnancy.

Ingredients to include in postpartum freezer meals

Above all else, Kipping says new moms should make sure they’re getting enough calories per day and hydrating, especially if they are breastfeeding. (“These are two major factors in being able to produce enough breast milk and keep mom energized to breastfeed and take care of the baby,” she explains.)

When it comes to specific vitamins and nutrients, Kipping says B vitamins, as well as vitamins A, D and K, choline and the omega-3 fatty acid DHA are vital. “High-iron foods such as beef, pork and chicken are great choices,” she adds, “as well as warm vegetable soups, eggs, broth and fish.”

These ingredients can all be incorporated into ready-made freezer meals that you can then throw in the microwave or oven and cook within minutes. Not only do these dishes tend to be healthier than getting takeout, but they’re cheaper. (So it’s a win-win!)

Read on for 11 delicious freezer recipes that are easy to prep ahead of time and even easier to gobble up.

Best freezer meals for new parents

Asian Peanut Chicken

Freezer meals new moms Asian Peanut Chicken recipe

This hearty chicken meal is packed with flavor and easy to make (it can be prepped right in a slow cooker or Instant Pot!). But it also contains plenty of protein to keep your energy levels up when you’re marathon-changing diapers and whipping up bottles or breastfeeding around the clock.

Ingredients

1/4 cup reduced sodium soy sauce

1/4 cup natural peanut butter

2 cloves minced garlic

1 tablespoon chopped ginger (or 1 tsp powdered)

2 tablespoons maple syrup

2 tablespoons sesame oil

1/2 teaspoon red pepper flakes

1/4 cup water

4 cups 1-inch sweet potato cubes (or 1 large sweet potato)

2 carrots, peeled and sliced

1 red onion, sliced

1 pound boneless skinless chicken breasts (each breast cut in two lengthwise for Instant Pot)

Get the recipe: sweetpeasandsaffron.com

Pesto Tortellini Bake

Freezer meals new moms Pesto Tortellini Bake recipe

This cozy dish is all sorts of yum, and it's super easy to prep for the freezer. From an ooey-gooey sauce to those cheesy bites of tortellini, it’s definitely made to scratch that itch you might have for comfort food in the postpartum days — and boy, does it deliver.

Ingredients

1 pound cheese tortellini, frozen or fresh

2 jars store-bought alfredo sauce

2 cups shredded rotisserie chicken (optional for vegetarians)

1/2 cup pesto

1 cup shredded mozzarella cheese

1/4 cup shredded Parmesan cheese

Get the recipe: happymoneysaver.com

Whole Wheat Pumpkin Pancakes

Freezer meals new moms Whole Wheat Pumpkin Pancakes recipe

Saturday mornings just got yummier (and a whole lot easier). These hearty and healthy pancakes won’t leave you feeling guilty after breakfast, since they’re made with whole wheat flour and pumpkin puree to deliver loads of fiber and a delicious taste.

Ingredients

2 cups white whole wheat flour (or substitute 1/2 whole wheat and 1/2 unbleached all-purpose flours)

4 teaspoons baking powder

1 teaspoon cinnamon

Pinch nutmeg

1/4 teaspoon salt

2 tablespoons brown sugar (or 12 drops liquid stevia)

2 cups milk

4 teaspoons melted butter or coconut oil, plus more for greasing skillet

2 eggs

1/2 cup pumpkin puree (i.e. canned pumpkin)

1 teaspoon vanilla

Get the recipe: thrivinghomeblog.com

Crockpot Taco Soup

Freezer meals new moms Crockpot Taco Soup

Want to satisfy all those cravings for Mexican food without loading up on salty takeout? This slow-cooker soup is easy to make and gluten-free (not to mention dairy-free if you leave out the cheese and sour cream). It’s also bound to become a new family favorite.

Ingredients

1 pound lean ground beef

1 small yellow onion, diced

3 cloves garlic, minced

1 cup frozen corn

1 can diced green chilis

1 can diced tomatoes, undrained

Kelly’s homemade taco seasoning (1 tablespoon chili powder, 1 teaspoon pepper and 1/2 teaspoon of the following: salt, ground cumin, red pepper flakes, paprika, ground oregano, garlic powder and onion powder)

4 cups beef broth

Get the recipe: thefamilyfreezer.com

Beef and Broccoli

Freezer meals new moms Beef and Broccoli recipe

Craving takeout but prefer not to load up on sodium? This homemade beef and broccoli dish will hit the spot on nights when you really want to order takeout. The hearty dish will fill you up while also providing you with a good deal of protein.

Ingredients

1 1/2 pounds skirt steak

1/2 teaspoon baking soda

1 teaspoon sugar

1 tablespoon cornstarch

1 tablespoon low-sodium soy sauce to marinate steak, plus 1/2 cup for sauce topping

1 tablespoon water

2 tablespoons vegetable oil

2 tablespoons brown sugar

2 tablespoons flour

1 tablespoon sherry

4 cloves garlic, minced

1 package frozen broccoli

Get the recipe: thisperfectmessblog.com

Tomato Florentine Soup

Freezer meals new moms Tomato Florentine Soup recipe

This delicious soup is warm, cozy and all sorts of perfect if you’re feeling under the weather or just want a big bowl of something hearty. It’s packed with tons of flavor and nutrients, thanks to vitamins A, C and K from the tomatoes and iron in the spinach. Best of all, it can be heated up and served within minutes.

Ingredients

1 can diced tomatoes

1 can tomato soup

1 package beef broth

1 cup water

1 onion, chopped

1 clove garlic, minced

1 cup rotini (can be substituted with rice, orzo or another pasta of choice)

1/2 teaspoon basil

1/2 teaspoon Italian seasoning

2 cups spinach, chopped

Get the recipe: simplystacie.net

Homemade Pizza Pockets

Freezer meals new moms Homemade Pizza Pockets recipe

Who doesn’t love pizza pockets? (No one, that’s who!) These are way healthier than the kind you’ll find in the frozen food aisle, since you can fill them with tons of veggies and meat for added nutrients. Plus, they’re easy to heat up quickly when you’ve only got one hand.

Ingredients

1 package store-bought pizza dough

20 mushrooms, sliced

1 green pepper, diced

1 package pepperoni (try turkey pepperoni for a slightly healthier option)

1 can tomato sauce

1 ball mozzarella cheese

Get the recipe: thegirlonbloor.com

Black Bean and Quinoa Freezer Burritos

Freezer meals new moms Black Bean Quinoa Burrito recipe

These lunchtime-ready burritos will fill you up big time while simultaneously restoring your energy levels. The black beans offer loads of fiber and protein. Plus, the quinoa and veggies deliver a variety of other crucial vitamins, not to mention they're simply delicious.

Ingredients

2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil

1 large yellow onion, diced

4 cloves garlic, crushed or minced

1 jalapeño, seeded and finely minced

1 large red bell pepper, diced

1 medium zucchini, diced

1 cup corn kernels fresh, frozen or canned

1 large tomato, diced

1 cup cooked quinoa from about 1/2 cup uncooked

3 cups black beans (about two 14-oz. cans)

1 tablespoon ground cumin

1 teaspoon hot smoked paprika

1 teaspoon chili powder

1 teaspoon salt

1/2 bunch cilantro, chopped

1 cup shredded cheese (optional)

6 large whole wheat tortillas

Get the recipe: heynutritionlady.com

Roasted Butternut Squash Mac and Cheese

Freezer meals new moms Roasted Butternut Squash Mac n Cheese

Nothing says comfort food like a big bowl of mac and cheese. The good news about this one, though, is that it’s practically guilt-free, since the creamy sauce sneaks in roasted butternut squash to cut down on the cheese and add veggies.

Ingredients

1 medium butternut squash, peeled and cubed, about 3 lbs.

3 garlic cloves

6 tablespoons butter, cubed

1 pound whole grain macaroni noodles, cooked

2 cups whole milk

1 teaspoon salt (plus a little extra for roasting)

1 teaspoon ground mustard

2 cups shredded cheddar cheese

1/4 cup grated Parmesan cheese (optional)

Get the recipe: livesimply.me

Italian Turkey and Spinach Chili

Freezer meals new moms Italian Turkey and Spinach Chili

Stews and chilis are great ways to load up on many different ingredients, from beans to veggies to meat — and this freezer-friendly turkey chili is no exception. If you’re looking to cut down on red meat but still want a hearty protein source, the ground turkey in this recipe offers a nice healthy alternative.

Ingredients

2 pounds ground turkey

16 ounces chicken stock

2 tablespoons cooking sherry

1 can diced tomatoes

1 can great Northern beans, drained

1 can green chilis

2 tablespoons tomato paste

8 ounce package spinach, frozen and chopped

2 celery ribs (about 1/4 cup)

3 carrots (about 1/2 cup)

1 medium onion (about 1/2 cup)

6 cloves garlic (about 3 teaspoons)

2 tablespoons Herb de Provence

1 tablespoon dried basil

2 teaspoons salt

1 teaspoons chili powder

1 bay leaf

1/4 cup fresh parsley, minced, for garnish

Get the recipe: happymoneysaver.com

Loaded Cauliflower and Chicken Casserole

Freezer meals new moms Cauliflower Casserole recipe

Living the low-carb life? (Or at least trying to?) This baked cauliflower dish really is “loaded” — with chicken, bacon, cheese … in other words, all the good stuff. But the cauliflower eliminates the need for pasta or rice, and won’t leave you missing the carbs.

Ingredients

3 boneless, skinless chicken breasts

1 tablespoon olive oil

3/4 teaspoon salt, divided

1 teaspoon pepper, divided

2 heads cauliflower, cut into florets

2 cups shredded Monterey Jack cheese, divided

1 cup shredded cheddar cheese

3/4 cup bacon pieces

6 green onions, sliced

1 teaspoon garlic powder

Get the recipe: rachelschultz.com

WhatToExpect.com, Postpartum Nutrition Guide , August 2021. Ryann Kipping, R.D.N., owner of The Prenatal Nutritionist.

Your Next Read

Your Postpartum Nutrition Guide Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Toddler Dinner Ideas Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Breastfeeding Diet Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

25 Best Snacks for Breastfeeding That'll Keep Your Energy and Supply Up Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

Benefits of Breastfeeding for Mom and Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Eat for Dinner When You’re Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

Homemade Baby Food Recipes Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Pregnancy Superfoods: Building Your Baby Bite by Bite Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Healthy Pregnancy Breakfast Ideas to Start Your Day Right Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Nutritional Needs of Babies: the First 12 Months Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Have for Lunch When You're Pregnant: Healthy, Simple Ideas for You and Baby Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Freeze-Dried Breast Milk Is Gaining Traction — But Is It Safe? Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window