Free Baby Samples? Yes, Please! How to Score Diapers, Formula and More

free baby samples

Quick Summary

The best free baby sample boxes and subscriptions are those that include a wide variety of brands and products to test, especially baby essentials like diapers, wipes, pacifiers, bottles, baby lotion and more, and aren't too difficult to set up.

When I was pregnant, I knew I’d be spending some money prepping for my baby’s arrival. After all, even the most affordable car seats and strollers are an investment. But I didn’t realize how much money would go toward those seemingly inexpensive items (the burp cloth bill can quickly add up!). Fortunately, thanks to many other moms, I learned that numerous retailers and baby brands offer free samples of bottles, blankets, formula, clothing, and so much more. By signing up for one (or many!) of these free baby samples, you can save money up front and in the long run. Every baby is different, so the samples allow you to try various products and find what works for your little one without having to buy each one in bulk right off the bat.

(And if you want more suggestions for baby gear based on your unique preferences, check out What to Expect's Registry Builder , which also recommends great baby registries tailored to your needs.)

How I Chose the Best Free Baby Samples

Curated a list of brands and retailers that offer free baby samples

Evaluated each brand’s or retailer’s offerings using firsthand experience and customer reviews

Reviewed the requirements to obtain free baby samples, such as paying for shipping, creating a gift registry, or signing up for a rewards program or newsletter

Using this information, I identified which brands and retailers offer the best value through their freebie programs—without too many strings attached. The result: a list of free baby samples that brings you one step closer to being a budget-conscious, in-the-know parent.

Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box

Parents pleased with samples

easy if you’re already a Prime member

Must be an Amazon Prime member

Why We Love It

The Amazon Welcome Box will make you seriously excited for your baby’s arrival. Here’s the catch: although anyone can create an Amazon baby registry, only Prime members can receive a Welcome Box — and only after you create a registry, add at least 10 unique items to it, and purchase at least $10 worth of items from your registry (if someone buys a $10 item for you, that counts!).

Once that happens, you’ll log in to claim your offer and have a box shipped to you with an assortment of full-size, sample-size, and travel-size products. The contents change depending on availability (here’s an overview of what you might expect), but in the past have included about 10 items. Think: a muslin swaddle blanket, a bodysuit, a single pack of Dreft, a 4-ounce baby bottle , a travel-size bottle of baby lotion, a three-pack of diapers, a travel pack of wipes, and single-use samples of items like diaper cream and ointment.

Read More : How to Get Your Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box

Community Reviews

jenannmosher We got our Amazon prime registry welcome box today and it's filled with SUCH goodies! I'd recommend getting an Amazon registry, completing the checklist and purchasing something $10+ so you can get your box. Totally worth it even if you only register for a few things on amazon.

babyh907 "Not a lot of stuff, but seemed like a nice little gift!"

Target Welcome Kit

Big value

you can have the kit shipped to you

In-store kits are subject to availability

Why We Love It

Once you register at Target , add 10 items to your registry, and make a $10 purchase, Target will send you a bag full of goodies. The bag contains over $100 worth of baby-related products and coupons (!), which is a bigger value than most other welcome kits. Parents have received three-packs of diapers, Dreft detergent, 10-packs of Honest wipes, 10-packs of WaterWipes, Lansinoh breast milk storage bags and nursing pads, a Philips Avent baby bottle, Boogie Wipes, Aquaphor, and more.

Read More : How to Get Your Free Target Baby Registry Welcome Kit

Community Reviews

ek098083 "I was pleasantly surprised with the amount of products that were in the package."

babyyyyyloveee Pretty happy about this kit. And like that they provided 2 bottle brands that I was going to try anyway.

Babylist Registry Hello Baby Box

Big range of products typically offered

lots of benefits to registry program

More stipulations than other welcome boxes

Why We Love It

Parents who register with Babylist (and live in the United States) can receive a box filled with samples that parents say are actually good—but you have to jump through a few hoops to get it. These include:

The specific items in the box change every few months, but you can expect to receive diapers, wipes, baby bottles, a pacifier, diaper rash cream, and a few bodysuits fitting babies 0 to 3 months old. But it’s not just about baby—many moms were thrilled to find stretch mark creams, postpartum pads, and other self-care finds. You can read the full fine print about the box here .

Read More : How to Get Your Babylist Baby Registry Welcome Box

Community Reviews

MamaSprinkle "I got it and I thought it was a pretty good compilation of goodies."

ftm012022 "The Babylist box was definitely worth the wait!"

Walmart Baby Registry Welcome Box

No requirement to get box other than having a registry

Can take awhile to arrive

Why We Love It

Walmart recently relaunched its baby box , and parents seem pleased! Although the contents vary from box to box, in the past, its contained things like Dr. Brown's bottles, Huggies diapers, A&D ointment, Baby Dove moisturizer, Liquid IV hydration powder packets (for adults), Mommy's Bliss gripe water, Dr. Brown's bottles, Huggies diapers and month milestone photo cards.

Claiming the Walmart Welcome Box is similar to other brands: add a minimum of 20 items to your registry and have over $25 in purchases made from it — but your registry must be active for seven days first. Note that the box can take about a month to arrive, but for many, the haul is worth the wait.

Read More : How to Get Your Walmart Baby Registry Welcome Box

Community Reviews

temohx "Y’all if you haven’t yet make sure you go online and order the free baby registry box from Walmart!"

miriamb22 "Just ordered mine. It’s the first free baby box I’ve gotten. For some reason I haven’t gotten any of the others because I always have to buy something in order to get it for free"

Enfamil Family Beginnings Pack

Great way to test different formulas for free

fun stickers included

Some families prefer other formula brands

hard to tell when you'll get samples

Why We Love It

Some babies can be finicky when it comes to formula, and parents can quickly drop a ton of cash buying full-size versions of the various options, so it makes sense to get free samples when possible. Enfamil will send samples of a few different kinds of formula to new parents, as well as formula coupons and gifts such as "Belly Badge" stickers, which you can place on your baby's outfit for milestone photo opps, such as "1 Month Old" and "My First Smile." If you decide you like Enfamil for your baby, you can also earn rewards and rebate coupons by using the app.

Community Reviews

krose2424 "I just got my free samples and coupons in the mail today! I was expecting tiny samples, but I actually got four 7.2 oz containers."

Pampers Club Rewards Program

Rewards aren't restricted to Pampers products

great way to get rewards if you're already buying Pampers

May be challenging remembering to scan codes at first

Why We Love It

When you join the Pampers Club Rewards program , you can download their app and use it to scan codes from the diapers and wipes you've bought. As you do so, you'll earn coupons and points (called Pampers Cash) that can be traded in Pampers counpons or other rewards, like gift cards to Amazon, Target, or Sephora. It's a little more work and there's no specific new parent gift box, but if you love Pampers, it's an easy way to save money.

Community Reviews

veganbunny "We’ve save up and gotten nice toys that have turned into Christmas and birthday gifts."

MySimilac Rewards

Free photo book in addition to formula samples

Your baby may prefer other formula brands

Why We Love It

MySimilac Rewards sends baby formula coupons and nutritional guidance for you and your little one. (You may get free baby formula samples depending on availability.) You'll also get a free Shutterfly photo book for the countless adroable baby photos you'll be taking. As part of the rewards program, members also get points when they scan the MySimilac QR code on select formula products.

Community Reviews

Savieb "So cool and super useful!!"

Hey, Milestone Pregnancy Sample Box

Easy way to try lots of products

Other sample boxes offered too

Must pay for shipping

Why We Love It

Hey, Milestone (formerly known as Noobie Box) offers free gift boxes made for babies and both new and expectant parents. Moms-to-be can order their own complementary pregnancy box to see if they like the program, and even customize it based on their due dates — you'll just need to pay $13 for shipping.

It varies by month, but a recent edition of the box included: five Cuties diapers, a Nanobébé Flexy pacifier, Lansinoh breastfeeding sample set and organic nipple cream, Palmer's stretch mark massage lotion sachet, two Prevail liners, a prenatal vitamin sample, a lactation drink sample, a travel-sized pack of Water Wipes, Aquaphor mini-spray for mom, hand sanitizer wipes, Bella B samples, $100 credit towards family meals with Sunbasket and other offers for sites like Zulily.

Community Reviews

mithilad2020 "You will get free coupons, some free goodies."

Dolly Parton's Imagination Library Subscription

Receive age-appropriate

high-quality books for free

May not be readily available in your area

Why We Love It

This program started by the country icon (and serious reading fan) has simple instructions: Sign up when your child is born, and she will receive free books in the mail until age 5. Note that the organization currently doesn't serve all areas of the country, although go-getters can work with the Imagination Library to start their own local affiliate. The book selections, which are all published by Penguin Random House, are reviewed annually by a team of early childhood literacy experts.

Community Reviews

"Anyway, the program sends you a free book a month, literally free, no strings attached, just to help promote literacy. You can register at imaginationlibrary.com. It had given us some great books and really helped to build our library. Some of DDs favorite books have come from Dolly!"

"We signed my daughter up when she was born, and she loves getting new books!"

"I got it for both my kids and they absolutely love it. With 3 kids close in age some books were same, but my kids always look forward for the new book every month."

Recurring Resources for Families

Raising a baby is expensive, and many families need more than just one-time freebies to help reduce the overall costs. If you or someone you know requires additional assistance in securing free or low-cost baby essentials, here are some helpful resources:

National Diaper Bank Network : Partnering with Huggies, this organization collects, stores, and distributes free diapers to families across the country. The website provides a state-by-state list of diaper banks so you can find the nearest one to you.

Free Formula Exchange : This nationwide network connects families in need of baby formula with others who have formula to donate, free of charge.

Women, Infant and Children : Commonly referred to as WIC, this program offers supplemental foods, health care referrals, and nutrition education for low-income mothers, infants, and children up to age five who are at nutritional risk. You must apply to be eligible for the program.

FAQ

How can I get free baby stuff?

Creating a registry and signing up for promos aren’t the only ways to score free baby items. Some other ways to snag free (or significantly cheaper) baby gear include:

Asking family and friends for hand-me-downs: When I was pregnant, I quickly learned how much parents like to declutter. My sister-in-law was more than happy to unload boxes of clothes, toys, and even a high chair.

Joining your local “Buy Nothing” Facebook group: Again, parents love to get rid of unwanted items, and many are doing so through neighborhood- and town-based Facebook groups. The only downside is you need to check often and act fast, so this may be better for non-essential items.

Getting a breast pump through insurance : Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, many new moms are eligible for free (or reduced-price) breast pumps . The coverage will vary based on your provider, and you may have to do a little legwork. But given that some breast pumps can cost up to $400, it’s worth the effort for such a helpful device.

Utilizing your FSA money on eligible items: There are a surprising number of FSA-eligible baby items , including baby monitors, diaper rash cream, and even postpartum recovery kits. Although you’re still paying for these items, you’re using pre-tax money, which saves you some money.

Is it ok to buy second hand baby stuff?

Although it's totally fine to buy some second hand baby gear, not every product is safe to buy used. The American Academy of Pediatrics , advises against used car seats, for example, because they could be expired or missing parts. There is similar concern with strollers and cribs.

If you accept or buy used baby gear , do your due diligence. Always check that the item hasn't been recalled, and look closely to ensure it’s not damaged or missing any parts.

Your Next Read

I Got the Babylist Welcome Box — Here’s What’s Inside the $8.95 Box Everyone Talks About By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Target Baby Registry Review Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Amazon Who? 10 Prime Day Alternative Sales That Give You More Chances to Save By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Baby Registry Checklist: Exactly What to Put on a Baby Registry Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

14 Ways to Save Money on Diapers Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

You're Going to Need to Track Your Baby’s Feedings, Diaper Changes, Sleep, and More. Here's How Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Overwhelmed by Baby Gear? Here's What You Really Need (and What You Don't) Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Creating a Nursery on a Budget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Diaper Size Chart: Your Weight-Based Diapering Guide Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window