From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

baby girl with Greek baby name

Mulling over names for your darling little goddess? These Greek baby girl names convey strength, sweetness, and brilliance.

The Hellenes (Greeks!) have a truly limitless array of mesmerizing female baby names. Many are rooted in ancient myths and figures, like the Nine Muses. Others, fittingly, spring from the generous bounty of Mother Nature.

Hopefully you’ll find an option that steals your heart in this list of bright and bold Greek baby girl names. (And if you're not sure whether you're having a boy or a girl, check out our favorite Greek baby boy names too.)

Amaryllis. This irresistibly beautiful name literally rolls off the tongue (pronounced a-m-ri-LIS) and means "to sparkle or twinkle" like an eye. She sounds like the creative type who is always looking for ways to express herself. You might shorten it to Mary.

Ariadne. The daughter of Crete’s King Minos, Ariadne (eh-rih-AD-nih) is best known for her role in the myth of Theseus and the Minotaur. With a name meaning “very pure,” Ariadne helped Theseus escape the labyrinth in which the fearsome half-bull, half-man resided. She became immortal when she married Dionysus, the god of wine and good times. Ari would be a cute gender-neutral nickname.

Artemis. The daughter of Zeus and Leto, Artemis was the widely-revered, indomitable Greek goddess of hunting, wild nature, and fertility. She was also considered the protectress of women during childbirth. If you choose this name, send your daughter to ancient Ephesus to see the world’s most significant temple dedicated to her namesake. Her nickname could be Artie.

Athena. A name that commands attention and respect, Athena was the bravest, most intelligent, and perhaps most enterprising of all the gods on Mount Olympus. Athens was named and the Parthenon built in honor of the goddess of wisdom, war, and the crafts.

Avgi. She is the light of your life, so why not grace her with a name that translates literally as “dawn”? Pronounced av-YI, she may well turn out to be the early bird who catches the worm.

Avra. You already know she’s going to be a deep thinker and warm individual brimming with positive energy, so why not give your baby girl a name that means “aura”? It originates from the Greek word for a breeze that’s soft, fresh, and almost imperceptible.

Dioni. Linked to Zeus, this name (di-O-ni) means “divine” and therefore, carries significant clout. According to some historians, Dioni was his first wife and the mother of Aphrodite, goddess of love. Dionne, as in living music legend Ms. Warwick, is the Americanized version. To you, she could simply be Di.

Eleftheria. Linked to the Homeric era word “eleftherotis,” which means “liberator,” this uplifting name signifies a condition or power that is prized above all else: freedom. Ellie or Elle would make for a lovely nickname.

Iakinthi. In Greek, Iakinthi refers to the hyacinth flower, whose fabulous blooms vary in color from ruby red to lilac. The name also means “precious gemstone.” You may recognize it as Jacinth, or the Spanish version Jacinta.

Iliana. Popular with Greek parents, this sophisticated name means “daughter of the sun.” Some believe it derives from the ancient city of Troy, which the Greeks renamed Ilios. In the Hebrew tradition, it is linked to Elijah, which means “Jehovah is my God.” You might want to call her Illy.

Ioli. She was the daughter of Eurytus, the king of Oechalia. Hercules’ love for Ioli (i-OL-i) led to his demise, but don’t let that deter you: This baby girl name is short but sweet and will set your little girl apart.

Ismini. This playful name, pronounced is-MI-ni, means “knowledge.” In Greek mythology, she’s known as the youngest daughter of King Oedipus and Jocasta and sister to Antigone. Minnie would be an adorable alias.

Melina. This angelic baby girl name is associated with the Greek word meli, which means “honey.” For the little girl who’s simultaneously sweet and tough!

Niovi. This is a name for a self-assured woman. It’s likely derived from two Greek words, "nea" and "vios," meaning “young” and “life.” A perfect moniker for a little lady who will stay young forever — at least at heart.

Phaedra. One of the most exquisite ancient Greek names, it means “radiant” and “happy.” What else could you wish for your young queen? Pronounced fei-druh, you might choose to call her Fay for short.

Thalassini. If you feel most alive when you’re near the ocean, how about this rhythmical, spirited name? Thalassini means “she of the sea.” Take her to the beach while she’s still a toddler so that she finds her natural affinity for the water.

Thalia. Yet another captivating ancient Greek name, it means “to flourish.” Thalia was one of the Nine Muses — the extensively-worshipped goddesses of the arts. The patron of comedy, Roman poets described Thalia as elegant and gentle.

Zinovia. A composite of words, Zinovia hails from Zeus and means “she who lives and enjoys life.” This moniker is a close cousin of the name Zenobia — a queen who ruled over the affluent Arabian city of Palmyra in the third century and was famed for her ingenuity and heroism. Novi would be a neat nickname.

Get even more baby name ideas (plus personalized updates for your little one's big debut) in the What to Expect app .

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Updates history

October 1, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,897 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Fierce and Fearless: 9 Baby Names for Girls With Superhero Energy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Gorgeous Chinese Baby Girl Names That Inspire Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Cute, Quirky, and Easy to Say: 19 Adorable Welsh Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

120 Astrological Baby Names Inspired by Your Baby's Zodiac Sign Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

14 Baby Names That Mean Peace, Strength, and Wisdom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window