From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

girl with French baby name

Looking for a name that's stylish, sophisticated, and feminine? Get inspired by these French names for girls.

You don’t need to know your "mére" from your "mer" to choose a French baby girl name for your little one. But unless you’re living in France or a die-hard Francophile, you might not be up-to-date on the trendiest French baby names. We’ve taken care of that for you.

From enduring classics like Juliette and Louise to emerging picks like Clémence and Manon, we hope you’ll find the perfect French baby girl name below. (And if you're not sure whether you're having a boy or a girl, check out our favorite French baby boy names too.)

Looking for more unusual baby names? Head to the What to Expect app for all kinds of inspiration from around the globe.

Adélaïde. Meaning “noble,” Adélaïde is a common first name in western France, near the border with Switzerland. Fluctuating in popularity, Adélaïde is a baby girl first name with Old World flair.

Amandine. Pronounced ah-mahn-deen, this first name means “one we can love” — and love her you will! Common especially in the north and Lyonnais regions of France, this first name is distinctively French but remains easy to pronounce.

Anaïs. A close cousin to Anne or Anna, Anaïs means “gracious one” in Hebrew. Rising to popularity at the end of the 1990s, new parents today still choose Anaïs, pronounced ah-nah-eece, as a first name for energetic and determined newborn girls.

Aurélie. With a name that means “golden,” little girls named Aurélie are gifted with a sparkling first name, pronounced oar-el-lee. Similar versions of this first name include Aurély, Aurélia, and Aurélienne.

Capucine. An almost exclusively French first name, Capucine has been popular for centuries and is back on the upward swing. Associated with the flower nasturtium in English, this feminine French name is pronounced ka-pous-seen.

Cécile. Girls named Cécile are known for being strong leaders. This Latin-derived first name has yo-yo’d in popularity for decades, and is currently on the upturn.

Céline. Originating from Latin, Céline means “heavenly.” With the rise of Céline Dion in the '80s and '90s it saw a peak in popularity, but its fame (and heart) go on; it’s often heard in kindergarten classes today.

Chloé. A favorite in antiquity but only resurfacing in modern times in the 1990s, Chloé is an extremely popular French baby girl name. Meaning “young sprout,” little girls named Chloé are said to be curious and passionate.

Clémence. “Mildness” and “gentleness” are the meanings of this elegant Latin first name, pronounced like clem-ance. As of 2021, it’s one of the most popular French baby girl names, especially in urban areas like Paris, Lyon, and Bordeaux.

Constance. Another royal first name, many queens have borne the name Constance. Meaning “perseverance,” Constance is seeing a comeback among French baby girl names.

Estelle. It’s no wonder the British Estelle has risen to such fame, with a first name that literally means “star.” This first name has been popular in France since the '70s and is still going strong.

Juliette. Any French baby name list would be incomplete without Juliette. Though this romantic first name is not as popular as Claire or Léa, Juliette is a classic French baby name chosen in all areas of the country.

Louise. Louise is the female version of Louis. Popular in the Paris region and the center of France, this is a royal name for a little girl who reigns in her household.

Maeva. A name from the islands of French Polynesia, Maeva is a first name that went from unknown to wildly popular after its arrival on the mainland. This first name means “welcome.” Is it the right first name for your gorgeous little one?

Manon. One of the most popular names in France, Manon (pronounced mah-nonn) is an exquisite first name for a little girl. A derivative of Myriam, this baby girl name is also chosen in many European countries beyond France, like the Netherlands and England.

Mathilde. With a name meaning "conquering force,” your little girl is sure to stand up to life’s challenges. Mathilde is originally from the Germanic languages, but from the 2000s onwards has been frequently chosen as a French baby girl name.

Marcelle. After fading out of use in the early 20th century, Marcelle is on the way back up in popularity. The name stems from Latin, “promised to Mars,” so it could be a nice choice for an Aries baby girl.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Ashley Parsons is a roaming journalist and copywriter covering lifestyle, adventure travel and environmental topics. She went to university in Paris, is fluent in French and has been living in France since 2015. She and her partner travel by bicycle or horseback, occasionally by train.

Updates history

September 26, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,922 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Oh Là Là! 16 French Baby Boy Names That Stylishly Cross Borders Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Bellissima! 14 Italian Baby Girl Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Spanish Baby Girl Names That Are Beautiful, Meaningful, and Timeless Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

20 Beautiful Arabic Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Athena to Zinovia: 18 Enchanting Greek Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

19 Gorgeous Chinese Baby Girl Names That Inspire Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Cute, Quirky, and Easy to Say: 19 Adorable Welsh Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Beautiful Biblical and Religious Baby Names Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Fierce and Fearless: 9 Baby Names for Girls With Superhero Energy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window