Frostbite in Babies and Toddlers

Updated and medically reviewed to ensure accuracy.

frostbite in kids

Baby's tiny fingers, toes, ears and nose are particularly susceptible to frostbite. Here's how to protect babies and toddlers from frostbite, signs of frostbite to keep an eye out for, and how to treat frostbite if it does happen.

The bitter chill of winter may leave you reaching for an extra cup of hot chocolate and a cozy pair of pajamas, but your toddler is eager to get outside and play. Or maybe you’re just in need of a gallon of milk and are forced to brave the cold temps with a baby in tow.

Either way, you may be concerned about the risks of frostbite to your little one, especially because he can’t always tell you he’s cold. Not to mention the fact that babies and young children are particularly susceptible to frostbite on their noses, ears, cheeks, fingers and toes.

Here's what you need to know to prevent, spot and treat frostbite in babies and toddlers.

What is frostbite?

Frostbite is tissue damage caused by overexposure to extreme cold. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionPrevent Hypothermia & FrostbiteSee All Sources [1] It happens when the skin and sometimes layers of tissue actually freeze. Frostbitten areas become very cold to the touch and turn white or pale gray.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionPrevent Hypothermia & FrostbiteSee All Sources

Frostbite can cause permanent injury; in extreme and very rare cases, if left untreated, it may lead to amputation.

What's the difference between frostbite and frostnip?

Frostnip is much less serious and more common than frostbite. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursFrostbite and FrostnipSee All Sources [2] With frostnip, the affected body part becomes red and numb or tingles (like when your foot falls asleep), but re-warming is less painful and takes less time.

Frostnip may be irritating to the skin and cause redness and discomfort, but it does not cause permanent damage.

What causes frostbite?

When you get cold, the blood vessels in your extremities constrict, sending blood to your body's core to keep you warm. In extreme cold, some tissue can be completely cut off from its blood supply, at which point it freezes and can become permanently damaged.

What are the signs of frostbite?

The first signs of frostbite are:

Redness and pain

Numbness that immediately follows the pain and redness

Skin that feels waxy and denser than normal

White or grayish-yellow skin color

Your baby or toddler may be unaware of the condition because the area is numbed and he can’t feel it. If the numbness does not subside in a few minutes, contact your doctor immediately.

How can you protect your baby or toddler from frostbite?

Protecting your little one from frostbite before you leave the house is your best defense against the elements. These tips can help:

Don’t brave the arctic. Babies and toddlers should never be outside in wind chills or temperatures of -15 degrees Fahrenheit or colder, because skin exposure can cause damage in just a few minutes.

Fill up. Be sure to feed your baby a meal or snack before heading out into the cold — it takes a lot of calories to maintain body heat in frigid weather.

Cover up. A rain cover will keep wind and snow out of a stroller, and a fleece-lined stroller sack is great for keeping baby bundled for a short jaunt. Still, no baby should be out in the very cold for long.

Layer up. Several layers of clothing, preferably those made of cotton or fleece are key (undershirt, shirt, sweatshirt, coat). Layers keep your baby warmer and you can remove them one-by-one when you’re inside. A good rule of thumb to remember is that babies and toddlers require one more layer than adults. Hat, mittens, warm socks, boots and a warm coat or snowsuit should be standard cold weather gear.

Limit your time outside. Babies should only be out in very cold weather for a few minutes at a time at most, and toddlers should only play outside for 20 to 30 minutes before taking a break.

How do you treat frostbite?

If you see signs of frostbite on your baby, immediately try to warm the affected areas against your body. Open your coat and shirt and tuck your baby inside next to your skin. Then get to a doctor or emergency room as quickly as you can.

If that's not possible right away, try to get baby inside to begin gradually re-warming the frostbitten areas. Here's how to do that safely:

Remove wet clothing and wrap your baby or toddler in warm blankets.

Give your baby warm fluids, either by nursing or feeding him a warm (not hot) bottle of milk or water.

Soak the area in warm (not hot) water that's approximately 100 degrees F, or just slightly warmer than body temperature. If the area is not soakable (i.e. ears, nose, cheeks), use warm compresses, washcloths or towels wet with the same temperature water. Never use hot water or place baby next to a stove, radiator or heater, which may actually make the damage worse. Continue soaking or applying compresses, adding warm water as necessary, until color returns to the skin for about 20 to 30 minutes at a time.

Do not rub or attempt to massage the frostbitten area, as that may cause more damage.

Do not let your toddler walk on toes you suspect may have frostbite because that, too, can make the condition worse.

Keep in mind that as frostbitten skin warms, it may redden or blister. If you haven't already, take your baby to the ER or urgent care, and be extremely careful en route to keep the affected areas warm.

When should you call the doctor?

If the numbness continues for more than a few minutes, call your pediatrician or take your baby to the ER or urgent care immediately.

Winter is a world of exploration for your little one. Whether he’s building a snowman-to-rival-all-snowmen or just snug in a baby sling , he may not notice that his teeny-tiny toes are overly exposed to the cold.

But by dressing your baby or toddler properly from head to toe, taking breaks, knowing the initial signs of frostbite, and consulting with your doctor, you can protect your little one from the dangers of extreme winter weather.