You’ve always dreamed of a little girl, but the ultrasound showed that you’re having a baby boy. There’s a name for that feeling: gender disappointment. And it’s more common than you might think.

Many parents secretly wish for a girl or a boy, only to feel a surge of sadness when the ultrasound (or the cake, or the confetti cannons) revealed that they were having a baby of the opposite sex.

Moreover, those feelings of disappointment are often followed by a big dose of shame. Society tells us that parents should only want their baby to be healthy — so wishing otherwise can make you feel guilty already.

Rest assured, these feelings are so common that they even have a name: gender disappointment. Here’s what you should know about it.

What is gender disappointment?

Gender disappointment occurs when a parent-to-be has their heart set on having a boy or a girl, only to learn that they’re having a baby of the opposite sex.

While statistics about gender disappointment are rare, anecdotes certainly aren’t. Maybe you broke down in tears after the ultrasound technician gave you the news. Or maybe you couldn’t hide your feelings of sadness at your (very public) gender reveal party. If so, you have plenty of company.

These feelings can range from disappointment to sadness to even grief. Some research cites parents who describe the feeling as a type of mourning over the loss of a child they’ll never have.

How to deal with gender disappointment

If you’re struggling to overcome the feelings of gender disappointment, use these tips to cope.

Acknowledge your feelings. You aren’t the first (or last) parent to feel guilty at the thought of being disappointed by your baby’s sex. For many parents-to-be, some sadness is to be expected. With all the huge changes coming your way — like giving birth and figuring out how to be a parent — it’s not surprising you’d seek what’s familiar or hope for a baby you think would be the best fit for your family. Once you recognize those feelings for what they are (read: normal), you can start to work through them.

Talk to someone. Your partner, a friend, a doctor. Simply airing your feelings can lift your mood. Plus, you’ll likely find way more people (either among your pals or in online discussions) who have had the same feelings. They can reassure you that your disappointment is normal, which might help ease some of the guilt you may be feeling.

Start planning. It’s okay to spend some time feeling bad about not having a girl or boy — but then, start dreaming about the beautiful baby you will be having. Some parents find that talking about their little one’s name, or buying a few outfits or toys, can help them manage gender disappointment — and make their baby seem all the more precious.

Get help if you need it. Gender disappointment is a real thing. So if the cloud doesn’t lift in a few days or a week, you might need some help to work through it. Feeling sad and hopeless — not just for a couple of minutes or once in a while, but consistently — may be a sign of depression .

Trust yourself. If you were hoping for a girl because you grew up with sisters or had a close bond with your own mother, for example, perhaps you're feeling nervous about the unfamiliar territory of raising a boy. Remind yourself that you're going to be a great parent for your child, and that every new parent needs to take a leap of faith to trust their parenting abilities.

As hard as it may be to feel disappointed — and then guilty — about your baby-to-be’s sex, keep in mind that many a parent has felt the same way. Rest assured that whatever sadness you may be feeling now will disappear once you take one look at your baby!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You’re Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, When Can You Find Out Baby's Sex? , July 2021. Cambridge University Press, ‘It's a Girl!’ Is Gender Disappointment a Mental Health or Sociocultural Issue? , October 2023. Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy, Is ‘Gender Disappointment’ a Unique Mental Illness? , December 2019. Studies in Religion, A Gendered Bun in the Oven. The Gender-Reveal Party as a New Ritualization During Pregnancy , September 2015.

Updates history

November 1, 2024

Editor: Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updated with "Ask Heidi" video.