How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs

how to protect your baby from germs conceptual, pink balls with green ball in a square

From limiting visitors to discarding leftover milk, here’s how to keep your little bundle of joy healthy.

When you bring your newborn home, there’s a lot to think about — and keeping her healthy and germ-free is likely at the top of your to-do list.

While you may feel the urge to constantly sterilize every surface of your home, instead, cozy up with your new bundle of joy and follow these simple guidelines to keep germs at bay.

Understanding a newborn baby’s immune system

Your newborn’s immune system is immature, meaning she can’t fight off viruses or bacteria very well. In the first few weeks of life, your baby gets some protection from antibodies shared from you through the placenta just after birth. Breastfeeding also offers an immune boost.

By the 2- to 3-month mark, her immune system is a bit more developed. And as even more months go by, the germs your baby inadvertently exposes herself to while gumming her way through the world can even help shore up her immune system so that she’s better equipped to fight off infections down the road.

But that doesn’t mean that when it comes to germs and babies, you should toss caution (or your clean-up spray) to the wind.

Tips for keeping your newborn safe from germs

Use these tips to keep your newborn safe from harmful germs that could make her sick.

Stay home

While you may feel your to-do list mounting, don’t stress. That trip to the grocery store (or flight home for the holidays) can wait until your newborn’s immune system is more developed.

In the meantime, stay home and soak in the snuggles. Right now, your job is to bond with your baby and adjust to life with your new addition. If you get cabin fever, take your little love out for a stroll around the neighborhood to get some fresh air.

Limit visitors

Everybody loves a new baby — and every relative and friend under the sun is likely eager to come get their hands on your little bundle of joy.

But be sure to set boundaries around visitors. Ask loved ones to put their baby meet-and-greet on hold if they’re feeling under the weather. Make sure everyone washes their hands before holding your baby and ask them to be masked and vaccinated against COVID-19, the flu and whooping cough .

And don’t get wrapped up in playing hostess — gently set limits on how long your visitors stay, so you can get back to bonding with your baby.

Keep it clean

Within reason, that is. With a newborn in the house, hand washing is rule number one. Though when it comes to cleaning just about everything else, just do your best.

Try to clean frequently touched surfaces (like kitchen counters and the bathroom sink) regularly. As baby’s laundry is piling up, using a fragrance-free detergent can help keep her sensitive skin protected. And baby herself? Don’t overdo it. Newborns should only be bathed a maximum of two to three times a week — bathing more frequently could dry out her skin.

Stay on top of baby's vaccines

Washing your hands and scrubbing every surface of your home can only do so much. One of the most important things you can do to keep your baby healthy and avoid serious illness is to get her vaccines on schedule from birth and beyond into childhood.

And don’t forget to stay on top of your own vaccines (the flu shot , Tdap , the COVID-19 vaccine, etc.) too. When in doubt about whether you're up-to-date on your immunizations, check in with your doctor.

Skip the leftovers

Be sure to discard leftover breast milk, formula, and jarred baby food. Any saliva clinging to the nipple of an unfinished bottle of formula or that gets transferred into a jar of food from a feeding spoon is a breeding ground for germs.

Wash your hands before preparing milk or food. Only fill bottles with as much as you think your baby will drink in a sitting (you can always add more). Keep prepared bottles of formula refrigerated until ready to use. Spoon jarred food into a separate bowl so that you can save uneaten portions in the fridge. Always toss any food or drink that’s left over.

There’s typically no need to sterilize baby bottles , nipples and pacifiers constantly. Running them through the dishwasher or hand scrubbing them in hot, soapy water (using a bottle brush if necessary) will usually get them plenty clean.

But you will want to sterilize bottles and pacifiers before you use them with your newborn for the first time, when they get really dirty (and it gives you peace of mind), and if your baby has had thrush . You also may need to sterilize bottles more often if your baby is premature.

Avoid wet and damp surfaces

Keep your baby away from items that have fallen onto wet or damp surfaces, or are damp themselves (for instance, an abandoned teething toy or sucked-on pretzel). The mold, mildew and bacteria that breed in moist areas could make your baby sick.

But don’t worry about bits and pieces of food from the floor or carpet. As long as you clean your floors on a regular basis, the germs that populate these surfaces aren’t likely to be harmful — even the ones that wind up on the stalest of Cheerios.

Take caution around pets

Generally speaking, you don’t have to worry too much about your beloved family pet — even if your pup has a penchant for licking your baby’s face. Some research shows that babies who are exposed to pets during their first year may be less likely to develop allergies to animals later on, though there is the chance that your baby may wind up allergic to pets in the future. Ask your pediatrician if you're not sure, or if your little one seems to be sneezing or wheezing a lot around the family cat or dog.

That said, be sure to keep your baby away from what four-legged family members leave behind — as in uneaten food (especially wet food, which can spoil), toys, half-chewed treats, and pet poop (from dog-doo to clumps in the kitty litter).

Remove Fido’s and Fluffy’s uneaten meals from the floor, stash the litter box where your baby can’t get to it to avoid the risk of toxoplasmosis , and be vigilant about keeping pet toys out of reach.

Pay attention outside

Don’t worry about grass from the backyard or sand from the beach. A little nibble of the great outdoors won’t hurt your baby, and she’ll soon figure out on her own that this stuff is hardly delicious.

Just be sure to keep your little one away from more hazardous items that can be found on the ground outside, like dog poop, human saliva, cigarette butts and other garbage (as well as pesticides, fertilizers and other toxins; while these aren’t germs per se, they certainly aren’t healthy for babies).

Don’t even think about giving your baby back her dropped paci or cracker. Pack spares to have on hand when you’re out and about.

When to call the doctor

If, despite your best efforts, your baby still gets sick, try not to worry too much, but feel free to get in touch with the pediatrician if your newborn comes down with something (if for no other reason than for reassurance).

Always call the doctor about a fever of 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit or higher in newborns up to 3 months old (especially babies 1-2 months old), as that requires immediate medical attention. For older babies, call the doctor about a fever that lasts more than a few days or one that won't come down with a fever reducer medication like infant Tylenol.

Plenty of viruses and other illnesses can be managed at home. But if your baby has worrying symptoms and/or doesn't seem to be getting better, or if your intuition is telling you that something is off, contact your pediatrician and see if a visit is in order.

By now, your maternal instincts have set in. Trust your gut, and don’t feel guilty if something small slips. You can’t always protect your baby from every potential germ in the world. Getting sick is a part of life, especially in the first few years. And frequent bouts of infection can actually help boost baby’s immune system, making it stronger in the long run and helping your little one fend off the next bug that makes its rounds.