Getting Pregnant

What you need to know when you're trying to conceive to prepare for the healthiest pregnancy possible.

Getting Pregnant Landing Page

Getting Pregnant Tools & Resources

Find Out When You're Ovulating

Get Pregnant Faster

Tips for Getting Pregnant Faster

Pregnancy Test

Home Pregnancy Test How-Tos

Preconception Community

Join the Discussion: Ovulation & Sex Drive

Getting Pregnant Topics

Ovulation

How do you know when you’re ovulating? Here's how to pin down your fertile days.

Ovulation Calculator Ovulation Symptoms Ovulation Test Strips Tracking Your Cycle Reasons for a Missed Period Can You Get Pregnant on Your Period? More

Preconception Health

Steps you can take to improve your health before you try to conceive.

Preparing for a Baby Before Conception When to Get a Preconception Checkup Irregular Periods and Getting Pregnant What to Eat When Trying to Get Pregnant Exercising Before Pregnancy Antidepressants and Pregnancy: Are They Safe? Tips for Quitting Smoking More

Fertility

Learn how fertilization happens, and how to set the stage for conception.

Community Groups

Find the support and information you need now in our preconception community groups

Latest Articles, News & Blogs

7 Foods Linked to Healthier Sperm — and 6 That Could Harm It

Can Salt Really Tell You if You're Pregnant? Here's the Truth

Think Getting Your Tubes Tied Means Pregnancy Is Impossible? Not Quite

What Is the Difference Between Cheap and Expensive Pregnancy Tests?

Can the Toothpaste Test Detect Pregnancy Before a Home Test?

Here's How Fertilization Actually Works (Because Most People Don't Really Know)

Trying to Conceive? Here's What Your Ovarian Follicle Count Can — and Can't — Tell You

How Late Ovulation Impacts Conception

Can a Certain Sex Position Help You Get Pregnant? Here’s What Science Says

The Surprising Side Effects to Expect When Ditching Birth Control for Baby-Making

The Exact Time of Day to Use Ovulation Tests If You're Trying to Conceive This Month

What Happens During Your Preconception Checkup

Should Men Take Folic Acid Supplements for Fertility?

Why You Might Have Cramps But No Period

Should You Use a Donor Egg to Get Pregnant?

Is IVF Right for Me?

The Best Pre-Pregnancy Workouts

Your Preconception Nutrition Plan: How to Prep Your Plate for Pregnancy

What Is Secondary Infertility?

Managing My Anxiety and Stress While Trying to Conceive

Is It Normal to Have Pain and Cramping During Ovulation?

What Is the Two-Week Wait?

Is It Safe to Continue Taking Antidepressants During Pregnancy?

What to Know About Your Fertility if You're Over Age 35

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window