The Bumpy, Itchy Pregnancy Rash Nobody Warns You About (Until You Have It)

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

skin rash during pregnancy

Got a weird rash during pregnancy? It might be PUPPP. Here's the scoop and what you can do about it.

You can see the end in sight — and then your belly breaks out in itchy bumps. You may be suffering from what's known as PUPPP (pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy) or PEP (polymorphic eruption of pregnancy). The fix? Cool compresses, oatmeal baths, and aloe vera can help. Here's what to know.

Key Takeaways

PUPP happens. This harmless common rash tends to pop up in the third trimester, but it won't hurt you or your baby-on-board.

The itching is no joke! It's tough not to scratch this rash all day long, but strive to relieve it with an oatmeal bath, aloe vera, cool washcloths, and loose clothing.

PUPP is temporary. You can't prevent this condition from occurring, but it will fade after delivery and might not appear in a future pregnancy (fingers crossed!).

What is PUPPP?

PUPPP is an itchy, bumpy rash — annoying but benign — that usually develops on the abdomen in stretch marks and sometimes appears on the thighs, buttocks, or breasts.

It's most common in first-time mothers and those carrying multiples. Sometimes itching can become very severe and spread to the rest of the body, but never on the face. (Thank goodness for small miracles.)

If you've got more pregnancy skin questions, we've got answers. Download the What to Expect app for expert-backed advice and a week-by-week guide from bump to bambino.

What does PUPPP look like?

PUPPP often resembles bumpy skin lesions, or skin-colored, pink, or dark bumps. It may look pink or red in fair skin, but it may be skin-toned or darker in women with deep skin tones.

What to Expect Community parent LBSgirl is dealing with this itchy mess right now. "I'm so miserable itching and nothing is working to stop the spread of the rash. It started on my belly — now it's everywhere and I still have 4 weeks left."

What causes a skin rash during pregnancy?

No one's really sure what causes this skin rash. Unlike most other symptoms of pregnancy, PUPPP doesn't appear to result from increased hormone levels.

One theory suggests that fetal cells invade the mother's skin during pregnancy, causing an itchy belly to develop. Another theory says PUPPP is genetic and can be traced through the father's side.

At any rate, PUPPP usually appears in the third trimester and disappears after childbirth.

What can I do about PUPPP during pregnancy?

There are a few home remedies you can try:

Taking an oatmeal bath or baking soda bath

Applying cold compresses

Using aloe vera gel after you shower

Wearing soft cotton clothes (and gloves if you're a scratcher)

If the itching becomes unbearable, consult your practitioner or dermatologist about medications or anti-itching creams . Some topical steroids are considered safe during pregnancy but should be used in small quantities under strict medical supervision.

The good news: The condition generally disappears after delivery and doesn't necessarily recur in subsequent pregnancies. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources

What treatments for a skin rash are off-limits during pregnancy?

As for treatments for a skin rash, oral steroids are generally considered a no-no during pregnancy. If you're close to your delivery date, your practitioner may consider inducing labor if the itching is so intense that you need to be treated with those kinds of drugs.

Can I prevent PUPPP?

Unfortunately, no, PUPPP can't be prevented. If you're going to get PUPPP, you're going to get it. Try to remember, though, that it's temporary and will disappear soon after your beautiful baby is born.