Gripe Water for Newborns and Babies

Updates to copy, information, and sources, and new medical review.

gripe water for babies and newborns

Gripe water can provide natural relief for baby — and you — from gas and tummy troubles that are typical for newborns and infants.

Gas and tummy troubles are almost par-for-the-course in newborns and babies because of their immature digestive systems . And parents desperate to find some form of relief for their tiny new arrivals often have gripe water recommended by their pediatricians as one potential remedy to try.

But what exactly is gripe water, how well does it work to relieve gas bubbles and is it safe for your little one? Here's what you should know about using gripe water for newborns and babies, plus how it stacks up against other common baby gas remedies .

Key Takeaways

Gripe water is an herbal supplement often used to help soothe gassy or fussy babies. There's not a lot of solid evidence proving it works, but many parents say it helps.

It's generally safe if your pediatrician approves, but always choose a brand that's alcohol- and sucrose-free, and be sure to follow the dosing instructions carefully.

If gripe water isn't your thing, there are plenty of other ways to ease tummy troubles, like gas drops, tummy time, baby massage, and switching up feeding techniques or bottles.

What is gripe water?

Gripe water is an over-the-counter liquid supplement of sodium bicarbonate and herbs (like fennel, ginger, chamomile, dill, lemon balm or peppermint, depending on the formula).

Along with claims that it eases gas pains and other stomach problems, gripe water is also marketed as a remedy for teething pain , hiccups and sometimes even colic , among other common baby issues.

But while plenty of parents swear by the stuff, there's not much hard evidence that gripe water actually does soothe troubled little tummies. However, a placebo effect has been documented, with parents perceiving that gripe water helps make their babies more comfortable. Because babies are sensitive to their parents' and caregivers' moods, if giving them gripe water calms the parents down, it may also have the same effect on the babies.

Plus, believers say that some of the ingredients in gripe water formulas, including dill, fennel and ginger, can help relieve gas and stomach discomfort (and in turn may benefit infants with colic, which is thought to be caused at least in part by gas).

Some experts think gripe water might be effective at soothing fussy babies simply because it tastes sweet.

It's worth noting that gripe water is different than over-the-counter baby gas drops. These drops contain simethicone, an anti-foaming agent that breaks up bubbles in the digestive tract, which can help gas pass. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSimethicone (Oral Route)See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSimethicone (Oral Route)See All Sources

Like gripe water, gas drops aren't proven to work. And the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) says they're a safe option to try, and they're unlikely to cause any potential side effects. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBreaking Up GasSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBreaking Up GasSee All Sources

How does gripe water work?

The original gripe water, first used by nannies and moms in England in the 1850s, contained alcohol — which people used to think relaxed babies. (Now we know that giving any alcohol to a baby is toxic.)

Today, experts don't fully understand how gripe water might help soothe tummy troubles, but it's thought that ingredients like dill, fennel and ginger can help with gas relief and stomach discomfort.

If you'd like to give it a try, get the green light from your baby's pediatrician first to make sure that they are on board with giving gripe water.

If you get the doctor's approval, consider using gripe water only as a backup when other gas relief methods — like abdominal massage, tummy time or leg bicycling — don't seem to make your baby more comfortable.

You should also have your doctor confirm that the brand you're using is okay, since the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) does not regulate gripe water products. Check the packaging for specific dosing instructions and ask the pediatrician about how much and how often to give it to your baby. The general limit is four doses a day, but only under the care of your practitioner.

If your doctor says gripe water is fine for your baby and it seems to work, you should stop using it by the time your little one is 4 to 6 months old, when gassiness typically becomes less of an issue.

Are there side effects of gripe water?

Some parents notice that their babies seem drowsier after a dose of gripe water. But does gripe water actually make babies sleepy? Probably not.

The more likely scenario is that all that fussing tires babies out to the point where they eventually end up falling asleep — whether they're given gripe water or not.

Aside from the potential snoozefest, it's worth watching for possible allergies. While gripe water isn't likely to cause an allergic reaction, as with any new food or drink you introduce to your little one, you should still look out for symptoms of an allergy such as hives, itchiness, watery eyes, vomiting or diarrhea. Call your doctor if you see any of these signs in your baby.

More serious allergy symptoms like swelling of the lips or tongue and trouble swallowing or breathing can be life-threatening and warrant a call to 911 right away.

Is gripe water safe for newborns?

It depends on the specific brand and ingredients. You should always ask your doctor for a recommendation for gripe water and any other remedy you're thinking of giving your baby.

Gripe water made with alcohol definitely isn't safe, and other formulas, including those labeled "natural" or "homeopathic" (depending on where they're made and what's in them), contain a variety of other ingredients that may be unsafe or untested.

Gripe water made with sucrose, while not dangerous, might not be the best choice either. Sugar has the potential to harm your baby's gums or emerging teeth. Plus, you don't want to get your baby used to being soothed with sweets. So always check with the doctor first about a specific type of gripe water. If it doesn't work, let the pediatrician know.

And remember, even if you do try gripe water as a remedy for digestive troubles with your pediatrician's approval, it should never be given in large quantities to a baby or used as a dietary substitute. Infants this age should be fed breast milk or formula (or a combination of the two) exclusively.

How to give gripe water to a baby

If your doctor does suggest a kind of gripe water that's safe for your baby, follow these tips:

Read the ingredients carefully

Look out for vegetable carbon (a type of charcoal that is sometimes labeled as carbo vegetabilis ), as it may cause constipation . Only buy brands that are alcohol- and sucrose-free and made in the U.S.

Read the instructions

The ingredients in gripe water brands vary, and most have different instructions for use. So before tearing open the box, make sure to read the label carefully. And again, ask your pediatrician about brands, dosing and use before giving it to your little one.

Some brands recommend waiting until your baby is at least 1 month old before giving her gripe water. And almost every brand varies when it comes to how long you should use the product, so read up and get sound medical advice before you dole out doses.

Alternatives to gripe water

If you're not completely comfortable using gripe water to relieve your child's symptoms and calm those cries, here are some other things you can do:

Try antigas drops

Antigas drops may work better for your baby than gripe water. Ask your pediatrician whether you should try these drops. The active ingredient, simethicone, breaks up gas bubbles.

Mylicon and Little Remedies are among the most common brands, but as always, check with the doctor for a recommendation first.

Do a formula check

If your gas-prone baby has just started on formula, try a ready-to-feed or concentrated variety instead of a powder mix. The reason: All that shaking and stirring generates bubbles that could unsettle your baby's delicate tummy.

If she loves her powder formula and you don't want to switch, take an extra minute or two after mixing to let the formula settle before feeding.

Since only an estimated 1 to 3% of babies and young children are allergic to cow's milk , it's best to talk to the pediatrician to determine if your baby really does have a dairy allergy or sensitivity before switching formulas (and getting a recommendation for a different one to try).

For some overly gassy, fussy babies, going from a standard cow's milk formula to one that doesn't contain cow's milk or one that's antigas and especially for sensitive tummies may help.

Also steer clear of casein-hydrolyzed formula or partially hydrolyzed formulas , since there is little evidence that they work.

Slow the flow

To keep gas out of your baby's tummy, slightly tip the bottle so formula or breast milk completely fills the nipple and replaces unwanted air bubbles. If that doesn't seem to help, check with your pediatrician about swapping your baby's bottle for one designed to prevent trapped bubbles, such as one with a collapsible bag inside, or with a more flexible or angled nipple.

The goal is to try to reduce the amount of air baby gulps while she enjoys her liquid meal. Keeping your baby upright and burping after feedings can help minimize air bubbles too.

Give a massage

A nice, relaxing rubdown can be a soothing way to calm a fussy infant and ease gas pain. An infant massage is also a great opportunity for some baby bonding.

Another trick to try: Bicycle her legs. Sometimes moving your baby's legs around and around in a bicycle-wheel motion helps relieve the gas that might be causing her so much discomfort.

Swaddle your sweetie

Swaddle your little one snugly in a warm blanket. Try rocking and dancing while holding her in your arms for an extra soothing sensation.

Do some tummy time

Some gassy (and fussy) babies find relief when pressure is placed on their bellies. To do this, simply lie your baby down with her head on one knee and tummy on the other, or sitting up on your lap with her tummy against your hand, and then gently rub or pat her back. Or lie her on a blanket or the bed on her back and rub her tummy gently with one hand.

Another idea recommended by the AAP is to try some tummy time . While you still want to make sure your baby sleeps on her back both at night and for naps, tummy time with you while she's awake may help burst some gas bubbles while strengthening those all-important neck and shoulder muscles.

Soothe with sounds

Try singing a little song. Even if you can't hold a tune to save your life, your baby will probably still love it. Calmly humming or whispering "shh" in her ear can also do the trick.

White noise like that from a fan, a clothes dryer or even a vacuum cleaner can also be comforting to babies, because as with the "shh" sound, the whooshing of those appliances may remind them of the womb.

Ask your pediatrician about other options

Breastfeeding moms can try drinking chamomile tea themselves to relieve baby's gas. How well it works is still up for debate.

Another possible remedy to ask your doctor about is probiotic drops, which could reduce gas pain and digestive problems in babies and also quiet their cries. Research has yet to consistently back this up, however.

If all else fails, try switching your diet

If you're breastfeeding your baby, try omitting common gas culprits like dairy, soy or caffeine from your repertoire one at a time to see if there's any improvement in your baby's digestive problems and discomfort. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsColic Relief Tips for ParentsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsColic Relief Tips for ParentsSee All Sources

Gripe water options to consider

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page.

Mommy's Bliss Gripe Water

Mommys Bliss Gripe Water

If your little one is crying from colic, Mommy’s Bliss Gripe Water is a gentle formula that works quickly to remedy pain. This gripe water contains 100% vegan ingredients, including organic ginger and fennel. The herbal mixture also contains no alcohol or parabens, making it a safer option for instant colic, gas, hiccup and teething relief.

Available from Amazon starting at $27

Little Remedies Gripe Water

Little Remedies Gripe Water

Little Remedies Gripe Water tackles your baby's stomach discomfort with a soothing formula. Ginger root extract, fennel seed extract and agave vegetable glycerin work together to remedy colic, gas and hiccups. This gluten-free dietary supplement comes with a dispenser as well, so your baby can take it directly if she is having tummy trouble. Plus, this gripe water set comes with two portable bottles that are great for impromptu trips to grandma's house or airplane travel.

Available from Target for $9

Wellements Organic Nighttime Gripe Water

Wellements Gripe Water

Getting a good night’s sleep is important, but a bout of colic could keep you and your little one up for a while. Wellements Organic Nighttime Gripe Water is designed to ease stomach discomfort symptoms, including gas and hiccups. Organic fennel seed extract, ginger root extract and chamomile flower extract help ease discomfort and improve rest. This formula is also USDA-certified organic and free from artificial colors and preservatives.

Available from Amazon starting at $13

Parent's Choice Gripe Water

Zarbees Naturals Gripe Water

Using organic ginger and fennel extract, the Parent’s Choice Gripe Water is a budget-friendly alternative to help keep baby’s stomach troubles at bay. Parents in the What to Expect community have even attested to its ability to stop hiccups in their tracks. It can be delivered orally with the included syringe and is suitable for infants as young as 2 weeks old. And, because it’s dye- and paraben-free, it’ll likely be easier on baby’s stomach. Each 4-ounce bottle contains up to 24 doses depending on your baby’s age, so it'll last you for a few weeks when stored in your medicine cabinet.

Available from Walmart for $7

Gripe water might be worth trying if your baby is struggling with gas or stomach pain, provided you get the green light from your doctor and pick out a reputable product. But if you're not quite convinced that it’s a magic tummy ticket, there are plenty of other soothers to try.

Frequently Asked Questions

When should I give gripe water to my baby?

Gripe water can be an option to have in your back pocket when other methods of soothing and relieving gas, like massage or tummy time, haven't worked. Before giving your baby gripe water, talk to your pediatrician.

Does gripe water work immediately?

There's actually not much solid evidence that gripe water works. But some parents do think it helps soothe their fussy baby. If your pediatrician gives you the green light, you can see how your baby does with gripe water.

Is gripe water safe?

It depends on the brand and ingredients. Only buy gripe water that's alcohol- and sucrose-free and made in the U.S. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) doesn't regulate gripe water, so be sure to check with your baby's doctor before using it.

Should I use gas drops or gripe water?

For gas relief, infant gas drops containing simethicone may be a more effective option. (Simethicone is considered safe, and breaks up bubbles in the digestive tract.) For general soothing, gripe water might help. Talk to your pediatrician to find out what's best for your baby.