How to Hand Express Breast Milk

How to hand express breast milk

Hand expression is a skill you can start using right after your baby is born — and continue to use throughout your breastfeeding journey.

Whether you plan to use a pump while you’re away from your baby or don't plan to pump at all, if you’re breastfeeding, it’s worth knowing about hand expression.

This simple, gear-free technique is a quick, convenient way to express milk when you’re away from your baby — but it can also help moms manage their supply and play a critical role in feeding your newborn if she's having trouble latching. Here’s how to get started.

What is hand expression?

Hand expression is an alternative to pumping that can also remove milk from your breasts. Instead of using a breast pump , you use your hands to massage and gently squeeze your breasts to get milk out.

There's a technique to hand expression, and it can take a little bit of practice to really get the hang of it. But experts agree that it's a good skill to have, since in some situations, it can be a better option than pumping.

What are the benefits of hand expression vs. using a breast pump?

One of the biggest pros of hand expression is the sheer convenience. Unlike a pump, you don’t need any special equipment — so you can hand express your milk anytime and anywhere you might need to.

For instance, if you’re away from your baby for longer than expected and are starting to feel uncomfortably full, you can hand express for a few minutes just to take the edge off. Or if you're trying to build your pumped milk stash, you can hand express briefly after feedings to get a little extra milk without having to set up your pump.

But convenience is far from the only benefit. Some other ways that hand expression can be helpful:

It allows you to get more colostrum in the days after giving birth. If your baby is struggling to latch early on, hand expression can help. Rub a little expressed milk on your nipple to help your baby latch — or express right onto a spoon and feed it to your newborn. Since this early milk is thick and sticky and there’s not much of it, the small amount you might be able to pump will likely end up sticking to the sides of the pump bottle.

It can help boost your supply. If you’re pumping in an attempt to make more milk, hand expressing for a few minutes at the end of a pumping session can usually yield another half ounce to an ounce.

It can keep oversupply issues in check. Pumping can be a good way to relieve fullness, but doing it too much or for too long can end up encouraging your body to make more milk — leading to an even greater supply and potentially upping the risk for clogged ducts or mastitis (inflammation of breast tissue that sometimes involves an infection). Hand expression is a good alternative; since it tends to remove less milk, it places less demand on your body to produce even more.

Of course, there’s no reason to commit to hand expression exclusively. Especially when you’re working, pumping is likely the most efficient (and most comfortable) way to get the milk you need and keep up your supply. But hand expression can be a complementary option for times when you don’t feel like dealing with the pump or don't have one around.

How do you hand express your breast milk?

How to hand express breast milk

There’s a method to hand expressing, and learning the ropes will help you make the most of your efforts. But it’s not difficult — and like so many aspects of new parenthood ( swaddling! Diaper changes! Bathtime! ), with a little practice, you’ll soon become a pro. Here's how:

Get ready. Wash your hands well and grab a clean cup or container to collect the milk in. If you’re collecting colostrum, a spoon will work.

Position your hands. Put your hand on one breast with your thumb and forefingers opposite each other around the outer edge of your areola, about an inch behind your nipple. Use your other hand to hold the cup, container or spoon up to your nipple.

Compress, press and rotate. Compress your hand in towards your chest, gently pressing your thumb and forefinger together while pulling forward slightly. (It should feel like a massage, not painful.) Avoid letting your fingers slip down towards your nipple. As you release, milk should squirt or flow out. Repeat five or six times, rotating your thumb and fingers around your areola to get milk from around your breast.

Switch to the other breast and repeat. Move to your other breast and do the same compress and press motion five or six times. Continue this sequence, alternating between your breasts. You can hand express for a few minutes if you’re just trying to take the edge off full breasts. If you’re hand expressing in lieu of pumping, try to go for 20 to 30 minutes, or until your breasts feel soft.

Tips for making hand expressing easier

As with breastfeeding, time and practice will help you figure out how to make hand expression work best for you. These tips can help as you’re getting started:

Get some hands-on guidance. While you’re recovering in the hospital after giving birth, ask a nurse, midwife or lactation consultant to help you learn how to hand express.

Start with some warmth. A warm compress or even a warm shower can help get the milk flowing. Try to get your hands warm, too.

Practice in the morning. Your supply tends to be the most abundant in the morning, so try hand expressing after your first morning feeding.

Relax. Feeling comfortable will boost your milk flow. Find a quiet spot, and try to clear your mind by thinking about something calming.

Move around your breast. Expressing around some areas will yield more milk than others, so keep switching positions. Just don’t squeeze around your nipple, since that can cause bruising.

Use gravity. Lean forward while expressing to help draw more milk out.

Think short and sweet. Especially in the beginning, you’ll get more milk through lots of short hand expressing sessions compared to longer, less frequent ones.

Hand expression is a skill you can start using right after your baby is born — and continue to use throughout your breastfeeding journey. It’ll call for a little bit of patience and dedication up front, but sessions will become a breeze once you get the hang of things. And if at any point you’re having trouble with your technique, a lactation consultant can help.