Help Me, Heidi! Is It Safe to Eat Deli Meat After the First Trimester?

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

are cold cuts and deli meat safe after first trimester, help me heidi murkoff, sub sandwich

“I’m 5 months pregnant and I have been craving a sub sandwich. I haven’t had any cold cuts yet ... is it okay to give in and have some now?”

Hi! Pregnancy cravings are a powerful force, for sure. But before you submit to that sub, consider this: Processed, ready-to-eat deli meats of all kinds (and that goes for all the usual, and arguably delicious, suspects — including turkey, roast beef, salami, bologna, and pepperoni) can be contaminated with Listeria.

Though the chances that the luncheon meat you happen to lunch on will be contaminated with this dangerous bacteria are slim, the potential risk to you and your baby if it were is significant. That's because pregnant women — whose immune systems are normally suppressed — are far more susceptible to listeriosis, the serious disease caused by Listeria .

Key-Takeaways

Deli meats may carry Listeria. This harmful bacteria is riskier during pregnancy, which is why skipping cold cuts is best (or at least heating them until steaming).

Fresh meats for the win. Dying for a big ol’ sandwich? Stick to fresh-cooked options like grilled chicken, roast turkey, or meatballs.

After birth, turkey subs are fine. The risk of Listeria goes away once your little one is on the scene so hit your fav sandwich shop to celebrate with a deli meat hero.

In fact, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), a pregnant woman is 10 times more likely than an average healthy adult to contract listeriosis. And that's why experts recommend ordering up an abundance of caution when it comes to cold cuts.

Does that mean that your Subway dreams are completely derailed? Not necessarily, but — spoiler alert — you may not be pleased with the safe-sub substitutes experts offer up. One scores high on most people's yuck scale — and that is to eat your cold cuts piping hot, since heating to steaming kills any lurking bacteria.

The other is to upgrade to a deli that roasts and slices its turkey fresh (freshly roasted roast beef is also fine, if it has been cooked well-done). Or to find compromise in a meatball sub, or a chicken parm, or a grilled chicken sandwich.

And I know it's not the same, but vegetarian options are always on the table too. Treat yourself to extra pickles, pepperoncini, and mustard ... and hey, you might even sublimate that cold cut craving.

Hit up the What to Expect app with all your food craving questions! We've got smart advice from the pros who know so you can eat safely at every meal.

Happily, there is a light at the end of that deli tunnel, even if it's about four months ahead of you. Listeria risks no longer apply once you deliver, even if you'll be breastfeeding, which means you can safely and happily enjoy your footlong — packed with the coldest of cold cuts — as soon as your little foot-and-and-a-half-long arrives. You can even place your order right from the birthing bed. That is, if you're still craving it.

Big hugs,

Heidi

Updates history

October 20, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting