What to Expect After a C-Section: Real-Mom Tips for Healing and Newborn Care

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

c-section tips and essentials, mom with baby in hospital, heidi murkoff

“Heidi, can we talk about C-section healing and all the must-knows and must-haves for recovery? I'm scheduled for one and just want to have an idea of what to expect!”

Most moms-to-be learn pretty early on that you can't always know exactly what to expect when you're expecting — after all, every pregnancy is different.

Most moms also ultimately discover that childbirth can be nearly as difficult to predict as pregnancy, from when labor will start to how long it will last — to whether the delivery will be vaginal (most likely) or cesarean (up to 30% or more of the time).

Key-Takeaways

Preparation makes a big difference. Getting familiar with C-section recovery — from what to pack to how to prep your home — can help you feel more confident and comfortable going in.

Your recovery will take time, and that’s okay. Gentle movement, pain management, and listening to your body are essential for healing after this major surgery.

Support yourself every step of the way. Pillows, smart postpartum supplies, and asking for help (from your doctor, lactation team, or loved ones) can make recovery smoother and less stressful.

It sounds like you're a bit ahead of the delivery guessing game, which gives you a definite edge in preparation. And I'm so happy you're taking the time this heads up gives you to get ready — at least as ready as you'll ever be for the arrival of a little one. The truth is, every mom and dad should be prepared for any kind of birth, including the ones not spelled out in their birth plan. And preparation means reading up. So read on!

You can read all about what you can expect during and after a C-section as well as in What to Expect When You're Expecting. And you should! You should also ask your OB/GYN as many questions about prep for and recovery from a C-section as you can possibly think up — and write down all the answers too so you won't forget them in the post-delivery flurry and postpartum fog. That includes all of the possible signs of infection and other complications (no earmuffs permitted — this is need-to-know stuff).

If you're feeling up to it, consider peeking at photos online of typical incisions and what they should look like as they heal, also good to know. Or have your partner do the looking, if you're too squeamish.

But for the real deal on C-section recovery (and the real deal on everything you'll need on hand to deal), since you've asked, I've gone to the best source of all: fellow moms on my Facebook page who've had a C-section. Here are some of their top tips, as well as mine:

1. Pack smart. In addition to all the usual hospital bag suspects, add a few C-section-specific items too, including:

A belly band. The hospital may provide one (something else to ask your doctor about) but it definitely doesn't hurt to pack a belly band . In fact, the right one may help you hurt less, supporting your abdomen and incision and possibly easing pain and swelling. "A good belly band can help you feel pulled together in your midsection too! I have one that has spaces for ice packs and heat packs in it to go on the back and the incision,” says What to Expect Community mom babyCharlit. Comfort counts, of course, so look for one made from a soft material (like bamboo). Continue wearing the wrap once you get home.

Everything high-waisted. Some moms prefer granny panties, but most swear by mesh underwear, also high-waisted and roomy so there's no rubbing against the incision. One mom suggested wearing an overnight pad over the incision (secured, so it doesn't shift) as another layer of protection, and to soak up extra fluids of all kinds, including sweat. A robe will be more comfortable over sore spots than clothes, so pack that too. For going home, consider extra roomy gym shorts or lounge pants, worn above your waist, or even better, a long, flowing dress.

Slip-on slippers for the hospital and slip-on shoes for the trip home. Bending to put on shoes (or tie or buckle them) will be a non-starter.

A nursing pillow and an extra pillow from home (more about those later).

2. Prepare your home. Fill your fridge and freezer with meals and snacks, of course. But also make any necessary adjustments around your house to limit the amount of bending you'll have to do post-op. Scope out chairs you'll be able to slide yourself easily up and down from (think leather, don't think extra low and cushy). Have a good supply of pillows handy (read on to find out why).

3. Buy ahead. Besides those basics for the hospital bag , you'll want to have on hand a good supply of post-op must-haves , including stool softener, ibuprofen, and acetaminophen, a clay cool pack that molds gently to skin, and a super soft washcloth that doesn't scratch tender skin. Also, stock up on silicone scar sheets, which you'll be able to apply once your stitches are out and you've gotten the doctor's go-ahead. Also essential: anti-itch lotion or ointment (ask your doctor for a recommendation). And pads and more pads, as well as extra mesh underwear, inexpensive granny panties, and/or adult diapers (some moms find them more "depend"-able, as well as more comfortable).

4. Move, Mom. As soon as you're allowed, and as much as you're feeling up to (measured in baby steps, Mama!). Don't try upward mobility unassisted though, and take it slowly. Very slowly. Also avoid engaging your abs as you get out of bed (roll to your side first and use your arms for support). Remember, a C-section is major surgery — no pushing allowed. That said, getting up and taking short walks in the hospital hallway may help you recover faster, and even bring down swelling. “The best advice I was given was to keep moving! I feel great now and have since a few days after, and I credit it to moving/walking,” says What to Expect Community mom blessedheart86. Follow all directions about lifting (typically you'll be advised not to lift anything heavier than your baby, and even that will seem a heavy lift) and climbing stairs at home. The most important direction: Listen to your body so you don't overdo it.

5. Get ahead of pain. Take pain meds as prescribed (no need to vie for superwoman status by skipping them — besides, you're already a superhero … you delivered a baby!). “Set an alarm clock for your pain meds and DON'T miss a dose. I made the mistake and went 2 hours over. Learned my lesson!” says What to Expect Community mom Ma42114. Ask about adding ibuprofen or acetaminophen to the med mix to decrease the amount of narcotics you need short-term (you may not need them at all, or you may need them only for a few days, perhaps up to a week). But also speak up if you definitely don't want narcotics, say because you don't react well to them or are in recovery.

Looking for more trusted answers during those early days at home? Get the What to Expect app for round-the-clock newborn care advice, recovery tips, and reassurance when you need it most.

6. Get ahead of constipation . Poop happens, but it doesn't happen easily post-delivery, especially not post-op (particularly if you're taking certain pain meds). Those little strolls will help move things along, but so will taking stool softeners as directed, eating plenty of fiber (dried and fresh fruit, nuts, and seeds), and drinking lots of water (hot water with lemon may be extra effective). Something else all that water will do: help flush out fluids accumulated not only during pregnancy, but during delivery (the requisite IVs can leave you puffier postpartum than pregnancy did).

7. Guard against gas. Gas will definitely be a pain post-op, sometimes an excruciating one, and may refer up your shoulder, even towards your neck. Ask for gas meds if they're not offered, and skip carbonated drinks, as well as high-fat, spicy foods (like those buffalo wings you've been craving).

8. Give yourself props. Pillows will be your best buddies, so keep several by your side, always. You'll want to grab one tight to your belly every time you get up and down, cough or sneeze, or laugh (you've gotta laugh, right?). Keep that pillow in place getting into and out of the car, as well as on car rides (including the one home from the hospital). Since lying flat can hurt and make the journey out of and back into bed longer and more painful, you'll also want plenty of pillows in your bed so you can sleep at a semi-recline (some moms say they're more comfortable camping out in the recliner short term).

9. Massage yourself. Your incision will be numb, probably for months to come. You may be able to bring feeling back faster by gently massaging the area around your incision once it's healed. This may also prevent the build-up of scar tissue , and result in a flatter scar.

10. Expect postpartum symptoms, plus. Just because your baby isn't exiting the vaginal route doesn't mean you won't have standard-issue postpartum symptoms too, so be prepared for the following: vaginal bleeding (lochia) , afterpains, and perineal pain , among others. You'll also probably have a hard time peeing at first, for all the same reasons that vaginal birth moms do, but having had a catheter may make it harder still.

11. Breastfeeding may be more somewhat more challenging for moms who've had a C-section, with breast milk potentially slower to come in due to stress, pain, and medications, as well as a sometimes-later start. To give yourself and your baby a breastfeeding-after-C-section edge, do your advance work (take a class, read up on breastfeeding). Ask ahead about the availability of a gentle C-section so you can breastfeed right after delivery, assuming all is well. But also be prepared to ask for extra help from the lactation department at the hospital, as needed.

12. Take it one day at a time. Some days will be harder than others (usually your body's way of telling you to slow down today, for a better tomorrow). If you don't start to feel progressively better, and especially if you notice any signs of infection or postpartum complications , (including anemia due to excessive blood loss during delivery) call the doctor right away.

Here's to a smooth C-section recovery!

Big hugs,

Heidi

Help Me, Heidi! is a weekly advice column in which What to Expect creator Heidi Murkoff answers your most pressing pregnancy and parenting questions. She’s tackling the stuff you are desperate to know right now — so if you have a question, ask Heidi here Opens a new window or on Facebook Opens a new window and she might answer in an upcoming column. (Not sure if Heidi's answered one of your questions? Check out the rest of the columns here .)

Updates history

November 20, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.