Help Me, Heidi! I Don't Feel as Connected to My Second Pregnancy

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

not as excited about second pregnancy

“Heidi, how do you cope with not having the same connection with a second pregnancy as you did with the first? With my first I was deeply excited, and we had this amazing connection. Although we are thrilled about this baby, the connection is not the same — and I feel like a bad mother. Any opinions? Will this change?"

The truth is, there’s nothing like a first pregnancy — or a first baby. Everything you experience that first time — from the elation to the trepidation, from the over-the-top excitement to the over-the-top nerves, from the transformation of your body to the transformation of your priorities, from the magical moments (hearing your baby’s heartbeat! feeling your baby kick!) to the miserable ones (those aches and pains! those swollen ankles!), from the giddy anticipation of your baby’s arrival to the overwhelming uncertainty over becoming a parent — it’s all brand new. Life changing. Game changing. Like nothing you’ve ever felt before, or will feel again.

Sure, there are exceptions. For example, excitement may run higher during a second, planned pregnancy if the first happened unexpectedly under less-than-ideal circumstances. Or joy may be more palpable during a second, more comfortable pregnancy than during a miserable, complication-marred first. Or maybe a long wait in between pregnancies makes every moment feel brand new, even when it technically isn’t.

But for most of us, me included, a second pregnancy and a second baby can’t compare with firsts — and, actually, they shouldn’t. That’s not only okay; it’s completely understandable. You and your body have been there, done that. Even your breasts may not be as pumped as they were the first time — they may grow more slowly or grow less the second time.

Key Takeaways

It’s normal for a second pregnancy to feel a bit more routine. Your first pregnancy was full of new experiences and emotions — your second just can’t be a “first” in the same way.

You’re not less connected — you’re just busier. Caring for your first child means you have less time to focus on your pregnancy, but that doesn’t mean you’re any less excited or invested.

Every pregnancy is different. You may not love your second baby in the exact same way as your first — because every child is different — but your love will be every bit as deep.

The second round of momentous pregnancy firsts may seem less momentous and less worthy of celebration and social media breaking than the first round was: your first positive HPT (which ended up being your first of 15, because who could stop at one confirmation the first time?), your first pregnancy announcement, your first pair of maternity jeans (that you bought before you really needed to, just because it made you feel so … pregnant!), your first fetal movement, your first baby hiccups, your first baby shower, your first time decorating a nursery, your first time buying baby clothes (okay, way overbuying baby clothes) … your first time holding your very own newborn. Magical, even if you had no clue what you were doing back then.

So if it doesn’t feel like the first time, it’s not surprising. If you’re not focused on this pregnancy like you were on the first one, or as focused on this baby as you were on the first — it’s for a very good, very loveable, very huggable, and let’s face it, probably very demanding reason: your first baby. After all, being an expectant mom isn’t a full-time preoccupation anymore, because, well, being a mom already keeps you occupied 24-7 — especially if your first little one is still very little and needy.

You are most definitely not a bad mother. You’re a completely normal mother, one who’s so good at nurturing her first baby that she can’t help but nurture her second at least as well. The fact that you’re already trying to love your babies equally (and feeling guilty about the fact that you can’t, no matter how hard you try) proves that beyond a shadow of all those nagging self-doubts.

Want extra support along the way? Connect with a Community of parents who get what it’s like to be pregnant while raising a little one — and also find week-by-week expert guidance — in the What to Expect app .

And here’s another truth, one I learned (and that Emma learned) in the trenches of second-time parenting. You can’t love your second baby exactly the same as you love your first, because they aren’t the same baby. Just as every pregnancy is different, every baby is different. The love will be just as deep, just as meaningful and miraculous, just as tender and unconditional — but it will be as different as your babies are different from each other. But remember this: Not only will there be enough love in your heart for both of your babies, the love will multiply as you learn to love each one of them individually and together.

You have this, Mom — and your babies are lucky, already, to have you as their mom.

Hugs,

Heidi

p.s. All of this should change, and most likely will change. But if feelings of disconnection don’t resolve — or if you have symptoms of depression, anxiety, or other mood disorders either during or following this pregnancy — make sure you seek help so you can fully enjoy parenting both your babies.

Help Me, Heidi! is a weekly advice column in which What to Expect creator Heidi Murkoff answers your most pressing pregnancy and parenting questions. She’s tackling the stuff you are desperate to know right now — so if you have a question, ask Heidi here or on Facebook and she might answer in an upcoming column. (Not sure if Heidi's answered one of your questions? Check out the rest of the columns here .)

Updates history

November 24, 2025

Editor: Lisa Lombardi/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Listen Up, Second-Time Moms: 9 Ways Your Second Pregnancy May Surprise You Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Help Me, Heidi! Can You Be Pregnant but With No Symptoms? By Heidi Murkoff

When My Babies Arrived, the Blissful Connection Didn't. Here's the Truth No One Talks About Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

I'm Struggling With Separation Anxiety During My Pregnancy. It Turns Out I'm Not the Only One Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Let’s Get Real: You Can Be Grateful for Your Baby and Still Not Love Being Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Why Pregnancy Changes Your Friendships — and How to Stay Connected Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

From One Child to Two: 23 Secrets of Second-Time Parents Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Thinking About Baby No. 2? What to Consider Before You Hit the TTC Restart Button By Heidi Murkoff

Thinking About a Second Baby? Let’s Break It Down Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Help Me, Heidi! My 2-Month-Old Wants Nothing to Do With His Dad By Heidi Murkoff

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window