Help Me, Heidi! How Should I Dress My Baby to Go to Sleep?

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

help me heidi murkoff, how to dress baby for sleep, sleeping baby in clothes, heidi murkoff

"How should I dress my baby when she’s sleeping? My mother insists she’s not warm enough because her hands are a little chilly, but I worry about overheating."

Score one for Team Mom … Team New Mom, that is. As much as I hate to call out a fellow grandmother, you’re absolutely right on this call: It’s wise to worry about overheating. That’s because being overheated is far riskier for a newborn than being a little chilly, especially when she’s sleeping. In fact, overheating is a risk factor for SIDS .

What’s more, hands are — hands down — the least reliable gauge of whether your baby bear’s too warm, too cold, or just right. That’s because a baby’s hands (and feet) are usually cooler to the touch, due to a still-developing circulatory system.

To get a much more accurate reading, dig deeper and reach for the nape of baby’s neck or her back. Is that skin very warm to the touch, even sweaty? Either she’s overbundled or the room is overheated — or both. Is it chilly? She’s underdressed or the room is too cold — or both. Is your snuggly bundle snuggly warm but not hot? You’ve found your sweet pea’s sweet spot.

Key Takeaways

Always check your little one for signs of overheating. Being too hot increases a baby's risk of SIDS. Hands and feet aren’t reliable for gauging temperature — check the back of the neck or torso instead.

Dress your baby for comfort and room temperature. Babies usually need similar layers to adults. An ideal sleep room temp is 68–72°F (20–22°C), with air circulation (like a fan) offering extra protection.

Use safe sleepwear only: Swaddles or sleep sacks are safest, adjusted for weather. Don't use hats indoors, since babies release heat through their heads, and keep blankets out of the crib.

Another indication of whether your baby’s sleepwear has her running too hot or too cold: your comfort. If you’re comfortable in about the same amount of clothing (clearly you won’t be swaddled, so this may take a little approximation), she will likely be as well. The reality is, once a full-term infant has clocked in a few days of life on the outside, her body has gained the ability to regulate her temperature. At that point, she doesn’t need to be dressed any more warmly than you do — unless you’re the person who consistently runs hotter or colder than the rest of the room.

Speaking of rooms, temperature matters there, too. The ideal room temperature for a sleeping baby is between 68 and 72 degrees, so if you’ve been blasting the heat or switching off the AC because there’s a newborn in the house, it’s time to adjust the thermostat. Again, if the room temperature is comfortable for you, it’s likely comfortable for her. If you’re too warm or too chilly, she’s likely to be, too.

A fan to circulate air adds another layer of protection against SIDS , plus a white noise bonus that might help everyone sleep more soundly.

So how do you dress a newborn for sleep success, and optimum safety? Since swaddling helps a newborn feel securely cocooned on her back (the only safe position for sleep), you’ll probably want to wrap your baby burrito up for the first few months. Just factor the weight of the swaddle into your choice of sleepwear.

In warm weather, she may not need more than a lightweight onesie or T-shirt under an equally lightweight swaddle, sleep sack or hybrid swaddle/sack. In very cold weather — unless your home gets overheated — she may need a footed sleeper and a heavier swaddle or sack to keep her toasty.

Still not sure whether you’ve found that happy medium? Run that neck check, and rerun it periodically — especially if your thermostat isn't reliable or your building or the landlord sets the temperature. Many (though not all babies) will also speak up if they’re uncomfortably hot or cold — not in so many words, but in so much fussing or crying.

One item of clothing that never belongs on a baby who’s napping or sleeping indoors? A hat. As cute as those hospital beanies are, she doesn’t need one for sleep once she’s left the hospital building. She needs to be able to release heat through that disproportionately-large head of hers in order to regulate her body temperature — and a hat prevents that release during sleep, putting her at risk for overheating. And of course, no loose bedding is safe bedding , so skip the blankets in any weather.

Have more questions about your little one's sleep? Open the What to Expect app to track your sweet pea's sleep and see what’s typical at every age.

Here’s to safe and comfy sleeping!

Big hugs,

Heidi

Help Me, Heidi! is a weekly advice column in which What to Expect creator Heidi Murkoff answers your most pressing pregnancy and parenting questions. She’s tackling the stuff you are desperate to know right now — so if you have a question, ask Heidi here or on Facebook and she might answer in an upcoming column. (Not sure if Heidi's answered one of your questions? Check out the rest of the columns here .)

Updates history

September 9, 2025

Editors: Kathleen Felton/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.