Help Me, Heidi! I'm Very Sensitive to My Partner's Smell Now That I'm Pregnant — What Can I Do?

Updated with Ask Heidi video.

pregnant woman and man standing far apart, help me heidi sensitive to partner's smell during pregnancy

"I’m super sensitive to my partner’s smell now that I’m pregnant, and not in a good way. I feel really bad about it, and about always pushing him away. What should I do?"

Smell trouble ahead? Most moms-to-me find that all scents — even none-scents they never much noticed before — intensify, and as you have noticed, usually not in a good way...and often in a repulsive way.

The smell of warm apple pie that once sent you back to your grandma’s kitchen now sends you heaving. The Cinnabon that lured you across the mall now has you running for cover in Nordstroms...that is, until you get a whiff of the perfume wafting your way through the cosmetics department. And the scent of your beloved partner, which once aroused passion now arouses your gag reflex. Even when he’s freshly showered and his teeth are freshly brushed. Even when he carefully (lovingly!) avoided the onions on his lunchtime sandwich he knew you’d find offensive. Even before he’s moved in for a cuddle or a nuzzle.

What once made you weak in the knees — his aftershave! his hair gel! yes, sometimes even his funky morning breath! — now makes your skin crawl as you crawl quickly under the covers or dodge behind a pillow to find breathing room, away from the man you definitely love...and the scents you definitely don’t.

Of course you feel badly — especially as you play an endless game of Keep Away with your partner (as in, keep-away-from-me-if-you-know-what’s-good-for-you). But you shouldn’t. After all, it’s not him — or you. It’s the hormones revving your sense of smell into overdrive , and relegating him to the other side of the sofa or the bed. And as with all the other hormonally-triggered symptoms of pregnancy, your super-charged sniffer is a force of nature that’s not within your control. As much as you try.

Your partner has almost certainly noticed that love — or at least, close contact — isn’t in the air these days, but he’s probably confused as to why you’re always pushing him away. So instead of trying to cover up your feelings (hard to do when you’re always taking cover from him), take him on a walk (in the fresh air) to talk them through.

Gently explain that your nose knows way too much these days — from what your colleague ate for dinner last night to what the neighbors are having for breakfast to distant dog poop and long-ago sprayed air freshener. That smells you never minded and even odors you once adored — including his — are overwhelming your senses, dialing up your nausea , and just plain bothering you big time. That you wish you could change it, but it’s the hormones talking right now — crying foul at the fried chicken essence clinging to his T-shirt, the smell of his gym socks from deep within the hamper, his breath no matter what. That you love him more than ever now that you’re making a baby together...but ironically it’s pregnancy that’s keeping you from showing that love, at least up close.

And tell him that it will get better — he is likely to pass the sniff test later in pregnancy, when early hormonal havoc and quease eases. In the meantime, reassure him that it isn’t personal — you actually don’t like much that you smell these days.

Then try showing your love in settings where smells dissipate — outside, or in the shower together (as long as you control the scent of the suds). Suggest he use products that don’t offend you and that you even find soothing, maybe citrus-scented or baby-fresh (though realistically, they may smell differently on him). Buy him a toothpaste you can tolerate, mints that you don’t mind, and present them with another sense you’ll both need in spades these days — a sense of humor, that is. Text him from across the room that you find him sexy...from afar. Let him know that while you will live to love his smell again, for now love may be blind...but it can sometimes stink.

?

?

?

?

Here’s to breathing easy again!

Big hugs,

Heidi

Help Me, Heidi! is a weekly advice column in which What to Expect creator Heidi Murkoff answers your most pressing pregnancy and parenting questions. She’s tackling the stuff you are desperate to know right now — so if you have a question, ask Heidi here or on Facebook and she might answer in an upcoming column. (Not sure if Heidi's answered one of your questions? Check out the rest of the columns here .)

Updates history

December 20, 2024

Editor: Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updated with Ask Heidi video.