Herbal Remedies and Supplements in Pregnancy: What's Safe and What to Skip

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Pregnancy herbal remedies

From chamomile to red raspberry leaf, there’s an herbal supplement that supposedly helps with almost anything that ails you during pregnancy — but are herbs safe to take during pregnancy? Here’s what to know about herbal therapy.

Whether you're dealing with bouts of nausea, anxiety, fatigue, or lower back pain, you might be considering an herbal fix. But just because it's natural doesn't mean it's safe.

Although you may be tempted to use them, herbal pills, teas , and supplements are not regulated in the same way as traditional over-the-counter or prescription drugs. So it's hard to know what you're getting because the strength, contents, and quality of the products may vary.

These tips can help keep you and your baby safe as you explore the broad (and sometimes confusing!) world of herbal medicine.

Key Takeaways

"Natural" doesn't automatically mean safe in pregnancy. Because herbal products aren't regulated like medications and can interact with your meds, always check with your provider before using any teas, tinctures, or supplements.

Culinary herbs are generally a-okay. Flavor meals with basil, rosemary, dill, mint, thyme, fennel, ginger, and garlic — but skip high-dose pills or powders unless your provider says they're safe.

Certain herbs are off-limits during pregnancy. Avoid uterine stimulants and toxic plants — like black/blue cohosh, dong quai, goldenseal, aloe, juniper, comfrey, and mistletoe — and be cautious with "labor prep" picks such as red raspberry leaf unless you've gotten the green light.

What is herbal therapy?

Herbal therapy is a form of holistic medicine that uses herbs for healing. Believe it or not, there's an herb that's claimed to help with almost anything ailing you during pregnancy.

Homeopathy is a similar type of alternative medicine based on the belief that "like cures like." In other words, you're given extremely minute doses of drugs, herbs, or even toxins that, in larger doses, would create the symptoms you're trying to treat.

Homeopathic medicine is largely unproven by science and may result in unwanted side effects and potentially harmful drug interactions.

How does herbal therapy work?

Herbal therapies are made from plants or botanicals and can be taken in a number of forms, including powders, tinctures, teas , capsules, and gels. Certain herbs are thought to help with various symptoms and other aspects of pregnancy and labor.

Dealing with morning sickness ? Multiple studies have indicated that ginger can help alleviate nausea, so you may want to stock up on ginger tea and fresh ginger to help calm your stomach. "I have been struggling with morning sickness since week 7. I made ginger tea with some honey this morning around 2 a.m. when I was up, fatigued, and nauseous, and it worked. The nausea stopped," reports What to Expect Community mom Jfearon02.

Want to get your body ready for labor? Red raspberry leaf supposedly induces labor naturally, but the science is still out on its safety. It's thought to boost blood flow to the uterus and get the birthing process going by triggering contractions. For that reason, it's always best to get the okay from your practitioner before trying it or any other herbal supplement.

Is herbal therapy safe during pregnancy?

When it comes to using herbal remedies during pregnancy, be cautious: Not all of them are safe. It's hard to know what you're getting because the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) does not regulate herbal supplements like other drugs.

You should take herbal medicines just as seriously as you take prescription or over-the-counter medications and beware of mixing the two. In other words, never take any herbal remedies — not even in the form of teas or powders — without first talking to your practitioner.

All pregnant women should avoid certain herbs because they might cause complications or otherwise prove toxic.

Wondering what's safe — and what's not — during pregnancy? The What to Expect app gives you expert-backed answers and peace of mind, every step of the way.

Herbs that are safe during pregnancy

Although you should proceed with caution when it comes to herbal supplements, culinary herbs definitely get the green light when you're pregnant.

Adding them to your meals not only gives them more flavor but also provides additional vitamins and nutrients , so go ahead and use more of the following (but in food form, not pills):

Basil

Parsley

Sage

Rosemary

Dill

Mint

Thyme

Fennel

Ginger

Garlic

Herbs that are not safe during pregnancy

Some herbs are definitely unsafe for pregnancy because they might cause premature labor or other problems. Herbs to avoid during pregnancy include:

Uterine stimulants like aloe, barberry, black cohosh, blue cohosh, dong quai, feverfew, goldenseal, juniper, wild yam, and motherwort

Herbs that might potentially harm your baby , such as autumn crocus, mugwort ( safe for moxibustion but not for ingestion), pokeroot, and sassafras

Herbs that have other toxic effects , such as comfrey and mistletoe

Again, always consult with your health care provider before taking any herbal remedy and check whether it's safe for you and your baby.