Here's What to Know About the DTaP Vaccine for Babies and Kids

Updates to copy, information, sourcing, headlines, and formatting, and new medical review.

DTaP vaccine, baby at doctor's with mom

Children should get five doses of the DTaP vaccine at 2, 4, 6, and 15-18 months of age, followed by another at 4 to 6 years old.

The DTaP vaccine protects little ones from three serious diseases that can be especially harmful to babies.

Your child will get the first in this series of shots starting at 2 months old. Learn more about what the DTaP vaccine guards against and why it's important for your baby to get it.

What is the DTaP vaccine?

DTaP is a combination vaccine that protects against three diseases: diphtheria (D), tetanus (T), and pertussis (P), or whooping cough. All three components of the vaccine are "inactivated" — meaning they are killed and incapable of causing the disease.

There are 11 DTaP vaccines licensed for use in the United States. Some of these vaccines protect against diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis only, while others include protection against other diseases too, such as Haemophilus influenzae type b disease and hepatitis B. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsDTaP (Diphtheria, Tetanus, Pertussis) Vaccine: What You Need to KnowSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsDTaP (Diphtheria, Tetanus, Pertussis) Vaccine: What You Need to KnowSee All Sources

"Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis are all very deadly," says Gina Posner , M.D., a pediatrician at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "It is important to protect your child against these diseases and make sure you get their boosters, as well as yours, since the immunity fades over time."

What are diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis?

The DTaP vaccine protects against three diseases: diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (whooping cough). Here's more about each one.

Diphtheria

Diphtheria is an illness that’s caused by a bacteria-produced toxin. It’s spread through coughing and sneezing. Initial symptoms include sore throat, fever, and chills. It can also cause a thick coating to form over the back of the nose or throat, blocking the airways and making breathing difficult. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout DiphtheriaSee All Sources [2]

an illness that’s caused by a bacteria-produced toxin. It’s

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout DiphtheriaSee All Sources

Diphtheria is rare in the U.S. But if it isn't treated promptly with the proper medication, the infection can cause a toxin to spread throughout the body that can then lead to heart failure, breathing problems, or paralysis. About 1 in 10 of those infected — and 1 in 5 children under the age of 5 — will die from diphtheria.

Tetanus

Also called "lockjaw," tetanus is not a contagious disease. Instead, a person typically becomes infected with tetanus if spores of tetanus bacteria found in soil, dirt, dust, or manure enter the body through a wound or cut. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout TetanusSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout TetanusSee All Sources

Symptoms, which can take up to three weeks to appear, include painful muscle stiffness all over the body, trouble swallowing, and seizures. There are about 30 reported cases a year of tetanus in the U.S., and up to 1 out of 5 people who get the disease die from it.

Pertussis (whooping cough)

Pertussis, also known as whooping cough, is a very contagious airborne bacterial infection that can cause violent, rapid coughing and a loud "whooping" sound upon inhalation. Babies may not cough or make this sound — they may gag, gasp, and turn blue. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Whooping CoughSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Whooping CoughSee All Sources

About half of infants who contract the disease need to be hospitalized, as it can make it very difficult for them to eat, drink, and breathe. '

The younger a baby is when he gets whooping cough, the more likely it is that he'll need to be hospitalized. About 25% of infants hospitalized with pertussis will also get pneumonia. Whooping cough is fatal for 1 or 2 out of 100 babies in the U.S.

Because whooping cough is so dangerous and there are still frequent outbreaks in the U.S., "make sure anyone that will be around your newborn has an updated Tdap [adult vaccine] so they don't give your unprotected newborn whooping cough," says Dr. Posner.

Plenty of parents do just that when it comes to their new babies, who are particularly susceptible to germs in those early months of life.

"We only had visitors to meet and hold baby who were up-to-date with their own TDap for the first two months until baby could get vaccinated themselves," says What to Expect Community mom dreamchord45.

How many DTaP shots will my child need?

Five doses of DTaP are needed during childhood. The shots are given at 2, 4, 6, and 15 to 18 months of age, followed by another between 4 and 6 years old. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Diphtheria, Tetanus, and Pertussis VaccinesSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Diphtheria, Tetanus, and Pertussis VaccinesSee All Sources

Since protection can fade over time with this particular vaccine, a related booster vaccine called Tdap is recommended for kids between 11 and 12 years of age. During a previous whooping cough outbreak, doctors were instructed to give the booster at age 10 instead, so some still do, Dr. Posner notes.

Diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis are all very deadly. It is important to protect your child against these diseases and make sure you get their boosters, as well as yours, since the immunity fades over time.

Dr. Gina Posner, a pediatrician in California and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

The Tdap vaccine provides protection against the same three diseases as DTaP. Vaccination continues into adulthood — Td, which offers protection against tetanus and diphtheria, is recommended for adults every 10 years for life. And some experts recommend Tdap every 10 years, says Dr. Posner.

If you're planning to get pregnant again, be aware that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends getting the Tdap vaccine during each pregnancy between weeks 27 and 36, preferably during the earlier part of that time period.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

The DTaP vaccine is a combination vaccine. It protects against three diseases that can be very dangerous and even deadly for young children: diphtheria (D), tetanus (T), and pertussis (P).

It protects against three diseases that can be very dangerous and even deadly for young children: diphtheria (D), tetanus (T), and pertussis (P).

This vaccine is given in five doses during childhood. Your little one will receive shots at 2, 4, 6, and 15 to 18 months of age, followed by another between 4 and 6 years old.

Your little one will receive shots at 2, 4, 6, and 15 to 18 months of age, followed by another between 4 and 6 years old.

Vaccinating your child against diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis is critical. Although they’re less common now in the United States, these diseases can make children very sick. For example, about 25% percent of infants hospitalized with pertussis also get pneumonia, and whooping cough is fatal for 1 or 2 out of 100 babies.

Although they’re less common now in the United States, these diseases can make children very sick. For example, about 25% percent of infants hospitalized with pertussis also get pneumonia, and whooping cough is fatal for 1 or 2 out of 100 babies.

The Tdap vaccine is a related booster, and helps improve protection from these diseases that can fade over time. And adults will continue to get the Td vaccine (which protects against diphtheria and tetanus) every 10 years.