Here’s Why Snoring During Pregnancy Happens (And How to Quiet It Down)

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

snoring pregnant

Here's why you're more likely than ever to snore during pregnancy, and what you can do about it.

Even if you've never snored before, snoring is fairly common during pregnancy. It's often a major sleep disruptor for you and anyone in your bedroom, which probably means that you and your partner are all ears about what can be done about these nocturnal noises.

Key-Takeaways

Pregnancy snoring = super normal. This nighttime noise can crop up in the second and third trimester thanks to fluid retention, weight gain, and nasal congestion caused by those pesky hormonal changes.

It's annoying, but harmless. Much of the time pregnancy snoring is just a hassle. But if it's severe or comes with fatigue or morning headaches, speak with your doc so that sleep apnea or preeclampsia can be ruled out.

Try some quick snoring fixes. Side-sleeping, elevating your head, using nasal strips, and keeping your weight gain steady may lead to quieter nights.

When does snoring generally start during pregnancy?

Snoring often starts in the second trimester, around week 16, when pregnancy hormones begin causing nasal congestion .

What causes snoring during pregnancy?

The most likely culprit of snoring are your surging pregnancy hormones. Elevated levels of estrogen and progesterone cause the mucus membranes in your nose to swell. The resulting nasal congestion increases when you lie down, which can lead to snoring.

Excessive weight gain during pregnancy may also be at fault, as it results in extra tissue around your head and neck that aggravates snoring.

What to Expect Community parent babyvaal has been dealing with her own case of snoring. “I'm 19 weeks and my husband just told me I've been snoring at night. Now I'm so self-conscious, but we both know I can't help it. I will say I've been sleeping GREAT lately.”

Is snoring a sign of preeclampsia?

In most cases, snoring is simply one more (rather unpleasant) pregnancy symptom. However sometimes snoring is caused by obstructive sleep apnea , a chronic condition when the airways collapse during sleep.

Research suggests that sleep apnea may be linked to high blood pressure and preeclampsia (a condition involving the sudden onset of high blood pressure during pregnancy).

Preeclampsia needs to be managed to prevent it from progressing to eclampsia or causing other complications. Signs of preeclampsia include severe swelling of the ankles, hands and face, vision changes, and sudden weight gain that's unrelated to eating.

Untreated sleep apnea during pregnancy can also deprive you and potentially your baby of oxygen, and it can increase the risk of health conditions including heart disease and pulmonary embolism.

Symptoms of sleep apnea include waking up with a headache in the morning and feeling extra tired, irritable, or forgetful (although exhaustion and sleeplessness are also very normal pregnancy symptoms , especially in the first and third trimesters).

Be sure to let your doctor know if you experience any of these symptoms or even if you simply seem to be snoring way more than usual. If you have sleep apnea, your doctor will work with you to find a healthy and safe weight management plan, since weight is the number one factor behind sleep apnea.

Your practitioner may also recommend using a CPAP (continuous positive airway pressure) machine to help you breathe better at night.

Head to the What to Expect app for expert sleep tips, personalized guidance, and been-there advice from moms who've snored (and survived).

What can I do about snoring when I'm pregnant?

For most women, snoring during pregnancy is more of an annoyance than anything else. That said, don't hesitate to bring it up with your doctor if it's keeping you from a good night's sleep.

Snoring can be associated with gestational diabetes . So make sure to get your glucose screening test between weeks 24 and 28 (or earlier if your practitioner suggests).

Can I prevent snoring during pregnancy?

The following steps can help prevent snoring during pregnancy:

Stick on a nasal strip at bedtime

Use a warm-mist humidifier in your bedroom at night

Try sleeping on your side. Your left is the best sleeping position for circulation.

Plump up your pillows and snooze with your head slightly elevated. You could also try adding a pregnancy pillow .

Keep an eye on your calorie intake during pregnancy to make sure extra weight doesn't contribute to snoring

Stay away from alcohol and tobacco, which can inhibit sleep. You should be avoiding them anyway when you're pregnant!

When does snoring during pregnancy usually end?

Your noisy new habit will likely end after you have the baby — if not right away, then once you've lost a lot of the baby weight. So hang in there (and tell your partner to do the same)!