Here's What to Do if Your Baby Is Crying in Her Sleep

Light copy changes and updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

baby crying in sleep, newborn baby crying in bed

When it comes to infant sleep, a sudden cry in the night isn’t unusual. Read on for more about why it happens and some ways you can ease her back to dreamland.

New parents expect a bit of fuss from their babies around bedtime, but once they’re settled down for the night, the silence is usually golden. Sometimes, however, your baby may seem to cry, grunt, or scream in her sleep — without actually waking up — leaving you to wonder what could be happening in the crib.

"My baby girl is 10 weeks old and the last couple of days I’ve noticed an increase in her letting out whimpers or cries in her sleep, and it’s breaking my heart," says What to Expect Community user -Saraay-. "She is asleep so I can’t pick her up or comfort her but they are the saddest little cries."

Fortunately, sudden nighttime crying while asleep tends to be short-lived and isn’t usually cause for alarm. Here’s more about it, plus what to do when your baby cries in her sleep.

Key Takeaways

Babies might cry in their sleep for a number of reasons, including hunger, stomach upset, sleep regressions, or during sleep training. Restless REM sleep can also trigger brief cries.

It's normal for little ones to cry for up to two to three hours daily in the first months; nighttime whimpers often resolve on their own without intervention.

You can soothe your crying baby by repositioning her, gently rubbing her tummy, swaddling or using sleep sacks (depending on her age), or checking her room temperature. Seek medical advice if her crying is excessive (more than two or three hours), persistent, or you think it's linked to issues like colic, reflux, or allergies.

Why do babies cry in their sleep?

Babies cry to communicate their needs, and hunger is probably the most common one, especially in newborns who nurse or take a bottle every few hours. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsResponding to Your Baby%u2019s CriesSee All Sources [1] But if your little one has recently been fed, she might be wailing for another reason, including:

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsResponding to Your Baby%u2019s CriesSee All Sources

Stomach upset. Babies are born without fully developed digestive systems, and it takes some time for them to get used to milk or formula.

Nightmares. Older babies are starting to develop their imaginations, a phase that’s filled with excitement but can also lead to bad dreams and crying at night.

What amount of crying is normal?

During the first three months of life, two to three hours of daily crying is considered normal. And because newborn sleep is often restless, cries can occur at night too.

The reason? Newborn sleep patterns alternate between non-rapid eye movement and rapid eye movement (REM), which is the light, active phase marked by dreams, moving in the crib and some tears. So if you hear your baby whimper in her room, she could be in that REM period.

Nighttime crying can also be pinned to a sleep regression , which is a normal setback in your baby’s regular nighttime routine. You might encounter a sleep regression around 4 months of age , at 6 months, around 8 to 10 months, and then again at 12 months (phew!).

And if you’re trying to sleep train your baby using a method like the Ferber method , tears at night are part of the deal. Sleep training can begin when your baby is between 4 and 6 months old, and it typically takes about two weeks to complete.

How to calm a crying baby

When you’re faced with nighttime wailing, you’ll want to quickly and quietly soothe your fussy baby so she can drift back to dreamland. Here are a few tips to try:

Don’t rush in. Remember, babies are restless sleepers, so whimpering and even briefly waking if she’s in REM sleep can happen. Cool your heels for a few minutes before you pop into her room, and she just might settle down on her own.

Set her straight. If she’s wedged herself in the crib corner or her leg is dangling between the slats, free her up and place her on her back in the middle of the mattress.

Stroke her tummy. Gentle reassurance by way of a belly rub and a calming voice can let her know you’re there to comfort her. Just keep this check-in short and sweet so she gets the message that it’s time to (re)hit the hay.

Try a swaddle. During the newborn to 2-month age range, a snugly wrapped, lightweight swaddle can calm your baby down and promote good sleep. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSwaddling: Is It Safe for Your Baby?See All Sources [2] Swaddle your baby safely and correctly so there are no loose ends of the blanket that could cover her face, she isn't too hot, her hips aren't too tightly wrapped, and she isn't at the stage where she's trying to roll over yet.

Dress her in a sleep sack. If swaddling isn't working out or she’s an older baby, a sleep sack, which is a one-piece outfit with snaps or a zipper, can offer the same benefits.

Check the temperature. Scan the thermostat to see that your baby’s bedroom is at a temperature of between 68 and 72 degrees Fahrenheit, which is a comfy range for good Zzzs .

When to call the doctor

If you just can’t figure out what’s causing your baby’s nighttime tears, you can always contact the pediatrician for advice. Baby docs are used to these calls, especially from new parents, and yours may want to examine your little one once you’ve described her crying pattern.

As for what’s considered excessive crying, out-of-the-ordinary tears that last for two or three hours warrant a call to the doctor.

Colic, which shows up between 2 and 3 weeks of age (later in premature infants) and commonly happens between dinnertime and midnight, is another reason to get expert help. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsColic Relief Tips for ParentsSee All Sources [3] Acid reflux, an infection or a milk allergy may also cause excessive crying. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicCrying Baby: What To Do When Your Newborn CriesSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsColic Relief Tips for ParentsSee All Sources

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicCrying Baby: What To Do When Your Newborn CriesSee All Sources

Still struggling to get your baby into a solid sleep routine? Open the What to Expect app to track your little one's sleep and see what’s typical at each stage — so you all can get some more rest.

Hang in there with the nighttime tears! In many cases, the reasons your baby is crying in her sleep are temporary, and your little one will soon be back to her usual solid slumber in no time.