Here's When Babies Can Start Sleeping With a Blanket

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

when can baby sleep with a blanket, baby girl with no blanket in crib

Wondering when your baby can finally use covers at night? Read on for the lowdown on blankets and babies at bedtime.

Some of the cutest baby shower gifts are crib-related, including sheet sets, comforters, hand-stitched quilts, and knitted afghans. And since you have these blankets and other sleep accessories waiting in the wings, you may be itching to finally put them to use in your baby’s crib .

But adding a blanket or other soft bedding too soon, whether at night or naptime, can be a danger, so the safest move is to wait until your little one is old enough to handle the blanket transition. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources [1] Here's more about blanket risks as well as when you can try one and how to keep your baby warm until you do.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources

Key Takeaways

Blankets are not considered safe for infants. Soft bedding like blankets, comforters, pillows, or toys can increase the risk of SIDS, suffocation, or entrapment. A fitted crib sheet alone is safest.

Most experts recommend waiting until at least 12 to 18 months, and ideally closer to 18 months, before using a thin blanket or lovey, as younger babies may still get tangled.

To keep your baby warm without the risks of loose bedding, use swaddles (until your little one shows signs of rolling), sleep sacks, or wearable blanket sleepers.

Is it safe for babies to sleep with blankets?

In short, no, because blankets can be a hazard in the crib. About 3,700 babies in this country die unexpectedly every year while sleeping, and the reasons are often related to sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), suffocation, entrapment, or strangulation, with blankets increasing the risk of all four. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionData and Statistics for SUID and SIDSSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionData and Statistics for SUID and SIDSSee All Sources

Because a baby can suffocate under a blanket, the safest sleep environment is a bare crib that’s completely free of comforters, bumpers, pillows, fleece, sheepskin, and stuffed toys. In fact, the only thing your baby needs at night is a fitted sheet that’s tucked in tightly on all sides. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsReduce the Risk of SIDS & SuffocationSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsReduce the Risk of SIDS & SuffocationSee All Sources

And don’t be tempted by ads for positioners, wedges, special mattresses, or other surfaces that are marketed to reduce the risk of SIDS, as they’ve not been proven to work, could potentially be dangerous and should be avoided.

When can I introduce a blanket?

There is no official age that's been deemed 100% safe to use a blanket, quilt, or comforter, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), but most medical experts feel that soft bedding poses little danger in the crib to healthy babies after 12 months of age and ideally when they're 18 months or older. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSleep-Related Infant Deaths: Updated 2022 Recommendations for Reducing Infant Deaths in the Sleep EnvironmentSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSleep-Related Infant Deaths: Updated 2022 Recommendations for Reducing Infant Deaths in the Sleep EnvironmentSee All Sources

So it's better to hold off on covering your baby with a blanket at night or during her naps until she’s at least 18 months old since she could still become tangled in it when she's younger. After 18 months, a thin blanket and a small, special lovey can be used and may even become an important part of the tuck-in routine.

Keep in mind that soft bedding is still a no-go even if you plan to place your baby on top of the blanket, rather than under it, since it could still become wrapped around her as she moves in her sleep or gets stuck in the crib corners at night.

When can I put my baby to bed swaddled in a blanket and when is it no longer safe?

Confused by the no-blanket policy since babies are often swaddled in a blanket? Don’t worry — it’s okay to swaddle a newborn at night and, in fact, this practice is recommended as a way to calm a cranky baby and promote good sleep. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSwaddling: Is it Safe for Your Baby?See All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSwaddling: Is it Safe for Your Baby?See All Sources

A properly wrapped swaddle blanket or a swaddle sleep sack can be used safely from birth until your baby starts trying to roll over (at around 3 or 4 months, but sometimes earlier). Don’t layer another blanket over a swaddled baby, as this loose bedding could cover your baby’s face and increase the risk of suffocation.

How do I keep my baby warm without a blanket?

It’s perfectly okay for a baby to sleep without a blanket, so if yours is under 12 to 18 months, you can keep your sweetie cozy by dressing her in a sleep sack or a wearable blanket sleeper. These one-piece outfits come with snaps, a zipper, or an elasticized gather at the bottom and are made to cover your little one’s body, but not her head. "My daughter LOVED her sleep sack and wore one until she moved out of her crib when she was 3 1/2," says What to Expect Community user bk50220.

Keep in mind, however, that if your house or your baby’s room runs very warm, she may not need this extra layer. The ideal temperature for good sleep is between 68 and 72 degrees Fahrenheit in all seasons. Cranking up the thermostat and/or over-bundling your baby can cause an infant to overheat, which may increase the risk of SIDS.

If you're wondering how you'll know whether your baby is warm enough at night, try feeling the nape of her neck. Skin that’s cold to the touch means she needs another layer, and if she feels very warm or is sweating, it means she's too hot. Your own comfort is another good guide as to whether the sleepwear your baby’s sporting is the right weight. If you're chilly between the sheets, she probably is too.

Baby bedding rules may seem complex at first, but the guidelines are designed with safety in mind. If your child is old enough for a blanket, it’s fine to add one or simply skip it in favor of a sleep sack. Either way, she’ll be warm all night long.

Have more questions about your baby's sleep? Open the What to Expect app to track your little one's sleep and see what’s typical right now — so you all can get some more rest.