Here Are the Vaccines You Need Before and During Pregnancy

Updated with latest expert recommendations.

pregnanct woman getting vaccine

For your health — and that of your baby — know which vaccinations you might need before and during pregnancy and which ones you should wait to get until after the baby arrives.

If you’re trying to conceive or are already pregnant, you probably know that you need to stay on top of your prenatal checkups and fit in plenty of healthy foods, exercise, and sleep. But have you talked to your doctor about the vaccines you need to get before and during pregnancy?

You definitely should, and here's why: Pregnancy weakens the immune system to support your growing baby, whom your body considers a foreigner, which means that you're at greater risk of catching something and getting sicker.

Plus, some vaccine-preventable diseases, like whooping cough , can be very dangerous for newborn babies. And if you’re considered high-risk or are traveling outside the U.S., you may need even more vaccines. Other shots, however, are considered unsuitable and sometimes unsafe for pregnancy.

How can you keep all this info straight? Start by talking to your doctor. Then check out this guide to the vaccines you and your family should get before and during your pregnancy — plus those you should wait to get until after you've delivered. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists2026 Maternal Immunization ScheduleSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists2026 Maternal Immunization ScheduleSee All Sources

Key Takeaways

Some vaccines are best received before pregnancy. If you're trying to conceive, make sure you're up to date on MMR, chickenpox, and HPV vaccines, since these aren't recommended during pregnancy.

Vaccines help protect both you and your baby. During pregnancy, vaccines like the flu shot, Tdap, and RSV vaccine can help shield you from serious illness while passing protective antibodies to your little one before birth.

Protection is a team effort. Encourage partners, grandparents, caregivers, and other close contacts to stay current on their Tdap, flu, and COVID vaccines to help create a protective cocoon around your newborn.

Vaccines to get before pregnancy

Chickenpox (Varicella)

Did you escape chickenpox as a child? Having avoided the calamine-soaked misery of this childhood illness may have seemed like a lucky break at the time, but now it means that you might be missing important immunity.

Having chickenpox as an adult can be quite serious. And if you’re pregnant, it’s not only uncomfortable, it could also spell trouble for your growing baby-to-be. Before you become pregnant, get checked by your doctor to see if you need the varicella vaccine — women who are already pregnant should not get it.

If bloodwork reveals that you’re not immune to chickenpox, the vaccine helps keep the pox at bay. If you have not had two doses of the varicella vaccine before, you’ll need two doses, four to eight weeks apart. Then, if you can, hold off on conceiving until a month after your second dose.

Measles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR)

In addition to all three of these being very uncomfortable illnesses, they can cause complications for pregnant women and their babies:

Rubella — aka German measles — can cause miscarriage and birth defects.

Mumps increases miscarriage risk.

Measles increases the odds of preterm birth or a low-birth-weight baby.

You can't get the MMR vaccine during pregnancy , so it's important to make sure you're protected before you get pregnant.

If your vaccination records show that you got an MMR shot when you were younger, you're considered protected for life and don’t ever need a booster dose. However, if you weren’t immunized according to the childhood schedule, you should get vaccinated and then wait at least a month before trying to conceive.

Not sure whether you received the MMR vaccination and can’t find your vaccination records? Get the shots now, before you conceive — even if you were vaccinated, it’s totally safe to get an additional dose.

Hepatitis B

If you’re at high risk for this viral infection that attacks the liver — for example, you’re a health care worker who comes into contact with infected people’s blood and bodily fluids, which is how hepatitis B is transmitted, or you’ve had more than one sex partner in the past six months — then you’d be wise to make sure you’re up-to-date on the HepB vaccine .

Hepatitis B can be passed on to an unborn baby, and it can lead to liver failure and liver cancer. The vaccine comes in a series of three shots, but you don’t need to finish all three doses before conceiving. It’s safe to continue with the series during pregnancy.

HPV

The human papillomavirus (HPV) is responsible for most cervical cancers and genital warts. Right now, two doses of the HPV vaccine are recommended for kids ages 11 to 12, though it can be given to children as young as age 9. A third dose may be needed if kids aren't vaccinated until they're older.

It's also recommended for young adults up to age 27 for women and up to age 22 for men who haven't previously been vaccinated as children. Adults ages 27 to 45 can talk to their doctors to see if they, too, should get the vaccine if they haven't already.

The HPV vaccine is not recommended during pregnancy and should be delayed until after baby is born if you haven't been vaccinated and are 26 or younger.

But don't worry too much if you had one dose in the series before you knew you were pregnant. Recent studies have shown no conclusive evidence that it can harm an unborn baby, even in early pregnancy. Just refrain from getting any more doses until after you give birth once you know for sure that you're expecting. And make sure to tell your doctor if he or she doesn't already know.

Want more tips and info about staying healthy before and during pregnancy? Find it in the What to Expect app .

Vaccines during pregnancy

Influenza (the flu shot)

The flu shot helps prevent some strains of the flu , which can be very unpleasant for adults and much more serious (even deadly) for pregnant women, babies, small children, the elderly, and anyone with a chronic medical condition or compromised immune system.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends that all pregnant women get the flu shot if they’re pregnant during the cold and flu season, preferably toward the beginning of the season, or ideally by late October. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsThe Flu Vaccine and PregnancySee All Sources [2] The flu season can last from October through April or even May.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsThe Flu Vaccine and PregnancySee All Sources

Just avoid the nasal spray, which contains live flu viruses. The flu shot will protect pregnant women and their babies once they're born up to 6 months old, when they can get their own flu vaccine.

Got vaccinated last year? You should still get a new shot this — and every — year. Immunity wanes with time, and the flu shot is reformulated every year to incorporate whichever strains doctors think will be most prevalent.

Also be sure to get vaccinated if you're planning to get pregnant or are caring for a small child, and make sure your little one gets vaccinated too. If you don't get the flu shot while you're pregnant, it's recommended that you get it just after you have your baby while you're still in the hospital.

Tetanus, Diphtheria, and Pertussis (Tdap)

The Tdap shot protects you from three illnesses:

Tetanus is an infection caused by bacteria that can enter the body through a break in the skin. A toxin made by these bacteria causes nervous-system symptoms such as muscle spasms and seizures.

Diphtheria is spread through coughing and sneezing, and causes a thick coating to form on the back of the throat, making it hard to breathe.

Pertussis (aka whooping cough) is also spread through coughing and sneezing, and causes severe respiratory problems.

All women should get the Tdap shot between 27 and 36 weeks of each pregnancy, preferably in the first few weeks of that window. That said, if you're at risk for whooping cough due to an outbreak in your community, or if you get a deep cut in your skin and are due for your tetanus booster, the vaccine is also safe to get earlier in pregnancy.

When you get the Tdap vaccine during pregnancy, you pass on some immunity to help protect your newborn from whooping cough before he’s old enough to get the DTaP vaccine for children , the first dose of which he’ll get when he’s 2 months old. And that’s important, since whooping cough is highly contagious and can be deadly for young babies, whose immune systems are still developing.

COVID-19

Leading experts including ACOG and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM) recommend that pregnant women get the COVID-19 vaccine. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsCOVID-19 Vaccination Considerations for Obstetric%u2013Gynecologic CareSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsCOVID-19 Vaccination Considerations for Obstetric%u2013Gynecologic CareSee All Sources

The vaccine is now an annual shot targeting the strains predicted to be dominant during the current season. Experts say that everyone ages 6 months and older can (and should) get it each year. Talk to your doctor if you have questions.

A review of dozens of studies involving more than 17 million women worldwide found that vaccination is safe and does not increase the risk of miscarriage or other complications.

Pregnant women have a higher risk of severe illness and hospitalization from COVID-19. The vaccine offers protection against serious illness and can also protect babies after birth until they're old enough to get vaccinated themselves.

To figure out where to get the COVID vaccine, visit Vaccines.gov , speak to your practitioner, or check the website of your local pharmacy.

RSV

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a common respiratory illness that can be very serious for young babies. But there's an RSV vaccine you can take when you're pregnant that will not only protect you but also your baby once she’s born.

ACOG recommends getting the RSV vaccine if you're between weeks 32 and 36 pregnant during RSV season (September through January).

Other vaccines you may need during pregnancy

You may also want to talk to your doctor about getting these vaccines during pregnancy if you meet particular risk factors, such as having a chronic illness or working or traveling in places where you may be exposed to the disease:

Pneumococcal vaccines : These vaccines protect people who are at risk from the infections caused by this bacteria — i.e., cigarette smokers; those with chronic heart, lung, liver, or kidney disease; asthma sufferers; and those with compromised immune systems, including pneumonia, meningitis, and ear infection.

Hepatitis A vaccine : The hepatitis A virus, which is usually transmitted through food that has been contaminated with an infected person's feces, causes an inflammation of the liver. If you have chronic liver disease, take medication with clotting factor agents, or work in a lab where you’d be exposed to the hepatitis A virus, you may need this vaccination. Your doctor may also decide to give you the shot if you’re traveling to a place where there’s an increased risk of contracting the disease, including Mexico, Eastern Europe, and Central or South America.

Hepatitis B vaccine : The hepatitis B virus also causes liver disease and is transmitted through sexual contact, body fluids, or shared hypodermic needles, and it can be present in the body for many years without showing any symptoms. If you’re at high risk of hepatitis B — for example, you're a health care worker, dialysis patient, have had sex with more than one partner in the last six months, have diabetes and are younger than 50, or are traveling to a place where hep B is prevalent, including many countries in Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and Western Europe — you should get vaccinated during pregnancy .

Meningococcal vaccines: Meningococcus bacterial infection can result in severe meningitis (infection of the membranes covering the brain) and can progress extremely rapidly, sometimes causing death in 24 to 48 hours. The good news is the disease is not common in the U.S., but you may need to get a meningococcal vaccine if you are at increased risk of contracting the disease.

Vaccines to avoid during pregnancy

There are several vaccines you definitely shouldn’t get during pregnancy. While in some cases there has been no definitive evidence of problems linked to these vaccines, more research needs to be done to prove they’re safe for you and your baby — which is why doctors recommend avoiding the following vaccines while you’re pregnant.

Chickenpox (Varicella)

If you’re not immunized against the chickenpox virus, you should get this vaccine before you conceive. Because the vaccine contains a live virus, it’s not safe for women who are already pregnant. Talk to your doctor before you become pregnant if you never had chickenpox as a child or were never vaccinated as a child.

If you’re exposed to the varicella virus while you’re pregnant — say, your nephew’s preschool class has an outbreak — and haven’t received the vaccine, talk to your doctor about getting the varicella-zoster immune globulin, which can offer you temporary immunity and prevent complications should you come down with a case of the pox.

MMR

Like varicella, the MMR vaccine (which stands for measles, mumps and rubella) contains live viruses, so it is not safe for women who are already pregnant. If possible, try to wait four weeks between receiving the vaccine and becoming pregnant.

Shingles (Zoster)

This shot protects people from shingles — which, like chickenpox, is caused by the varicella zoster virus. It’s most common in those older than 50 and in people with certain medical issues.

There isn’t much research on the effects of the vaccine on pregnant women, so doctors advise you get the shot — if it’s recommended for you before age 50 — after you deliver.

Some vaccines for travel

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says you should not receive the following vaccines since not enough studies have been done on pregnant women to determine whether they're safe for baby:

BCG (for tuberculosis)

Japanese encephalitis

Typhoid

Do keep in mind, however, that these vaccines are safe if you’re breastfeeding — and, if you get these shots postpartum, you’ll pass some temporary immunity on to your baby through your breast milk.

Vaccines your partner and family should get

Anyone who takes care of or spends a lot of time with your baby — including grandparents, siblings, caregivers, babysitters, and day care providers — should be up-to-date on their shots too.

They should all get a flu shot, since the virus is so prevalent and the formulation changes every year. And also make sure they are up-to-date on their Tdap or DTaP vaccines, since pertussis is highly contagious, and statistics show that most babies get whooping cough from a family member.

Experts also recommend that all those 6 months and older get the annual COVID-19 vaccine that targets the most dominant strains that season.

"We asked all of our family members that will be around the baby to be up to date on flu, COVID, and Tdap," says What to Expect Community parent Callie72. "The thing is, many adults with pertussis have minimal symptoms, but it is very likely to hospitalize your baby. If they don't want to get them, that's their choice. It's also our choice to keep them away from our baby until she is fully vaccinated and bigger."