I Got the Babylist Welcome Box — Here’s What’s Inside the $8.95 Box Everyone Talks About

2025 Babylist Welcome Box

Curious about the Babylist Welcome Box (a.k.a. Hello Baby Box)? Here’s what was inside my 2026 box — from full-size gear to sample essentials.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Babylist Welcome Box Quick Review

The Babylist Welcome Box is filled with a sweet mix of baby gear — and the contents change regularly, so it’s always a bit of a surprise.

As of August 2025, you’ll find sample-sized goodies from Huggies, Honest Company, and Tubby Todd.

Feeding time is covered, too, with gear from Dr. Brown’s, Momcozy, and Lansinoh.

There’s also baby clothing from Kyte and Primary, plus coupons to help you save on more must-haves.

The small shipping fee of $8.95 is worth it for a box valued at $100 — and possibly more once you count the coupons.

When I was pregnant with my first baby, I rushed into creating a baby registry without knowing all the best-kept registry hacks . Now, as a soon-to-be mom of two, I’m older, wiser, and far more strategic — which is why signing up for a Babylist registry (and snagging their famous Welcome Box ) was at the top of my to-do list.

Over the years, friends have raved about the variety of trusted brands tucked inside — think Huggies, Tubby Todd, Dr. Brown’s, and more. Caroline Picard , What to Expect’s deputy editor and new mom, puts it best:

“Calling the Babylist Welcome Box ‘generous’ feels like an understatement,” says Caroline. “One of the highlights for me was the selection of diapers, wipes, and butt cream samples. While they’re not big-ticket items, the cost of experimenting with different brands adds up."

And she’s right — for just $8.95 in shipping, you get over $100 worth of baby gear. That’s money saved and decision-making made easier (and yes, maybe even a little sanity preserved).

Having a chance to test several without committing to full-size purchases felt like a real win.

Caroline Picard, What to Expect Deputy Editor and mom of one

What’s Inside the Babylist Welcome Box 2026

The 2026 Babylist Welcome Box proves that good things really do come in small packages. My spring box included baby clothing, feeding gear, postpartum treats, and a surprising number of coupons for free or discounted goodies.

The 2026 Babylist Welcome Box: Huggies Skin Essential Diapers and Primary Bodysuit

The 2026 Babylist Welcome Box is well-stocked with samples from beloved brands.

According to Babylist (and the many What to Expect Community threads I’ve scrolled through), the box’s contents change about twice a year. So what your sister-in-law got last fall might not be what you find inside yours this spring — but the variety and quality stay consistent.

Here’s what was inside my spring 2026 Babylist Welcome Box:

Full-size Products:

The 2026 Babylist Welcome Box: On the left, a white Kyte bodysuit with porcupines. On the right, a Primary body suit that's white with suns and rainbows.

One of my favorite items in the 2026 Babylist Welcome Box: Soft bodysuits from Kyte Baby and Primary.

Primary “Hello Sunshine” bodysuit (3-6 months)

Kyte Baby bodysuit (0-3 months)

Dr. Brown’s Natural Flow Anti-Colic Options+ Narrow Baby Bottle (4 oz.)

Philips Avent Natural Baby Bottle (4 oz.)

Suavinex Pacifier (0-6 months)

Bibs Pacifier (0-6 months)

Beaufort Bonnet Company burp cloth

Stonyfield Organic bib

Sample-size Products:

The 2026 Babylist Welcome Box: Huggies Skin essentials diapers, Honest company wipes, waterwipes, ubbi baby wipes, health baby diapers, triple paste

Babylist stocks their welcome box with diapering samples — perfect for traveling or testing before investing in full-size products.

WaterWipes (10-count)

Honest Clean Conscious Wipes (10-count)

Ubbi Baby Wipes (25-count)

Healthy Baby Diapers, Size 1 (2-count)

Huggies Skin Essentials Diapers, Size 1 (3-count)

Triple Paste Diaper Cream (two 0.21 oz. packs)

Tubby Todd All Over Ointment (0.17 oz.)

Noodle & Boo Newborn 2-in-1 Hair and Body Wash (0.5 oz.)

Noodle & Boo Newborn Super Soft Lotion (0.5 oz.)

Palmer's Cocoa Butter Formula Skin Therapy Oil (0.68 oz.)

Momcozy Breastmilk Storage Bags (7-count)

Lansinoh Breastmilk Storage Bags (3-count)

Lansinoh Nursing Pads (2-count)

Lansinoh Nipple Balm (0.05 oz.)

Coupons and Freebies:

20% off Primary coupon

20% off Kyte Baby sleep bag

Free Colored Organics bodysuit

Free Little Unicorn swaddle

Free Bobbie formula (one can)

Free Tinybeans+ subscription (one month)

Free TinyBeans photo book

10 free Shutterfly birth announcements

It’s a low-cost way to try trusted brands without fully committing to products that may not work for your baby.

How to Get the Babylist Welcome Box

Start a Babylist registry .

Add at least 40% of items from the Babylist registry checklist.

Add three items from other stores.

Make a $30 purchase from the Babylist Shop (or wait for a gift-giver to do it).

Verify your address and pay $8.95 for shipping.

Even though I already had a lot from my first pregnancy, meeting the criteria was easier than expected. Exclusive Babylist bundles like the Bottle Box and Pacifier Box made it simple to fill in gaps.

Caroline, on the other hand, used Babylist as her primary registry and said meeting the criteria was a breeze.

How Does Babylist Compare to Other Registry Welcome Boxes?

Compared to the Amazon Welcome Box, the Babylist Welcome Box comes out ahead in both quantity and brand quality. Caroline especially appreciated the inclusion of products for moms — something other boxes sometimes skip.

Yes, the $8.95 shipping fee is a minor downside, especially since some registry welcome boxes are free. But with a retail value of $100, it’s an easy decision for me.

Is the Babylist Welcome Box Worth It?

Between the generous mix of full-size products, the variety of sample-size items , and the stack of coupons for even more freebies, the Babylist Welcome Box is worth far more than the small shipping fee.

The 2026 Babylist Welcome Box

In short: The Babylist Welcome Box contains $100-worth of baby items that you'll be happy to have on hand.

It’s a low-cost way to try trusted brands without fully committing — and as any parent knows, what works for one baby might not work for the next. Even though I know which products Olivia liked, Baby #2 could have entirely different preferences. Consider this box your test-drive for baby gear, with plenty of perks along the way.

In short: Add the Babylist Welcome Box to your registry checklist — your budget (and your curiosity) will thank you.

Babylist Welcome Box FAQ

Can international users receive the box?

Unfortunately, the Babylist Welcome Box is only available to U.S. residents At this time, it can’t be shipped internationally or to APO (Army Post Office), FPO (Fleet Post Office), or DPO (Diplomatic Post Office) addresses.

What brands are typically included in the Babylist Welcome Box?

Much like the products themselves, the brands featured in the Babylist Welcome Box change regularly. Based on my own experience — and plenty of conversations with other moms-to-be — some of the most popular brands included in the Babylist Welcome Box include:

Aquaphor

Beaufort Bonnet Company

Desitin

Dr. Brown’s

Healthy Baby

Honest Company

Huggies

Kyte Baby

Lansinoh

Lovevery

Momcozy

monica + andy

Motif

Nanobébé

Palmer's

Pampers

Philips Avent

Primary

Triple Paste

Tubby Todd

WaterWipes

Are the products in the Babylist Welcome Box sized for newborns only?

The clothing in the Babylist Welcome Box is usually sized for newborns or 0 to 3 months. Non-clothing items can often be used well into your baby’s first six months — and in some cases, even longer.

Can someone trigger the $30 Babylist Welcome Box purchase on my behalf?

Yes! If someone buys a gift of $30 or more from your Babylist registry, it counts toward the purchase requirement for the Babylist Welcome Box. But if you’re as excited (and impatient) as I was, you can always make the purchase yourself and get your box on the way sooner.

Your Next Read

Free Baby Samples? Yes, Please! How to Score Diapers, Formula and More By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Target Baby Registry Review Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Baby Registry Checklist: Exactly What to Put on a Baby Registry Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How Much Does It Cost to Have a Baby? Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

14 Ways to Save Money on Diapers Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Overwhelmed by Baby Gear? Here's What You Really Need (and What You Don't) Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Delivering at a Birth Center Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window