Hernia During Pregnancy

Updates throughout to copy, sourcing and formatting, plus a new medical review for accuracy.

pregnant woman cradling belly with partner holding her hand, hernia during pregnancy

Could your newly-outie belly button signal a hernia? Here's what you need to know about umbilical hernias and other types that can develop during pregnancy.

As your baby bump grows, it’s common for your innie belly button to pop out and become an outie, like a new little reminder of your pregnancy. But rarely, that popping navel — during pregnancy, or after childbirth — can signal a hernia.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

A hernia happens when part of an internal organ pushes through a small opening, soft spot, or tear in the muscles or tissue that hold those organs in place. During pregnancy, as your tummy grows and stretches, the pressure on the abdominal wall increases. Rarely, that extra strain can cause a hernia to develop.

There are different types of hernias that can affect pregnant women, but umbilical hernias are the most common. These occur right at your belly button, when your intestines bulge through the front of the umbilical wall.

There are different types of hernias that can affect pregnant women, but umbilical hernias are the most common. These

Most hernias are present at birth, but you may not notice it's there until many years later, if it expands during pregnancy. Moms-to-be might be more prone to getting a hernia if they're expecting multiples, have had prior pregnancies, or had a previous hernia that was repaired.

Most hernias aren’t cause for concern. But you should let your health care practitioner know if you have any new bulges or aches in your abdomen throughout pregnancy and in the days after you have your baby.

What is a hernia?

A hernia happens when part of an internal organ pushes through a small opening, soft spot, or tear in the muscles or tissue that hold those organs in place.

A hernia, which usually surfaces in the abdominal or groin area, can look like a little bump or bulge that may disappear and reappear as you switch positions. There may be no other symptoms if you're dealing with a hernia, or it can be accompanied by discomfort and even pain.[1]#1

Some people have a small opening in the fascial layer (made up of connective tissues) of their abdomen; pregnancy can cause that to develop into a hernia, explains Shannon Smith , M.D., a board-certified OB/GYN and partner at Brigham Faulkner OB/GYN Associates in Boston, Massachusetts.

"As pregnancy stretches your abdomen, it stretches your fascial layer as well — which will enlarge and weaken anything that is already there," says Dr. Smith, who is also a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "So a tiny opening that was never a problem before suddenly is stretched, and after delivery, you have a hernia."

Want to understand more about all the ways pregnancy transforms your body? The What to Expect app has week-by-week updates tailored to you and your little one.

Hernias during pregnancy are rare, and most aren’t cause for concern. But it’s important to let your practitioner know if you have any new bulges or aches in the stomach or groin area at any point during pregnancy or postpartum.

What is an umbilical hernia?

There are a few different types of hernias that can crop up when you’re expecting. Umbilical hernias are the most common, though still rare overall — they affect around .08% of pregnant women, according to one large recent retrospective study .[2]#2

Umbilical hernias occur right at your belly button, when your intestines bulge through the front of the umbilical wall.

There are other kinds of hernias that can affect pregnant women and new moms. Paraumbilical hernias occur near — but not at — your naval. And inguinal hernias are less common, and occur where your groin muscle is weakened by the pressure from your uterus, resulting in tissue bulging through.

What causes a hernia during pregnancy?

Most hernias are congenital, meaning they’re present at birth. You may simply not notice a hernia until it expands during pregnancy, so anyone can develop one. However, certain factors might make a mom-to-be more prone to getting one, including if you’re:

Expecting more than one baby

Have had prior pregnancies, especially those ending in long labors

Have had a previous hernia that was repaired

Unfortunately, there's not a lot of good research about what you can do to prevent hernias from developing during pregnancy, Dr. Smith says. But maintaining a healthy pregnancy weight and having good core strength may be helpful, she says.

It's also important to try to minimize activities that might trigger or worsen a hernia (such as a lot of very heavy lifting or intense straining to pass bowel movements).

Signs of a hernia during pregnancy

hernia during pregnancy

If you have a hernia, you’ll probably notice a soft lump around your belly button, or sometimes in your groin area. It might be dull and achy, and hurt more when you’re active, cough, sneeze, or bend over.

"I have a little bulge near my belly button, and my doctor confirmed it’s an umbilical hernia," says What to Expect Community user nina-t91. "Thankfully, I don’t have any pain."

As long as your hernia isn’t causing you severe pain or protruding out too far, it will probably repair itself after you have your baby. There are no risks to you or your baby in just leaving the hernia be, which is why most experts recommend a “watchful waiting” approach when treating uncomplicated hernias.[3]#3

If it starts causing you excruciating pain, or you notice it sticking out further than it has in the past, it may be a sign that the hernia has become “strangulated,” or trapped in your abdominal wall. In that case, you should reach out to your provider right away.

Other signs can include severe abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. If left untreated, these hernias can lose blood supply, damaging your intestines, so you may require more aggressive treatment or surgery.

As pregnancy stretches your...

What happens during labor if you have a hernia?

Most women with hernias can have a normal, healthy vaginal delivery . If you have a small hernia, your practitioner will still likely recommend that you labor as you would otherwise.

But in some cases — if you’ve had a previous C-section or have a hernia that’s particularly large or low in your abdomen, for example — your doctor may suggest a C-section to deliver your baby.

Rarely, a hernia can appear during or immediately after labor, rather than while your belly is growing throughout pregnancy. That’s because it takes lots of abdominal pressure to push a baby out, which can occasionally cause a hernia.

What are the red flags of a hernia during pregnancy?

A hernia during pregnancy or labor won’t directly hurt your baby, who's cozied up inside your uterus, so a small hole in your abdominal wall has no effect on her. Even if you feel sore, your baby can’t tell!

But if the condition is affecting your ability to eat, talk to your health care provider about how to make sure you’re getting the proper nutrition , as your baby needs lots of nutrients to grow.

And if you have any of the following symptoms, make an appointment with your OB/GYN to make sure your hernia hasn’t blocked your intestines or become strangulated:

Increased pain at the hernia site that does not resolve with rest.

A hernia bulge that protrudes, can’t be pushed back in, and is painful.

Nausea and vomiting at the same time as a painful hernia bulge that’s red and tender to the touch.

How are hernias treated during pregnancy?

In most cases, your practitioner will recommend “watchful waiting,” or keeping an eye on your hernia without any treatment. If the bulge bothers you, you can try wearing a belly band to hold it in, or gently massaging it back in towards your stomach.

After you have your baby, your doctor will give you some exercises to help your abdominal muscles heal from the strain of pregnancy. If your hernia still isn't repaired after you do those for the recommended amount of time, surgery may be considered a few months or more postpartum.

"I had a very small umbilical hernia that I had repaired when I was done having kids," says What to Expect Community user KML2013. "Recovery wasn’t too bad."

Surgery during pregnancy is only recommended if your hernia becomes strangulated and puts you at risk. However, if you’re having a planned C-section and have a large hernia, some practitioners may suggest getting it repaired surgically during your C-section.

If you're expecting and do develop a hernia, try not to stress about it too much. It won't hurt your baby, and the risks to you are usually minimal. Just keep in regular contact with your doctor regularly about your symptoms, and chances are good you'll have a healthy pregnancy and delivery.