High Blood Pressure During Pregnancy

Updates throughout to information, guidelines, practices, sources, and formatting, and new medical review.

hypertension during pregnancy

Do women with chronic high blood pressure go on to have healthy pregnancies and babies? Here's a toolkit for how to keep your blood pressure in check and avoid complications.

If you’ve lived with chronic high blood pressure, or hypertension, for a long time, you know you need to watch your blood pressure carefully — and have it tracked by your doctor. So it will probably come as no surprise that it will be monitored even more carefully now that you’re pregnant.

What is chronic high blood pressure?

Chronic hypertension is high blood pressure that was present before you became pregnant or that appears during the first 20 weeks of pregnancy. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionHigh Blood Pressure During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionHigh Blood Pressure During PregnancySee All Sources

Chronic high blood pressure is different from gestational or pregnancy-induced hypertension , which occurs in the second half of pregnancy.

If you have high blood pressure that was present before pregnancy, you’ll be putting in more time at the doctor’s office and putting more effort into following doctor’s orders — but all for a very good cause.

Although many women with chronic hypertension do well during pregnancy, the condition means your pregnancy will be considered high-risk for certain complications. Yet with well-controlled blood pressure, and carefully monitored self-care and medical care, you’re likely to have a safe pregnancy and a healthy baby.

Blood pressure criteria for hypertension had been the same in pregnant and nonpregnant people until 2017, when the American College of Cardiology (ACC) and the American Heart Association (AHA) modified the traditional criteria for diagnosing hypertension in adults who aren’t expecting to better identify long-term cardiovascular risk. Under the new criteria, in adults who aren’t pregnant:

Elevated blood pressure: Systolic blood pressure 120 to 129 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure of less than 80 mmHg.

Stage 1 hypertension: Systolic blood pressure 130 to 139 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure 80 to 89 mmHg.

Stage 2 hypertension: Systolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 140 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure greater than or equal to 90 mmHg.

Because of the new criteria, the number of reproductive-age women in the United States diagnosed with chronic high blood pressure is expected to double, but the implications for pregnancy remain unclear.

Emerging evidence suggests that women with stage 1 hypertension may be at increased risk of developing preeclampsia and gestational diabetes compared to women with normal blood pressure (i.e. less than 120 mmHg systolic and less than 80 mmHg diastolic) at the first trimester visit.

What risks are there to a pregnancy with high blood pressure?

Unmanaged or even well controlled chronic high blood pressure can put your pregnancy at higher risk of certain complications.

Some may include a small-for-gestational-age baby (because of decreased blood flow through the placenta), premature birth , breathing problems before or during labor, placental abruption and preeclampsia.

If your condition is well-managed, these risks can be minimized.

Managing chronic hypertension during pregnancy

Good nutrition may be helpful in managing high blood pressure during pregnancy. Foods that are rich in potassium, for example — such as beets, prunes and sweet potatoes — help you lose sodium through urine, and work to keep your blood pressure in check. The more potassium you eat the more sodium you lose.

Potassium also helps to ease tension in your blood vessel walls, which can further lower blood pressure. Talk with your doctor or a dietician about how nutrition can help you manage your hypertension.

Here are other ways to lower the risks associated with chronic high blood pressure during pregnancy:

Medical teamwork. The practitioner who supervises your pregnancy should have plenty of experience caring for moms-to-be with chronic hypertension and be joined on your pregnancy care team by the doctor who has been in charge of your hypertension. A consultation with a maternal fetal medicine specialist prior to conception can also help to gain medical clearance for a planned pregnancy and determine your best care plan while pregnant. You may also receive a referral to a cardiologist who will check your heart function, ensure safe medications are being used and to establish your baseline maternal health prior to pregnancy.

Close medical monitoring. Your practitioner will probably schedule more frequent visits for you than for other expectant mothers and may order many more tests — but, again, that’s time well-spent. Since having chronic hypertension slightly increases your risk of developing pregnancy conditions like preeclampsia, you’ll be monitored closely.

Relaxation. Relaxation exercises like meditation are soothing for every expectant mom, but particularly for those with hypertension. Research has shown that meditation and yoga can actually lower blood pressure. Consider using guided meditation or even taking a yoga class, or watching free YouTube videos specifically for pregnancy.

Other alternative approaches. Try any complementary or alternative techniques recommended by your practitioner, which might include biofeedback , acupuncture or massage . Research has found acupuncture reduces blood pressure through various pathways in the body, including acupoints, sensory and motor neurons and neurotransmitters.

Exercise . Being physically active can help lower your stress levels, which in turn can lower blood pressure. But it's very important to talk to your doctor before you start exercising. Not all pregnant women (including some of those with poorly controlled chronic hypertension) should exercise, so make sure you discuss an appropriate regimen for your specific situation with your doctor before doing anything.

Blood pressure monitoring. You may be asked to keep track of your own blood pressure at home. Take it when you’re most rested and relaxed. The American Heart Association includes additional easy-to-follow instructions for how to take your blood pressure at home, including how to sit and when to take readings. Trusted SourceAmerican Heart AssociationMonitoring Your Blood Pressure at HomeSee All Sources [2]

Good diet . Eating a healthy pregnancy diet is a good start, but you may need to modify it with the help of your practitioner to fit your needs. Eating plenty of fruits and vegetables, dairy products, healthy fats (like omega-3 fatty acids), and whole grains, in addition to potassium, may be especially helpful in keeping your blood pressure down.

Healthy weight gain. Since being overweight or obese is related to an increase in blood pressure, try to stay within the weight gain guidelines your practitioner recommends. Keep your weight gain steady and on track throughout your nine months. Read up on general pregnancy weight recommendations, but be sure to follow the specific recommendations set out for you by your practitioner.

Adequate fluids. Remember to stay well-hydrated , which should help relieve any mild swelling of your feet and ankles . In most cases, a diuretic (a drug that draws fluid from the body and is sometimes used in the treatment of hypertension) is not recommended during pregnancy. Though it varies based on your body type and size, as well as how active you are, a good rule of thumb is somewhere between eight and 12 8-ounce glasses of water a day.

Prescribed medication. Whether your medications will be changed or not during pregnancy will depend on what you’ve been taking. While some medications like ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), and renin inhibitors are not considered safe for expectant moms, others are. Your doctor will prescribe one that’s pregnancy-approved. You’ll also need to be extra mindful of avoiding medications (including over-the-counter ones) that are contraindicated for those with hypertension, so talk to your doctor about what to steer clear of. Looking ahead to breastfeeding? There are blood pressure meds that are completely compatible with lactation too.

When should you treat high blood pressure during pregnancy?

Research suggests that neither you nor your developing baby appears to be at immediate risk from mild hypertension during pregnancy. However, some findings have shown that pregnancy-safe therapy does decrease the incidence of severe hypertension.

Traditionally, only severe chronic hypertension (blood pressure greater than or or equal to 160/110 mmHg) has been treated in pregnancy because of safety concerns for baby and lack of evidence of maternal benefit.

Based on research findings, however, doctors now recommend antihypertensive treatment for pregnant patients with chronic hypertension to keep BP less than 140/90 mmHg.

By carefully monitoring your blood pressure, eating a diet rich in potassium and other nutrients, drinking plenty of water, and practicing relaxation techniques, you’ll be on the road to the greatest reward of all: a healthy pregnancy and baby.