Homemade vs. Store-Bought Baby Food

jarred vs. homemade baby food

Does homemade baby food offer any advantages over the jarred varieties? Here’s what parents should know.

Starting solids is an exciting time for both parents and baby alike. But figuring out what type of baby food to feed your little one can be equally intimidating.

If you're introducing solids in the form of purées, you may be wondering: Is the best option a store-bought jar or pouch, or a homemade purée whipped up right in your kitchen?

Here’s what parents need to know about baby food — plus whether one option is any healthier than the other.

Is store-bought or homemade baby food healthier?

Rest assured, both jarred and homemade baby food can be perfectly healthy options to give your little one. That’s because when it comes to baby food, what you’re serving is often more important than what type of packaging it comes in. (Homemade chocolate chip cookies, for example, aren’t necessarily any healthier than the ones that come in a box.)

These days, many jarred baby foods are made with natural and organic products, and often contain minimal ingredients. A jar of bananas and blueberries, for instance, is likely to be made with just bananas and blueberries — and maybe a little lemon juice for flavor.

Of course, if you want to buy local ingredients or prefer to make your own baby food (really, it can be fun!), that’s a great option, too. Making your own baby food allows you to invent new flavor combinations and introduce your little one to a wider variety of foods than what’s found in store-bought jars of baby food. Dragon fruit purée, anyone?

Pros and cons of store-bought and homemade baby food

Both jarred and homemade foods come with some benefits and drawbacks. Here are a few things to keep in mind:

Pros of homemade baby food

You can save money. Baby purées can be pricey — it’s far cheaper to make your own versions of those same food combinations at home.

You know where the ingredients come from. Jarred baby foods will list their ingredients on the label, but you may prefer to buy locally or even prepare vegetables from your own garden.

Your baby can eat with the family. Sure, your little one may not be able to twirl a forkful of spaghetti, but he can eat the same fruits and vegetables — like an avocado and apple purée — that his parents or older siblings are eating.

You can introduce your child to your favorite foods. Are purple sweet potato fries a family favorite? Is cabbage a must-have around the holidays? By introducing your child to ingredients that are unique to your culture and heritage at a young age, you can help ensure a life-long love of foods that have been in your family for generations.

Cons of homemade baby food

Homemade baby food can be time-consuming to make. You may not be whipping up a three-course meal, but it’s far quicker and easier to unscrew a jar of butternut squash purée than it is to make it from scratch.

It can spoil more quickly than store-bought varieties. A jar of baby food can sit unopened on the shelf for more than a year. Homemade baby food, on the other hand, is only good for a couple of days in the fridge (though it can last longer in the freezer).

You still have to worry about food safety. Children under the age of 5 can be particularly susceptible to foodborne illnesses. Wash your hands, use clean utensils and (if necessary) thoroughly cook foods such as meat, poultry and eggs.

Pros of store-bought baby food

It's convenient. It can take time to steam or cook down fruits, vegetables and meats, which is why, for many busy parents, jarred baby food is a major time-saver.

It comes in pre-made “stages.” Parents who are nervous about feeding their baby homemade food (“Is it too lumpy?”) may feel more comfortable serving jarred baby food, which usually comes in stages 1, 2 and 3 to make it easier to determine when to offer thicker textures to your little one.

It has a longer shelf-life. Unopened jars of commercial baby food can last for more than a year, so there’s no rush to eat, say, that banana mash before it goes bad.

It doesn't require you to invest in additional gear. Although it's not necessary to buy a fancy baby food maker just to whip up homemade purées, many families do find themselves purchasing new kitchen gadgets to make the process a little easier.

Cons of store-bought baby food

It can be expensive. The price of jarred baby food (not to mention the pouches, puffs and teething crackers) can add up — especially when it seems like all your little one is doing is pitching his food over the side of his high chair.

It's less environmentally-friendly. Some commercial baby food products can be recycled, but sometimes, the jars and pouches will go to a landfill.

Bottom line? There are benefits to both store-bought and homemade baby food, so choose what makes the most sense for your family.

Many parents take a hybrid approach — buying jarred food when they need convenience, and making their own versions at home when they have the time and ingredients on hand.

Do you need to worry about heavy metals in store-bought baby food?

You may have heard recent — and-not so-recent — reports about heavy metals in jarred baby food. But experts stress that store-bought baby food can still be perfectly healthy.

According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the low levels of heavy metals found in some baby foods likely pose a very small risk to your child. However, any heavy metal exposure can be harmful to the developing brain, so it's a good idea to minimize exposures from all sources of heavy metals, such as lead, arsenic and mercury, when possible. (More common hazards, for example, include lead exposure from old paint or arsenic exposure from contaminated pipes.)

While some findings do highlight the need for stricter regulations in the baby food industry, experts say that store-bought baby food is generally very safe, and the recent headlines should not scare families away from buying jarred baby food.

Serving your baby a variety of nutrient-rich foods, including fruits, vegetables, grains and lean meats, can help to lower exposures, as can limiting foods like rice cereal and teething biscuits made with rice.