Hot Days, Cool Mocktails, and a Baby Bump: What Summer Pregnancies Really Feel Like

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

a pregnant woman standing on the beach in a bikini

Maxi dresses and pool days? Great! Morning sickness and ultra-hot temperatures? Not so great.

Ah, summer: backyard barbeques, beach vacations, fresh lemonade, and ... a baby the size of a watermelon sitting on your bladder all day? While this time of year can invoke a breezy sense of freedom, being pregnant in the summer (especially if you're in the third trimester) can also be challenging, to say the least.

Pregnancy comes with a kaleidoscope of symptoms, and the heat can make many of them extra difficult. But there are also several reasons to love summer pregnancies.

That flowy, comfortable maxi dress hiding in the back of your closet? You get an all-access pass to wear it around-the-clock. On your way to doctor appointments? No need to invest in a maternity winter coat or step gingerly on icy sidewalks. Making sure to stay active and hydrated? Say “yes, please” to a dip in the pool and a refreshing summer mocktail .

And remember, you’re far from alone. Below, moms in the What to Expect Community reveal the good, the bad, and the totally relatable things that anyone who’s experienced a summer pregnancy will understand.

Key Takeaways

Heat can be a doozy. The higher the temp, the worse some pregnancy symptoms may feel, especially in the third trimester (think sweating and swelling …)

Summer clothes rock right now. There’s no need for layers — hurray! You can kick back in comfort and style with flowy maxi dresses and bathing suits.

Savor the flavor. Yup, we’re talking endless runs for milkshakes and cones as you stay hydrated and cool by the pool. Having a summer pregnancy? Lucky mama!

Summer pregnancies: The cons

"My doctor told me to avoid saunas and hot tubs . I laughed and asked if my car counted. I'm thinking I may just live in my pool, under an umbrella." — Minty_tea

"As a first-time-mom (and even now) people would always say, 'Oh, it's going to be a long, hot summer for you!' Or, 'That's terrible you'll be pregnant in the dead of summer!' Not so nice of them to give you something else to dread." — Lawn1214

“I had my daughter at the end of August during a summer that was insanely out of the ordinary hot. I was so puffy and swollen and sweaty ... just yuck." — winterbaby316

“My first was born [in September], and it was miserable! I had swollen feet for the last four months, I was hot ALL the time and you are constantly sweating. Winter pregnancy has been much easier and seems to help limit some of the end-of-pregnancy symptoms.” — cdcmommy

"Being huge and prego and SWOLLEN caused by heat and sun is not fun ... No shoes fit, even flip-flops were tight. Wedding rings are also out.” — Country_Momma26

Check out the What to Expect app for more seasonal advice and expert guidance, whether you’re having a baby in January or July.

Summer pregnancies: The pros

“Bring on the heat and sunshine! Not to mention pregnancy pool floats! Good for the pool, good for napping on your tummy!” — SAG34

“Flip-flops! It’s already getting hard to put on socks and shoes." — Goombas_mom

"Water fun [is the best]. You will soon find (if you haven't already) that being in a pool or the ocean and being buoyant is the most comfortable, weightless solution for all your aches and pains and [is] just plain relaxation. You can do this any time of year, but it is more readily available in summer." — Lawn1214

“[Being pregnant in the summer] saves space in the hospital bag [by] not having to pack winter clothing.” — cristalma21K

“This is my second August baby. I have a season pass to the water park so I can live in the lazy river being a human submarine! Ice cream is a must!” — Good-A-Neff

“I’m delighted to be pregnant in the summer again. I loved it last time! Summer maternity clothes are so much nicer than winter ones, easy to get summer shoes on and it’s not cold when you get up in the night to use the bathroom." — anon290718

What to Expect Community parent emmarrap loved her summer pregnancy wardrobe. “I was in a bikini or a sun dress 95% of the time and it didn’t matter if something didn’t fit because it was so hot I could have as much skin out as I wanted.”

“For all the teachers, [it’s great] spending the last two months on vacation and then starting maternity leave just as the school year is starting!” — VTbabyMJW

“My first was a summer pregnancy, and yes to the maxi dresses and flip-flops! Even better, sitting in the shade on a warm day with my swollen feet in the kiddie pool. All while eating frozen Thin Mints and homemade slushies." — Tandabat

Updates history

December 10, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Why You're So Sweaty During Pregnancy — and How to Cool Off Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Is It Pregnancy Fatigue or Heat Exhaustion? How to Tell the Difference Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Saying “I Do” While Expecting: Having a Comfortable Wedding When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Moms Are Sharing Their Craziest Pregnancy Symptoms, and Some of Them Are Truly Wild Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Why Swimming is the ‘Secret Weapon’ for a Smoother Labor Experience Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Is It Safe to Use Hot Tubs and Saunas During Pregnancy? Here's the Deal Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

10 Things I Wish Someone Had Told Me About the Third Trimester of Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

8 Pregnancy Sex Challenges — and How to Fix Them Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Laughing, Crying, Cleaning the Window Sills? 11 Pregnancy Emotions You May Have When You're Expecting Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Let’s Get Real: You Can Be Grateful for Your Baby and Still Not Love Being Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Why You're More Likely to Get Sunburned During Pregnancy (and How to Prevent It) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

5 Delicious DIY Pregnancy Mocktails (With Bump-Friendly Benefits!) Fact Checked by Marcy Lovitch

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window