How a Lactation Consultant Can Help You Breastfeed

Updates to sourcing and copy.

mom breastfeeding lactation consultant

While breastfeeding is one of the healthiest ways to feed your baby, nursing doesn't come naturally to all new mothers. That's where lactation consultants come in. Here's how they can help — and how to find one.

Breastfeeding is healthy for moms and babies — but a lot more challenging than many women expect. That's one of the reasons why many women give up on breastfeeding in the first month. But experts, including the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), recommend breastfeeding for the first six months, and continuing to breastfeed for at least the first year if you can. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBaby's First Month: Feeding and NutritionSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBaby's First Month: Feeding and NutritionSee All Sources

But even if you're not making enough milk, have sore nipples, or have a baby who refuses to latch on , you don’t have to call it quits just yet. Lactation consultants — health care professionals who specialize in breastfeeding and hold a special certification — can help.

What is a lactation consultant?

Lactation consultants or lactation specialists are nursing professionals who help new moms in their efforts to breastfeed. They also provide prenatal education and preparation for expecting parents. Anyone can call themselves a "lactation consultant," but it's best to find one who is certified as an International Board Certified Lactation Consultant (IBCLC).

How effective are these pros at helping new moms with nursing? Very. Enlisting the help of breastfeeding consultants measurably increased the number of women initiating breastfeeding, boosted breastfeeding rates, and helped more women exclusively breastfeed their newborns, a review of 16 studies found.

A March 2025 review of 40 randomized cliical trials by JAMA Pediatrics showed that lactation consultants lowered the risk of stopping breastfeeding and exclusive breastfeeding by 8% and 4%, respectively. They also tended to extend breastfeeding of any length of time by 3.6 weeks. Trusted SourceJAMA PediatricsBreastfeeding Support Provided by Lactation Consultants: A Systematic Review and Meta-AnalysisSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceJAMA PediatricsBreastfeeding Support Provided by Lactation Consultants: A Systematic Review and Meta-AnalysisSee All Sources

What does a lactation consultant do?

A lactation consultant can help you navigate any number of new baby feeding challenges, including:

Poor milk supply

Trouble hitting weight milestones

Struggles with finding the right nursing position , especially after a C-section

Baby falling asleep at the breast

Baby refusing to breastfeed

Marathon breastfeeding sessions that leave you feeling drained

Emotional and physical barriers to breastfeeding, including postpartum depression

Pain while breastfeeding

A lactation specialist can also help with feeding premature babies (some preemies lack the coordination to suck, breathe, and swallow) or infants with physical or neurological disabilities. No matter what the problem may be, your consultant can work with you to come up with a solution.

When to call a lactation consultant

The best time to call a lactation consultant is while you're expecting, as your counselor can help you mentally and physically prepare for breastfeeding . You’ll practice holding your baby for optimal feeding and get tips on everything from the best pump to how to enlist your partner in breastfeeding.

That said, you can alway ask for help after your baby is born. Hospital staff, your pediatrician, or your OB/GYN can connect you with a lactation consultant.

Questions to ask a lactation consultant

Before hiring a lactation specialist, you’ll want to ask:

How much experience they’ve had with moms like you. Make sure you choose one who supports your family's breastfeeding goals.

How they’ve handled difficult situations. If the going gets tough, what can you expect?

Their philosophy on formula feeding and supplementation. While every lactation consultant believes in the benefits of breast milk , some are more flexible than others. You don't want to feel even a whiff of shame if you decide to stop nursing early. Ensure ahead of time that your lactation consultant will be supportive if you ultimately make that decision.

How accessible they’ll be when you need help. Tech-friendliness is another factor worth considering. Some moms prefer to communicate with consultants through text messaging or video chat.

Another question you may want to ask is whether your lactation consultant has had real-life experience with nursing and has breastfed her own children. You may feel more comfortable with a specialist who has.

Just as importantly, assess the consultant’s style and "breastside" manner, because this person is going to be with you when you're at your most vulnerable. Some moms want a "just the facts" type who takes a clinical approach. Others will prefer a lactation consultant with a nurturing, compassionate style.

Working with a lactation consultant

Your relationship with your lactation consultant is about as intimate as it gets. These tips can help you get the most out of the relationship.

Try not to feel embarrassed

Once baby arrives, your consultant will be quite hands on — literally — as you start breastfeeding. Expect to have your breasts squeezed or manipulated to ensure that your baby has the best feeding position, and don't be surprised if the consultant dabs a little salve on your swollen, chapped nipples. Trust the expert, and try not to get embarrassed. It's a lactation specialist’s job to help.

Tell her what's really going on

While your lactation consultant isn't a doctor, it's important to share the aspects of your life that could affect your milk supply or general health. That includes diet and exercise habits, sleep, feelings of stress and anxiety, conflicts with people in your life, and any supplements or medications you might be taking.

How to find a lactation consultant near you

While many lactation consultants work independently, some work with doctors, nurses, and midwives, or are on staff or contract with hospitals or lactation centers. Many hospitals and birthing centers provide one for all moms-to-be, so check if yours does when you take your pre-birth tour .

But even if your facility doesn’t, it’s easy enough to find one. Ask your OB/GYN or your mom friends for a trusted recommendation, or track down a lactation consultant on your own. Just use the International Lactation Consultant Association online directory .