How to Clean Baby Toys

How to Clean Baby Toys

From wooden blocks to stuffed animals, here’s what you should know about cleaning baby’s toys, and how to do it.

Baby toys can end up in some pretty icky places — on the floor, under the couch, in the toilet. More concerning, though, is where those toys go next (yep, you guessed it: baby’s mouth).

While there’s no need to start sanitizing everything in sight — most household bugs aren’t harmful, anyway — you might want to keep some supplies on hand to wipe down your child’s favorite toys.

Cleaning your baby’s toys, however, can be trickier than cleaning your baby’s clothing or bedding, in part because many of them weren’t made for endless cycles in the dishwasher or washing machine, says Jessica Ek, a spokesperson for the American Cleaning Institute.

For a step-by-step guide to cleaning your tot’s toys, follow these steps.

What you'll need

Use these supplies to clean baby’s toys at home or on the go.

Award-winning detergent

Laundry detergent: You don’t need to spring for a baby-specific brand, but if your child has sensitive skin, you may want to choose a mild, hypoallergenic option like Dreft Liquid Baby Detergent ($20 for a two-pack on Amazon ).

Laundry mesh bag: Washing a beloved stuffed animal? A mesh bag can help keep tiny buttons or plastic eyes from going missing in the washing machine and dryer.

Dish soap: Many wooden or plastic toys can be cleaned with mild dish soap. This one from Babyganics is a favorite among parents in the What to Expect community.

Disinfecting wipes: Disinfecting wipes kill off bacteria and viruses. Parents in the WTE community like these ones from Seventh Generation .

Handy disinfecting wipes

Fragrance-free soap

How often should you clean baby toys?

If a toy is visibly dirty — for example, you can see dirt or food on it — you should wash it off, says Ek. Likewise, if someone in your home is sick, it’s a good idea to disinfect the objects that that they’ve touched at least once a day to help prevent the spread of germs.

There’s no need to break out the big gloves, though. Most germs around the home aren’t particularly harmful, and exposing your baby to some germs can even help shore up his immune system and fend off infections later on.

How to clean wooden baby toys

Wooden toys are among the most straightforward objects to clean, says Ek. Here’s how to do it.

Step 1: Wet a washcloth with dish soap

Dab some mild dish soap onto a washcloth and wipe off the toys.

Step 2: Let the toys air dry

The toy will still be damp, so you’ll want to let them dry off before giving them back to your child.

How to clean plastic baby toys

Plastic toys can also be easy to clean, though if they have electronic components to them, you’ll want to take care not to get those ones wet, says Ek. Here are a few steps.

Use a mild dish soap to remove the dirt from the surface of the plastic toy, being careful not to get any water on any electronic parts. Toys that are made of entirely plastic (including pacifiers) as well as ones designed for the bath can also likely go in the top rack of the dishwasher, says Ek.

stains on baby clothing

Step 2: Let the toys air dry

Let the toys dry off before giving them back to your baby.

How to disinfect toys

To kill bacteria and viruses that may be lingering on the surface of your toys, you can use a disinfectant wipe, says Ek. Make sure to let the disinfectant liquid dry completely, and then rinse it off and let it dry again.

You want to make sure the toy is completely dry and residue-free before giving it back to your baby, especially if your little one can put it in their mouth, she says.

How to clean baby stuffed toys

Many stuffed animals and other plush toys are machine washable (though you can check the tag for specific instructions). Here’s how to clean your baby’s beloved teddy.

Step 1: Put the toy in a garment bag

Stuffed animals can have plastic eyes, noses and buttons that can go missing in the wash, so your best bet is to put them in a garment bag before placing them in the washing machine. If you don’t have a garment bag, you can always use a pillowcase.

Step 2: Wash on delicate in cold water

Washing the toys on a gentle cycle — and in cold water — reduces the wear and tear on the toys. Unlike baby clothing, plush toys aren’t meant for multiple rounds in the washing machine. Hot water can also be harsher on materials than a cold rinse. “These toys are often well-loved, and you don’t want to damage them,” says Ek.

stains on baby clothing

Step 3: Toss the toy in the dryer on low or dry it with a hairdryer

Leave the toy in the garment bag or pillowcase and place it in the dryer (with or without other laundry) on a low setting, says Ek. Or, simply dry the toy with a hair dryer. While it’s possible to air-dry the stuffed toy, that can be trickier to do when the weather is warm. “If it’s a really humid day in the summer, air-drying might not dry it fast enough, and there may be an opportunity for mold to grow on it,” she says.

WhatToExpect.com, How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs , November 2021. Jessica Ek , Senior Director, Digital Communications at the American Cleaning Institute, Washington, DC. American Cleaning Institute, C Is for Clean .

Your Next Read

How to Clean Baby Clothes By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

How to Clean Your Breast Pump Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Preventing Mold in Sippy Cups, Baby Teethers, Bottles and Bath Toys Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Clean a Car Seat Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When and How Should I Sterilize Baby Bottles? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Clean Toddler Ears Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Should Parents Be Concerned About Lead Paint in Children's Toys? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Change a Baby’s Diaper Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Teach Kids to Wash Their Hands Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

When Do Babies Start Playing With Toys? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window