How Much Caffeine Is Safe During Pregnancy? The Sneaky Sources That Put Moms-to-Be Over the Limit

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Hand reaching for a frothy coffee drink in a clear glass mug

Here's how much caffeine is safe during pregnancy and how to make the cut if you need to.

You don't have to break up with your morning coffee just because you're pregnant. But caffeine can be sneakier than you think. It's not just in coffee — it can also show up in tea, soda, chocolate, energy drinks, and even some medications. Knowing where caffeine hides can help you stay within the recommended pregnancy limit and sip a little easier, knowing you're looking out for both yourself and your growing little one.

Here's what to know about how much caffeine is safe during pregnancy and how to stay within the recommended limit.

Key Takeaways:

You don’t have to quit caffeine completely . Most experts say up to 200 mg per day (about one small cup of coffee) is safe during pregnancy, but it's important to stay below that limit.

Caffeine can affect both you and your baby . It crosses the placenta and, at higher levels, may be linked to lower birth weight. For you, it can cause jitters, heartburn, or trouble absorbing iron.

Caffeine adds up quickly from multiple sources . Coffee isn’t the only culprit. Tea, chocolate, soda, and energy drinks all contain caffeine, so keeping track of your total daily intake can help you stay within safe limits.

Can pregnant women drink coffee?

You don't have to completely kick your caffeine habit once you're expecting. While pregnant women were once advised to avoid caffeine entirely, experts now say that low to moderate amounts are okay.

That said, you'll want to be mindful of how much you’re consuming and err on the side of caution.

"When I tested positive with my daughter I was drinking anywhere from two to five cups of coffee a day," says What to Expect Community mom EJL425. "As soon as I found out I cut back to one to two cups a day."

How much caffeine is safe during pregnancy?

Current guidelines from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) and other experts say that it's safe for pregnant women to consume up to 200 milligrams (mg) of caffeine a day during pregnancy.

More than that may slightly increase the risk of miscarriage , though the evidence is inconclusive. Some research has also linked moderate caffeine intake to slightly lower birth weights .

For these reasons, many doctors recommend sticking firmly to the 200-milligram limit.

When tracking your intake, keep in mind that caffeine is found not only in coffee, but also in tea, chocolate, soda, and other products.

How much caffeine is in my coffee and other drinks?

The amount of caffeine in a cup of coffee varies from about 120 mg to 300 mg per 12-ounce cup (about the size of a medium coffee mug or a medium-size coffee at a coffee shop).

Of course, the size of your cup matters, but so does the variety of coffee, how it was brewed, the temperature of the water, and the ratio of the beans to water.

With that in mind, here's a general guide:

Graphic containing information about how much caffeine is in common drinks like coffee, energy drinks, and tea

Coffee

12 oz of brewed coffee (home): 120 to 300 mg

16 oz coffee shop coffee (Starbucks, Dunkin Donuts, Caribou Coffee): 189 to 350 mg

12 oz decaf coffee: 1 to 15 mg

1 shot espresso: 75 mg

1 oz decaf espresso: 0 to 1 mg

16 oz latte or cappuccino: 150 mg

8 to12 oz mocha: 90 to 95 mg

8 oz instant coffee: 62 mg

8 oz instant decaf coffee: 2 mg

"I had a cup of coffee every morning before work. If I got coffee out, I would check the caffeine amount in it beforehand," says Community member kdun24.

Tea

Tea tends to have less caffeine than coffee. If you’re someone who enjoys the ritual of a warm drink in your hands, switching from coffee to tea can be an easy way to cut back.

Most teas have less than half the caffeine of coffee, and some herbal teas are caffeine-free. (Not all herbal teas are safe to drink during pregnancy, so check with your health care practitioner if you have one in mind.)

Note, too, that some herbal tea blends have added caffeine, so it's always a good idea to check the label. Here's what's typical:

6 oz black tea: 30 to 55 mg

6 oz decaf black tea: less than 1 mg

6 oz green tea 20 to 40 mg

8 oz matcha: 38 to 89 mg

6 oz yerba mate: 40 to 80 mg

6 oz white tea 15 to 20 mg

Herbal tea: 0 mg

14 oz kombucha: 15 to 28 mg

Energy drinks and soda

12 oz cola: 34 mg

12 oz ginger ale: 0 mg

12 oz diet coke: 46 mg

12 oz Mountain Dew: 54 mg

16 oz energy drink 90 to 300 mg

2 oz energy shot: 200 mg

Other caffeine sources

2/3 cup coffee ice cream: 25 to 91mg

1 Tbsp. cocoa powder: 8 to12 mg

1.5 oz milk chocolate bar: 10 mg

1.4 oz dark chocolate bar: 20 mg

8 oz hot chocolate: 2 to 25 mg

How can I cut back on caffeine during pregnancy?

If you’re trying to scale back, start by figuring out how much caffeine you’re getting each day — then make small, manageable changes.

Here are some tips for making the process a little easier:

Figure out what you love best about your caffeine fix

Sometimes a simple substitution is all you need.

Is it the taste of coffee you crave? That's easy — switch to a quality decaf brew, and enjoy the flavor without the caffeine (even espresso comes in decaf).

Can't sparkle without carbonated sodas? Turn instead to sparkling water, sparkling juices, or sparkling caffeine-free sodas, but in moderation if they're full of sugar or artificially sweetened.

Are you addicted to caffeine's energy kick? Get a healthier boost from a snack of complex carbohydrates and proteins (like cheese and crackers or dried fruit and nuts), exercising regularly (even a 10-minute walk will give your energy levels a jolt), and getting enough sleep (but not too much, which can actually make you more tired).

"I started transitioning to chai tea (with caffeine-free tea) which was good," says Community member lillia33. "I think you need to find a happy replacement for that morning time."

Know where caffeine hides

Obviously, it's in the latte. And the iced Americano. And even the English breakfast blend. But caffeine can also show up in:

Sodas

Energy drinks

Chocolate

Coffee-flavored foods

Some over-the-counter medications

Check product labels for caffeine content. If you don't see it there, check the manufacturer's website for nutritional information. Likewise at your coffee shop: Many provide caffeine contents of their various brews, and that information should also be available online.

Go gradually

Going from six cups to zero in a day can leave you exhausted, cranky, and headachy (the last thing you need on top of pregnancy fatigue ). So forget those cold turkey plans — and take a gradual approach instead:

Take it day by day. Start by cutting down one cup a day until you're at the one or two small cups a day mark (or keep going if you'd like to be completely caffeine-free).

Go half and half. Stick with the same number of cups, but substitute decaf for half of each cup. Then slowly wean yourself off both the taste and the kick of the real stuff by reducing the amount of regular and increasing the amount of decaf. Before you know it, your cups will be much lighter on the caffeine and within the appropriate limits for pregnancy.

Add more milk . Another way to lower your intake is to order make your own "misto." Cut the coffee back to half a cup, and fill it to the brim with hot, steamed milk.

"Sometimes I'll have a second cup of coffee in the afternoon, but I try to make that one decaf," says Community mom ASZfam.

"I've been drinking half caff coffee from Dunkin or SB," says Community member DixieMomMelanie. "I can't taste or feel the difference at all!"

Find other ways to boost energy

Caffeine isn't the only way to get an energy boost. Here are some others:

Eat small, frequent meals

Take your prenatal vitamins

Get regular exercise

Prioritize rest

You can even set aside the money you'd spend on coffee and treat yourself to something else — a manicure, some flowers, or a lunch out, for example.

While the thought of scaling back on caffeine can feel tough, remember that while you're pregnant, it's always better to err on the side of caution. You may even find you feel better once you lower your daily caffeine count!

How does caffeine affect my baby when I'm pregnant?

The effects aren't entirely clear. Experts know that caffeine crosses the placenta , and very high intake has been linked to a greater risk of pregnancy loss and lower birth weight .

Beyond that, research is mixed, which is why experts recommend keeping your intake at 200 milligrams or less.

How does caffeine affect me when I’m pregnant?

You may find it doesn’t affect you much. On the other hand, it’s possible that you may react differently to caffeine once you’re pregnant and notice new or stronger side effects.

Coffee, for example, can stimulate your bowels, so if you already find yourself running to the restroom , you may want to cut back.

And whereas you once would have been able to down three cups of coffee a day without issue, you may now find that even one small cup worsens your heartburn or gives you the shakes or jitters. Some women also find the taste changes during pregnancy.

"If I have too much, more than about 12oz or so of coffee, I do start to feel a little jittery, which never happened before I was pregnant," says Community mom haileyboyd.

One note of caution: Too much caffeine during pregnancy may interfere with your body’s ability to absorb iron, which can increase your risk of iron deficiency or anemia. If you already have low iron levels , you may want to cut caffeine out entirely while pregnant. Talk to your doctor if you're concerned.

Are there any benefits of caffeine during pregnancy?

In general, moderate amounts of caffeine can boost energy and alertness, helpful after a night spent tossing and turning . One study also found that low to moderate caffeine intake during the second trimester may be linked to a lower risk of gestational diabetes.

Still, there's no conclusive evidence that caffeine provides meaningful benefits during pregnancy. So if you didn’t consume caffeine before, there’s no reason to start now.