How to Teach Your Baby the Difference Between Day and Night So Everyone Gets More Sleep

newborn day night confusion

Your baby won’t always get days and nights confused, but here’s how to survive and get in some shut-eye until that happens.

Arguably one of the hardest parts about bringing home a newborn baby is figuring out their sleep patterns. Why are they sleeping so much? And on the flip side, why won't they nap when you put them down?

The reality is that newborns are adjusting to life outside the dark, noisy womb, and it can take a while for them to settle into their regular sleep patterns. This can lead to day and night confusion, when a baby sleeps when they’re supposed to be awake and stays up all night instead.

Not every baby experiences this — not to brag, but my now-kindergartener was one of those infants who was relatively easy to put down at night, and he woke like clockwork for feedings and diaper changes. But you’re definitely not the only parent struggling with their baby not quite getting the hang of this whole day vs. night thing.

To help everyone in your household get some more shut-eye, here's more on what newborn day and night confusion is, plus some tips and tricks to help your baby differentiate between when it’s time to sleep and wake.

What is newborn day and night confusion?

Newborn day and night confusion, also referred to as day and night reversal, is just what it sounds like: when your baby has trouble differentiating between daytime hours and nighttime hours, and therefore their sleep patterns are wonky and perhaps, they fight sleep . Parents might experience this as early as the first few days and weeks they’re home with their newborn, notes Natalie Willes , a sleep consultant in Portland, Oregon.

Why does this happen? Your baby just spent nine months in the womb, a dark, noisy, cushiony environment where mom’s movements rocked them to sleep in the day, but had them kicking more at night when you were still and quiet. It's likely they're continuing this cycle in the womb. Plus, being born into the big, bright world is jarring, no doubt! All that to say, newborns go through this day and night confusion in part because of the extremism of transitioning from one environment to another.

Additionally, much of it has to do with a newborn’s circadian rhythm — or lack thereof. Babies need time for their circadian rhythm, or their internal 24-hour rhythm that tells them when they should be awake and when they should be asleep, to develop. It just takes time, and usually starts to become regulated around 4 to 5 months, notes Chee Chun Tan, M.D. , a pediatric pulmonologist and sleep specialist in New Jersey.

How to teach your baby the difference between day and night

Luckily, by about 4 months old your baby's day and night confusion will likely have subsided, says Dr. Tan. But there's good news even if your little one hasn’t yet reached that 4-month mark yet.

Here are some steps you can take now to help them get on more of a sleep schedule and regulate their slumber patterns (PS: they’ll likely help you regain your sanity too):

Expose your baby to sunlight when they're awake

To help your baby figure out the difference between light and dark, expose them to indirect sunlight when they’re awake during the day by positioning their swing or playmat near a window (outdoor stroller walks count too!). “It doesn’t need to be a bright sunny day — overcast is fine,” Willes notes. This is because “babies’ brains are sensitive to sunlight and regulate to time changes more quickly than adults.” Studies have found that exposing babies to natural light (think window shades open, lights on in the house and more walks outside) during the day also helps promote normal circadian rhythm development. Just be sure infants less than 6 months are kept out of direct sunlight since their skin is sensitive and can burn easily.

Encourage a longer stretch of sleep at night

Until about 12 weeks old, newborns will sleep about 14 to 17 hours or more in a 24-hour period, and usually babies in this age group have the ability to sleep one longer stretch in that timeframe. Of course, you'll want that longer stretch to ideally be at night, which will also help them figure out the difference between night and day. So how do you get there?

“Limit sleep during the day to two hours at a time,” Willes says, adding that some infants may do better with 90 or 105 minute-naps. Newborns typically need around three to five naps a day or more, while babies around 4 to 6 months usually have two to three. Capping these naps to no more than two hours will “encourage babies to sleep three, four or five hours overnight early on,” she adds. They’ll also learn that these long sleep stretches are associated with night rather than daytime. Remember though, that newborns may need to be woken up more frequently (around every 3 hours or so) to feed in the first few weeks, especially until they have regained their birth weight. Studying your baby's sleep cues, and how many wet diapers they have can also help guide how often they need to feed.

Every hour or so, pay attention to your awake baby to see if they may be ready for bed, says Willes. “Babies don’t need these crazy long stretches; it’s ok to feed them, expose them to a bit of sunlight and put them to sleep again, she adds. “Their signs of being tired might be a change in disposition, a glossy gaze, rubbing eyes or a yawn.”

Placing your baby down to sleep when they’re drowsy rather than fully asleep, both for naps and nighttime sleep, trains their little brains and bodies to eventually fall asleep without help — and at the proper times, Dr. Tan adds.

Practice safe sleep habits

It goes without saying that you want your baby to sleep soundly, but safety is of utmost importance. Always follow the American Academy of Pediatrics’ guidelines for safe infant sleep , which are to place a baby to sleep on her back on a firm mattress with only a fitted sheet, by herself, and without stuffed animals, blankets or crib bumpers. This helps prevent Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) , notes Dr. Tan.

Stay consistent

Overall, what’s going to help your baby sleep on a normal schedule over time is keeping to a routine during the day and at night. “A consistent bedtime with a simple nighttime routine is best,” notes Dr. Tan, which may include a warm bath, a feeding, a book or song and then being placed in the crib. You'll want to keep things quiet and calm at night. For naptime, you can also have a routine, whether that's a book, turning on the white noise machine , feeding them or giving them a bottle, however, it's a good idea to expose them to regular daytime noise and activity so they learn to sleep in those environments.

Consistently using things like swaddles and pacifiers can also help with establishing a good sleep routine. Using swaddles for both naps and overnight sleep may help your baby stay calm and sleep longer, while pacifiers can help some babies settle down — and can help reduce the risk of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) .

As with most aspects of parenting, it’ll take a little effort to get your baby into a day and night routine that works for you and your family. But there is a light at the end of the tunnel, even if it does seem far away right now. Remember: “Up to 80 percent of infants will sleep through the night by the time they’re 9 months old,” says Dr. Tan, so this too shall pass, tired parents. Here’s to more (and better) sleep for everyone.