How to Have a Boy or a Girl

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

how to have a boy or a girl, gender selection, pink and blue pacifiers

If you're hoping for a girl or boy, there are some gender selection techniques that may help you give birth to the baby of your preferred sex. Other methods however, aren't as likely to work.

Do you have your heart set on getting pregnant with a girl? Or dreams of getting pregnant with a boy? While having a healthy baby is most certainly your top priority, it’s also common to want a baby of one sex or the other, especially if you've already had a baby (or two, or three) of the opposite sex.

Whatever you're hoping for, there are a number of ways — some scientific, others silly — that just might give Mother Nature a nudge and increase your chances of conceiving a boy or a girl.

Here's what you should know about gender selection techniques — including the high-tech, the low-tech and the no-tech options!

Wondering whether you can really sway your odds of having a boy or a girl, or just want to have fun guessing baby's sex when you do get pregnant? Try our Chinese Gender Predictor and learn other methods for predicting your baby's sex on the What to Expect app .

Key Takeaways

High-tech options: Techniques like preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) and sperm sorting can offer more accurate ways to select your baby's gender, but they come with high costs and ethical concerns.

Low-tech methods: Methods like the Shettles or Whelan methods involve timing intercourse around ovulation and other theories, but there's no scientific proof that they increase your chances of having a boy or girl.

Other myths and theories: While some diets, sex positions, and even gender selection kits claim to influence your baby's sex, there's little to no evidence supporting these ideas, and most experts suggest they are no more reliable than chance.

Preimplantation genetic diagnosis

If you’re getting an assist from science to conceive in the first place, you may be able to pick the sex of your baby.

With preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD), used in conjunction with in-vitro fertilization (IVF) , doctors can extract one cell from the rapidly dividing embryo fertilized in the petri dish and examine it to determine sex. Only embryos of the desired sex can be implanted in the mother's uterus.

That said, using PGD to choose your child's sex is controversial (not to mention costly). This method was developed to help couples who have gone through genetic testing and know they are carriers of serious genetic disorders — and most fertility centers and medical organizations discourage it if there is no real medical reason to select baby's sex. (Some genetic disorders, for example, are specifically linked to sex, such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), which mostly occurs in boys.)

PGD is part of preimplantation genetic testing (PGT), which also includes something called preimplantation genetic screening (PGS). PGS counts the number of chromosomes and tests for chromosomal abnormalities.

Other fertility clinics will let parents choose the sex of their baby if they've already had one or more children of the same sex — a term called "family balancing."

Sperm sorting

Sperm sorting, also known as the MicroSort Method, is done using flow cytometry, in which the girl-producing sperm (X-sperm) is separated from boy-producing sperm (Y-sperm). Girl-producing sperm contains about 3 percent more DNA than boys', and when stained with a special fluorescent material in the lab, appears to shine brighter.

The sperm of the desired sex is either inserted into the mom-to-be’s uterus via intrauterine insemination (IUI) or used to fertilize an egg in vitro.

Sperm sorting is less reliable than gender selection with PDG, which is nearly 100 percent accurate in selecting the desired sex.

The Shettles Method

Though there is no medical data whatsoever to back up the efficacy of the so-called Shettles Method, some couples swear by it and others decide to give it a try.

The theory behind the Shettles Method is that girl-producing sperm (called X-sperm) move more slowly but are more resilient and live longer than male-producing sperm (aka Y-sperm), which are faster but have shorter life spans.

What that means, the story goes, is that couples can try having sex to conceive two to three days before the woman is scheduled to ovulate. The thinking is that it might up the chances for the girl X-sperm to be the ones still waiting around in the fallopian tubes by the time the egg drops in a few days later.

If you're trying for a boy, on the other hand, the theory is that having sex as close as possible to ovulation is the ticket, since the speedy boy Y-sperm could be more likely to reach the egg first.

As long as you realize that your odds of the Shettles Method working are pretty much the same 50-50 chance you have of getting pregnant with a baby girl or a baby boy, it certainly can't hurt to give it a whirl!

The Whelan Method

The Whelan Method of gender selection is based on similar theories as the Shettles Method, and it's equally short on medical evidence supporting its effectiveness. But if you go into it realizing there's absolutely no solid science behind it, there's no harm in trying it out.

The Whelan Method is based on the idea that biochemical changes in a woman’s body at certain times in her cycle make it more likely that boy Y-sperm will fertilize an egg, while at other times her biochemistry will favor girl X-sperm.

So if they're hoping for a boy, the theory says, couples can try to have sex four to six days before ovulation. And to conceive a girl, they can hit the sheets either two to three days before ovulation or on the day the woman ovulates.

Aside from the lack of any actual data showing that the Whelan Method works, critics also say having sex four to six days before ovulation is much too far ahead of the release of the egg to get pregnant, since sperm can’t survive that long (usually around three days at most).

That said, if you're the "ring gender test" type and understand the Whelan Method has about the same odds of determining whether you'll give birth to a boy or a girl, then by all means, have fun with it!

Gender selection kits

There are a variety of kits available that claim to improve baby sex selection odds. They're based on altering the conditions around the egg and sperm — by using nutritional supplements and douches — to make the vaginal tract more receptive to either the X- or Y-sperm.

Most experts consider the claims of these gender selection kits to be suspect.

Diet and nutrition

There's no such thing as a diet that can boost your odds of conceiving a boy or girl, but that hasn't stopped people from speculating about it.

Some theories say that eating foods low in sodium and high in calcium can increase your chances of having a girl. Others claim that your diet should include eggs, yogurt and chocolate if you want a girl and red meat, potassium-rich foods like bananas, and salty dishes if you want a boy.

Sex positions

Theories abound about whether certain sex positions can help you conceive a boy or girl — but as you can imagine, there's no evidence showing that, say, having sex standing up can help you have a boy, or missionary position makes you more likely to have a girl. Same goes for the theories about who has an orgasm first. Still, there's no harm in trying!

As promising — and unpromising — as some of these methods sound, keep in mind that high-tech gender selection techniques can be expensive, invasive and controversial. As for the low-tech ways of conceiving, they haven't been shown to be any more successful than just letting nature take its course.

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect Before You're Expecting , 2nd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Predicting Baby's Gender, October 2019. WhatToExpect.com, Carrier Genetic Screenings: What Parents Need to Know , April 2019. World Health Organization, Gender and Genetics , 2020 Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology , Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis for Gender Selection: You Don’t Always Get What You Want , September 2012. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Use of Reproductive Technology for Sex Selection for Nonmedical Reasons, June 2015. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Preimplantation Genetic Testing , March 2020. American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Preimplantation Genetic Testing , 2014. MicroSort, What Is MicroSort? 2020. National Human Genome Research Institute, About Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy , April 2013. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis , October 2009. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, The Effectiveness of Flow Cytometric Sorting of Human Sperm (MicroSort) for Influencing a Child’s Sex , November 2014. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Female Gender Pre-selection by Maternal Diet in Combination with Timing of Sexual Intercourse—A Prospective Study , December 2010. The Embryo Project Encyclopedia, Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis , March 2011. The Embryo Project Encyclopedia, The Shettles Method of Sex Selection , April 2019. The Embryo Project Encyclopedia, The Whelan Method of Sex Selection , June 2018. The New England Journal of Medicine , Timing of Sexual Intercourse in Relation to Ovulation—Effects on the Probability of Conception, Survival of the Pregnancy, and Sex of the Baby , December 1995. UpToDate.com, Preimplantation Genetic Testing , September 2020. British Medical Journal , Entrenched Misinformation About X and Y Sperm , April 2006.

What Our Community Is Talking About

40 Plus Ladies TTC Part 6

Early July Test Day Countdown

Late June early July testers!

There are 91,459 active discussions happening now in our Trying to Conceive community group.

Your Next Read

12 Scientific Signs You’re Having a Boy or a Girl Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Does the Ovary Gender Test Work to Predict Your Baby's Sex? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

How to Tell if You’re Having a Boy or Girl on an Ultrasound Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

When and How Your Baby’s Sex Is Determined in the Womb Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Boy or Girl? Here’s When (and How) You’ll Find Out Baby’s Sex Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Top Fertility Treatments Used by Couples Who Need Help Conceiving Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

IVF: What It Is, How It Works, and What to Expect Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Pregnant Moms Are Asking ChatGPT to Guess Their Baby's Sex — Does It Actually Work? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Does the Heartbeat Gender Prediction Method Work? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

I Waited Until Birth to Find Out Boy or Girl — the Surprise Was Harder Than I Expected Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Can Your Placenta Give You a Sneak Peek into Your Baby's Gender? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Chinese Gender Predictor Chart Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Can The Shape Of Your Baby's Skull Really Be The Key to Learning Their Gender? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Do At-Home Gender Tests Really Work? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is This Old Wives' Tale True? New Data From 117,000 Moms Settles the Gender Debate Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window