Turn Baby's First Birthday Party Into a 'Winter Onederland'

winter onderland baby first birthday party

Tap into the wintry season for a magical first birthday celebration.

If your baby's birthday falls between late November and the end of February, a Winter Onederland first birthday party is the perfect way to celebrate your baby's milestone first year . Lean into the magic of these winter months as your party theme, and use it to inspire everything from the birthday party decor and food to the games and favors.

It's an especially important celebration because "the first birthday party is often the most photographed, celebrated and remembered birthday for parents," says Jennifer Nyikos, a pro party planner and owner of Fun By The Yard .

A Winter Onederland theme "combines the magic of winter with the joy of celebrating a child's first birthday," adds Carissa Kruse, an event planner and founder of Carissa Kruse Weddings. "You can incorporate elements like snowflakes, ice and cozy winter-themed decorations to create a whimsical and festive atmosphere that will delight your guests," she explains.

Read on for these party planners' top tips on how to plan a first birthday party that's as cute as it is memorable.

Winter Onederland invitations

winter onderland birthday invitations

Pick a design that's dusted with snowflakes or accented with silver foil to announce your baby's upcoming Winter Onederland party.

Winter Onederland decorations

Wintry color palette

"For a Winter Onederland party, the perfect colors are shades of blue, silver and white," says Nyikos. The metallic accents are especially important, as they'll add a layer of dimension and sparkle to your aesthetic.

Big balloons

winter onderland birthday balloon decorations

Incorporating balloons into your Winter Onederland party decor is a great way to welcome guests and brighten up your space, says Nyikos. Even better: "They make the perfect backdrop for photos and memories that will last a lifetime."

Fairy lights and snow

"My two go-to decorations for a Winter Onederland birthday are white fairy lights and fake snow," Kruse says. "You can sprinkle fake snow around the party space and on tabletops, and use the lights to create a glittering effect."

Woodland accents

winter onderland birthday party woodland decorations

A garland of pinecones, snow-dusted bottle brush trees and buffalo check bring this colorful Winter Onederland party to life. (Note that the cake is decorated to look like birch bark!)

Paper snowflakes

A few paper snowflakes fluttering down from the ceiling will dress up your Winter Onederland venue. You can even set up a paper snowflake-making craft station for any kiddos in attendance, suggests Nyikos, and encourage them to tape them up around the room when they're done.

Winter Onederland food

Snowman-shaped eats

winter onderland food, snowman cinnamon bun

"For food, serve snowman-shaped sandwiches or pizza cut into shapes with winter-themed cookie cutters," Kruse suggests. You can also "dip Oreos into white frosting and, once set, decorate them to look like a snowman face," adds Nyikos. Or try this simple cinnamon roll snowman recipe from The BakerMama that will double as a show-stopping centerpiece for your food table.

Hot chocolate bar

winter onderland food, hot chocolate bar

"Set up a hot cocoa bar with different toppings like marshmallows, whipped cream and chocolate chips," suggests Kruse. Get creative with your set-up, and steal this beautiful board idea from The BakerMama featuring all sorts of mix-ins — from butterscotch chips to peppermints to adorable snowmen scotcheroos for dunking. (Get the full recipe .)

Winter Onederland games

Faux snowball fight

If your space allows for it, this Winter Onederland game will get everyone (kids and adults) having a great time. "Ball up 'snowball' socks, give them to each team and watch the magic happen," says Nyikos. If you want to get serious with it, you can even prop up tables or piles of pillows as shields for players to hide behind.

"Bundle up" relay race

Get your cold-weather gear ready for this Winter Onederland party game, because you're going to need it! "Host a relay race in which you run to a pile of coats, hats, gloves and boots and put on as many items as you can before running back to dress the next person in line, who then runs back to take it all off," suggests Nyikos.

Winter Onederland favors

Build-your-own snowman kits

winter onederland birthday party favors, build-your-own snowman kits

This clever Winter Onederland party favor idea will delight any kids in attendance. A tub of white play dough paired with snowman-making accessories, like a straw nose and foam eyes, is a unique gift idea that can double as fun party entertainment, if needed.

Mini snow globes

For a magical end to your baby's first birthday party, try this unique favor idea: "I love giving out mini snow globes as Winter Onederland party favors," says Kruse. If that's not feasible, "you can also put homemade hot cocoa mix in Mason jars with cute, winter-themed tags."

Jennifer Nyikos, Party Planner and Owner, Fun By The Yard . Carissa Kruse, Event Planner and Founder, Carissa Kruse Weddings .

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw a Winter Wonderland Baby Shower for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Celebrate 'Mr. Onederful' With a Dapper First Birthday Bash Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Host a 'Wild One' Birthday That's a Roaring Good Time Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Space Birthday Party Ideas That Are Out of This World Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

How to Throw a Fall-Themed Baby Shower for Your Little Pumpkin Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window