How to Potty Train Your Little Girl: Helpful Tips and More

Updates to copy, info, sourcing, formatting, and headlines, and new medical review.

how to potty train a girl, little girl sitting on the potty with her doll on the potty

Thinking about shedding your toddler’s diapers for good? If your daughter shows some of the signs of readiness, follow these tips for the best way to potty train your little girl.

Making the leap from diapers to big-girl underwear is a major developmental milestone for your toddler daughter. It’s also a relief for parents to finally retire from diaper changing duties.

As you consider how to start potty training your little girl, know that one size does not fit all. Each child is her own person, which means she’ll follow her own pace when she's potty training (and it might be faster or slower than that of her pals or siblings).

For starters, don’t be misled by gender stereotypes about girls potty training faster than boys or at a much younger age. This is certainly the case for some tots, says the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsIs It True That Boys Are Usually Toilet-Trained Later Than Girls?See All Sources [1] According to two large studies, the average age for girls to master potty training is 35 months, whereas for boys it's 39 months. But not all children will fit this exact timeframe.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsIs It True That Boys Are Usually Toilet-Trained Later Than Girls?See All Sources

Still, says Gina Posner , M.D., F.A.A.P., board-certified pediatrician at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board , girls seem to have the upper hand when it comes to mastering the potty training milestone.

“They tend to be more emotionally mature sooner,” Dr. Posner explains.

Your best bet: Strive to offer praise at every turn, whether she produces successfully in the potty or not. Read on to see when you can start potty training your little girl and get some smart tips to help you along the way.

When to get started potty training a toddler girl

Even if you’re ready to get the potty training show on the road, your daughter might not be. So before you jump in, curb your expectations, as potty training readiness can actually vary by as much as a year or more between toddlers.

And keep in mind that a child’s success during the process is much more tied to her personality than any other factor, like age Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsThe Right Age to Potty TrainSee All Sources [2] or sex.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsThe Right Age to Potty TrainSee All Sources

Still, you can be on the lookout for signs she’s ready to try, including staying dry for longer stretches, the ability to pull down her own leggings, and predictable bowel movements, like in the morning or after lunch. The Cleveland Clinic also notes Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicHow to Potty Train: Our Best TipsSee All Sources [3] that children with some verbal skills (“I pee now!”) are likely good potty-training candidates.

Tips for potty training girls

Once you’ve spied some of the above readiness signs, it’s time to learn the best way to potty train a girl. To help, follow these tips:

Go shopping. Picking out cute underwear and a potty seat together might help set the tone for this exciting adventure ahead and give your child some ownership too.

Play with the potty. It lives in the bathroom, of course, but you can also set up the potty where she plays. This way, she can sit on it clothed and get used to the idea.

Pick your lingo. Whether you choose “urinate” or “pee” to describe the output, be consistent and keep it positive. You can also share these terms with family, day care teachers, and babysitters.

Dress for success. Tights and overalls are a no-go when it comes to the best way to potty train a girl. And though skirts and dresses are easy to handle during potty training, girls may end up accidentally getting them wet in the process of trying to go. Instead, shorts or pants with an elastic waistband are ideal. Avoid dress-up outfits or Halloween costumes , which can be tough to get off in a pinch.

Add in some books. Stories about little girls learning to use the potty are a fun way to enliven the topic. You can also offer books and toys to hold while she sits and tries to go.

Strip down. Going naked while training makes getting to the potty on time much easier. And the bare feeling may help your tot become more aware of her body’s signals.

Pick up some disposable training pants. They help contain accidents and also prevent your little girl from feeling any wetness or mess. Still, disposable training pants are a good option to try since they act like regular cotton underwear and teach the up/down motion.

Celebrate the little things. Did she sit when you asked her to? Or did a few drops land in the potty? These victories, however small, are ones to be praised.

Offer incentives. Little toys or an outing to the children’s museum are a couple of savvy ways to encourage your tot to keep trying on the potty. Dr. Posner votes for a potty training chart with stickers “and then a reward after a certain number of stickers are earned.”

Give her the money. We’re not talking about big dollars here, but tiny monetary incentives can work, says What to Expect Community mom SarahEM32. “We give our daughter a coin each time she goes, and then every so often we let her use her money to buy something,” she says.

Be super consistent. What to Expect Community mom mommaXtwo2224 says her daughter wasn’t telling her when she had to go to the bathroom so her pediatrician recommended that she try “sitting her on the potty every 10 minutes,” she reports. It helped!

Find the humor. Accidents will definitely happen as you learn how to potty train your daughter. Be sure to react with a good-natured smile and encouragement for the next attempts.

Let it go. If the process has stalled or taken a turn toward tantrums , it’s perfectly fine to take a break. And make note of any big life changes that could be impacting your little girl's potty progress, such as a new sibling, a different babysitter, or the start of preschool.

Teach her how to wipe. Girls need to wipe front to back to avoid infections, so it's a good idea to start teaching her that trick now so she has plenty of practice.

Get more tips on how to potty train your little one in the What to Expect app and chat with other parents about what's working for them.

How long does it take to potty train a girl?

Every parent is dying to know how long potty training takes (maybe to brace themselves?). But the truth is that every child is different, which means some potty train faster or slower than others.

In general, you can expect potty training to take between three and six months to nail down. As for nighttime dryness , this takes many more months or even years to master. (Hang in there!)

We give our daughter a coin each time she goes, and then every so often we let her use her money to buy something.

What to Expect Community mom SarahEM32

With lots of patience and a little humor, you'll get through potty training your little girl. But know that your child’s pediatrician is your partner in this age-old process.

“Some kids are more stubborn than others, and a few may experience painful stools,” explains Dr. Posner. If you have questions, speak with the doctor. And if she’s still untrained by age 4, bring it up so you can get some professional advice.

Key Takeaways

Girls may potty train sooner than boys. But watching for readiness signs is the best way to gauge the start of this milestone, such as reliable bowel movements and the ability to remove her clothing.

Engage your little girl in the potty training process. Make the task fun by picking out new underwear together, reading potty-training stories, using stickers or small rewards, and praising her attempts.

Know that potty training can take several months and staying dry at night comes much later, but your pediatrician is available to answer your questions along the way. It's a good idea to stay as calm as possible while your little girl learns how to use the potty.