Celebrate 'Mr. Onederful' With a Dapper First Birthday Bash

mr onederful birthday party theme

Bring on the mustaches and bowties, and get ready for a "onederful" time at your baby's first birthday party.

Your little guy's first birthday is an event to remember, so dial up the glam with a Mr. Onederful birthday theme. From bowties and suspenders to mustaches and top hats, there's so much fun to be had with this unique first birthday party theme .

"A Mr. Onederful theme allows you to celebrate your little guy in a fun yet fancy way while also celebrating the fact that as parents you've made it through this first year," says Amber Anderson , founder of the Authentically Amber Blog . Anderson would know — she used this theme for her own son's first birthday party.

Read on for Anderson's professional advice, from tips for planning a first birthday party and the best foods to serve to aww-worthy Mr. Onederful decorating ideas and more.

Mr. Onederful birthday party decor

Dial up the glamor with black, white and gold

Mr. Onederful birthday party color palette

Set the tone of your Mr. Onederful bash with the color scheme. "If you want something that's a bit more formal (aka "man glam"), try a black, gold and white color palette," suggests Anderson. You could lean into this black-tie theme even more and consider asking partygoers to dress up for the event!

Keep the vibes casual with blue, gray and white

"If you'd like to go a bit more casual or traditional with your Mr. Onederful party, baby blue, gray and white make a great palette to work with," Anderson says. You can still incorporate bowties, mustaches and suspenders — but they don't scream "black tie" when done in these slightly softer hues.

Jazz up balloons with DIY bowties

Mr. Onederful birthday party balloon bowties

"Lots of balloons will make a strong impact when guests first arrive," says Anderson, and if they're adorned with little bow ties to fit your Mr. Onederful theme, even better!

"Whether you use die-cut cardstock bow ties or DIY your own by folding cardstock accordion-style and cinching it in the center with tape or ribbon, attach them onto the ends of balloons for that extra touch of awesomeness," Anderson says.

Take your Mr. Onederful tablescape to the next level

Mr. Onederful birthday party tablescape

There's no need to stop with the balloons! "Some easy and festive Mr. Onederful decor ideas are leveraging bowties and suspenders throughout all elements of your party decor," says Anderson. "Try napkins folded in the shape of bowties and centerpiece vases made to look like suspenders."

Lean into dapper accents for Mr. Onederful eats

Mr. Onederful birthday party decor

If you're serving finger foods instead of a sit-down dinner, add some gentlemanly accents to your buffet table. Adorn popcorn containers, juice boxes or signs with nods to the theme. "Top hats make lovely decor elements," Anderson says.

Mr. Onederful birthday party food

Serve up a scrumptious brunch

When planning your Mr. Onederful party, "Consider breakfast or brunch timing, which allows you to catch your 1-year-old at their best — either first thing in the morning or after their first nap," Anderson says. This start time lends itself to a fun menu, too.

"For a breakfast theme, you could serve pancakes shaped as the number one, fruit trays in the shape of a one, and breakfast meats and eggs," Anderson says.

If you host your party later in the day after your baby's nap, "You can extend the menu to breakfast and lunch items including all things 'miniature' — mini sandwiches, mini waffles and wings for chicken and waffles, fruit in cups or on a stick, shrimp and grits, mini quiche, and breakfast meats or salmon," she says.

Dress your Mr. Onederful cake for the occasion

Mr. Onederful birthday party cake

"No Mr. Onederful party would be complete without a cake,'" says Anderson. Yours could feature a bowtie, suspenders and buttons — or maybe a cake topper that highlights the number one or specifically calls out Mr. Onederful. Separate the top and bottom tiers before serving, and use one layer as your baby's first birthday smash cake and the other layer to serve to guests.

Mr. Onederful birthday party activities

Encourage guests to contribute to a time capsule

Mr. Onederful birthday party time capsule activity

For a sentimental activity that guests can participate in throughout the event, "Ask guests to leave words of wisdom and advice for your Mr. Onederful at every age, and place them all in envelopes for him to open during various milestone years throughout his life," suggests Anderson.

Play background music for the ultimate Mr. Onederful party vibes

To bring this glamorous theme to life, set the scene with music. "Live music — whether it's a family friend who knows how to play a guitar or a professional — can help create a fun atmosphere that goes well with a breakfast or brunch," says Anderson. A playlist of jazz tunes is an easy, yet effective, alternative.

Designate the number one spot for photo ops

Mr. Onederful birthday party balloon photo op

"A number one sign — whether it's a lighted marquee, a poster board cut-out or a balloon display — will provide a great backdrop for photo ops with Mr. Onederful himself, while doubling as eye-catching decor," Anderson says.

Hang a number one piñata in honor of Mr. Onederful

"If most of your Mr. Onederful party attendees are grown-ups, fill a number one-shaped piñata with items that are good for adults — like colorful bow ties or mini hand sanitizers and lotions," Anderson says. "If you are anticipating other children, add a few fun and age-appropriate items for them, such as small toys — it doesn't have to be candy!" (Keep party safety in mind and skip choking hazards smaller than 1.75 inches across.)

Mr. Onederful birthday party favors

Send guests home with gentlemanly favors

Mr. Onederful birthday party cake pop favors

Thank guests for attending (and for any first birthday gifts ) by sending them home with goodie bags. "Beautifully designed cake pops or cookies make excellent party favor ideas ," says Anderson. "For younger kids, you can always do animal crackers or unsweetened applesauce pouches, and add a bowtie and suspenders to the packaging to go with your Mr. Onederful theme."

Amber Anderson , Party Planner and Blogger, Authentically Amber . WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a First Birthday Party , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes , January 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Birthday Party Dos and Don'ts , November 2022.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Turn Baby's First Birthday Party Into a 'Winter Onederland' Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Host a 'Wild One' Birthday That's a Roaring Good Time Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Dog-Themed Ideas for a Pawfect Puppy Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Space Birthday Party Ideas That Are Out of This World Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Throw a T-Rex-iffic Dinosaur Birthday Party That'll Go Down in History Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Gender Reveal Themes to Inspire Your Special Celebration Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window