How Can I Get My Baby to Move in Utero?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

pregnant woman and toddler in kitchen feeling baby bump, 8 tricks to get baby to move in utero

Here are 8 tricks for getting your baby to kick, flip, and roll in there.

All pregnant parents live for those moments when they can feel their babies kicking. And it's understandable to want to nudge them along sometimes. Happily, there are some safe and simple things you can try to get your baby to respond — including eating, moving your body, and gently prodding your little one.

Read on to learn some tricks for encouraging those cute little kicks and somersaults. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicKick CountsSee All Sources [1]

Kick Counts

Key Takeaways

Simple everyday activities can help encourage baby movement. Eating a snack, lying down, talking or singing to your baby, gently nudging your bump, or using light and sound may prompt kicks and movement during pregnancy.

Babies respond to changes in their environment and your body. Increased blood sugar, movement, noise, and even adrenaline can sometimes stimulate fetal activity, though every baby responds differently.

A noticeable decrease in movement should never be ignored. If kick counts slow down significantly or you're concerned about reduced movement after 28 weeks, contact your healthcare provider or maternity ward promptly for evaluation.

What are some ways to encourage my baby's movement?

Here are some tricks doctors , midwives, nurses, and ultrasound technicians often use to encourage babies to move. These methods aren't foolproof or scientifically proven, but they frequently work!

1. Have a snack.

Babies often respond to your blood sugar boosts much like you do. The next time you're trying to do a kick count Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistSpecial Tests for Monitoring Fetal Well-BeingSee All Sources [2] or just want reassurance that your little one is okay, try eating a healthy snack like cheese and crackers, peanut butter toast, Greek yogurt, or fruit and nuts.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistSpecial Tests for Monitoring Fetal Well-BeingSee All Sources

For an extra boost, add a small glass of all-natural juice. The surge in blood sugar may be all it takes to get your baby to "kick" into high gear.

Count your baby's kicks with the My Journal tool in our free What to Expect app .

"Whenever I drink 100% pure cranberry juice diluted into ice cold water, I always get so much movement out of my little boy." says What to Expect Community member MommaBeartoBen. "Not sure if he likes the bitterness or not, but it definitely gets a reaction out of him lol."

"Frozen yogurt and lying on my back on the couch or bed with my legs bent does the trick every time!" says Community mom esbb.

2. Do some jumping jacks, then sit down

This is a trick the practitioners doing my 20-week ultrasound taught me, since my camera-shy baby girl was hiding in there, and it was hard to get accurate measurements.

They told me to go into the hallway, do some jumping jacks or a little jog in place, then come back and we'd try again. The tactic worked, and she rolled into a new spot so that we could see her. Yay!

3. Gently poke or jiggle your baby bump.

This is another tactic many expectant parents (including yours truly) see during ultrasounds and doctors' appointments when practitioners are tracking fetal movement and measuring baby .

Ultrasound technicians will often lightly shake the device's wand over your tummy to encourage your baby to perk up. Plenty of moms have felt their babies move in response to a very gentle poke or light jiggle of their bump. Just remember not to prod too vigorously — you've got precious cargo in there!

4. Shine a flashlight on your tummy.

By week 22 of pregnancy , babies can begin to perceive light and dark . You may notice your baby reacting if you shine a flashlight on your stomach. Your little one could well be turning toward or moving away from the spotlight!

"Last night my baby was being quiet, and usually he's not, so I put the flash on my belly, and he started moving almost instantly," says Community member pandax21.

5. Lie down.

All that walking, running, and moving around you do during the day creates a rocking sensation that can lull babies to sleep in utero. That's why many pregnant moms notice that their baby kicks more at night , just as soon as they lie down (good practice for those newborn overnight feedings !).

You may also notice movements more easily when you're quiet and still.

Even if it's not bedtime (alas), try lying down for a few minutes. If being on your back doesn't work, roll onto one side and see if that makes a difference.

"The only thing that gets my baby moving is me getting comfortable, then she'll start kicking like crazy!" says Community mom Elleandco.

6. Talk to baby.

All that talking and cooing to your baby bump isn't in vain. Fetal hearing starts developing around 16 weeks of pregnancy , and by week 22, your little one can likely hear your voice, the swoosh of your blood, loud household noises, and other sounds.

Your baby may respond by turning, wriggling, or jumping as the startle reflex kicks in. So talk to your baby often — those sweet conversations may prompt movement in return.

7. Do something that makes you nervous (within reason).

That adrenaline rush you feel when you're nervous can give your baby a jolt, too. So if watching a suspenseful movie scene or thinking about labor makes you jittery, it may also encourage your baby to move.

Just don't send yourself into a full panic — that won't do either of you any favors.

8. Sing a lullaby or turn up the music (just not too loud).

If your usual chatter isn't getting your tiny gymnast to move, try singing a lullaby , playing a favorite song, or turning up the music a bit. Some moms even place headphones on their bellies.

Your baby may respond with kicks or rolls if you're at least 22 weeks pregnant. Be sure the sound isn't too loud , as excessive noise isn't good for developing ears.

"When I'm in the car and my husband plays loud rap music, the baby will kick harder," says Community mom anndavrab. "I'm assuming the bass feels wild to them lol."

"My little guy goes nuts when I listen to country music. Only country, haha," says Community mom Snipes1011.

These tricks can be easy, fun, and safe ways to encourage your baby to move in utero. But if they don't work for you, remember that all babies are different.

As long as you continue feeling regular movement throughout the second trimester and third trimester — and even during labor — everything is likely progressing normally.

What if I can't get my baby to move?

If none of these tricks works, it doesn't necessarily mean anything is wrong. Your baby will likely become active again soon.

But if you're worried about your baby's movements, notice a significant change once you begin kick counts around week 28, or it takes longer than two hours to count 10 movements of any kind, call your health care practitioner or head to the maternity ward as soon as possible just to make sure everything is okay with your baby. Trusted SourceKaiser PermanenteCounting KicksSee All Sources [3]

Counting Kicks