How to Choose a Toddler Chair

toddler chair

When your child is ready for a throne of her own, here's how to find a seat that'll suit her.

As you’ve no doubt learned from your little shadow, tiny tykes love to imitate the grown-ups in their lives. Once they hit toddlerhood, kids want to eat, clean, and yes, even relax just like their parents do, so a toddler chair is a surefire hit (especially if your wee one loves playing house ). From basic wooden and plastic seats to mini recliners and plush club chairs with matching ottomans, it’s easy to find a chill-out spot for your tot that’s practically identical to your own chair of choice. And if your little one is sitting pretty in her pint-sized perch, she’ll be more likely to spend time there, happily entertaining herself. These tips will put you in the driver’s seat as you search out the perfect toddler chair:

The right size. Not every toddler chair is the perfect height for your small fry, so it’s best to bring your little lounger to the store to give a couple of chairs a try before you invest in this piece of toddler gear . Her feet should touch the floor when she’s seated, though it’s not necessary that they rest flat against it. The goal is for your toddler to be able to sit down and get out of the chair on her own, and if her feet hit the ground when she’s sitting, she should have no trouble making those moves all by herself.

A sturdy make. Safety shouldn’t take a backseat to style. For children’s safety , look at the manufacturer’s instructions for the suggested maximum height, weight and age of the child using the chair. You can also look for a JPMA Seal (Juvenile Products Manufacturers Association) which means the product has been tested on behalf of the manufacturer to meet federal and state safety standards. Why? Well, your toddler’s not going to pack on that many pounds before preschool, but she’ll probably run into her chair, try knocking it over, and even stand on it. A sturdy chair means it can withstand that kind of rough play.

The right age range. Most chairs for toddlers are designed for children between the ages of 18 months and four years old, but it’s still worth checking the age recommendations on the packaging before you buy one, in case the chair is intended for bigger kids. Always look for the manufacturer’s suggested weight capacity and top age for the chair.

The best material for the intended use. Basic plastic or wood chairs are great if your tot and her playmates will be using them at tiny tables for children, while an upholstered chair works well next to your critter’s book collection. Crazy about coordinating? You’ll be able to find a toddler chair to match practically every material on the grown-up versions scattered around your house.

Nemours, KidsHealth, Household Safety: Preventing Injuries From Falling, Climbing, and Grabbing, May 2018. National Archives, Federal Register, Safety Standard for Children’s Folding Chairs and Stools , December 2017. Meredith Birkhead, Product Safety & Certification Associate, Juvenile Products Manufacturers Association (JPMA), Mt. Laurel, NJ, (856)-793-0906. United States Consumer Products Safety Commission, Durable Infant or Toddler Products, 2019. American Academy of Pediatrics, Healthychildren.org, Tips for Buying Baby Furniture and Baby Equipment , November 2009. What to Expect the Second Year , Heidi Murkoff and Sharon Mazel. Whattoexpect.com, Feeding Seat Options for Toddlers , January 2019.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

Can a Toddler Eat Too Much? What to Do When Your Child Always Wants More Food Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Picky Eater Problems: What to Feed a Picky Toddler Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

What to Know About Your Toddler's Car Seat: Get the Latest Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Why Is My Toddler Such a Picky Eater? 6 Causes of Picky Eating Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

How Much Should a Toddler Eat? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Dressing Toddlers By Maressa Brown, Contributing Writer/Editor

8 Walking Safety Tips for Toddlers to Keep Spills and Hazards at Bay Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Childproof Furniture to Prevent Tip-Over Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Can't Toddlers Sit Still? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Toddler Room Ideas That Turn Any Nursery into a Magical “Big Kid” Room By Kaitlin Stanford, Contributing Writer

How to Buy a Baby Stroller By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The 9 Best Baby Floor Seats, According to Parents and Experts Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Baby's Car Seat Safe and Up-to-Date? Check These Infant Car Seat Safety Tips Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

The Best Toddler Beds to Safely Transition Little Ones From Their Cribs Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window