How to Plan a First Birthday Party

Light copy updates for style and formatting.

how to plan first birthday party, birthday cake with one lit candle and one slice cut out of it

Gearing up for your little one's big bash? Here are tips to make your baby's first birthday party a blast for everyone.

It's tempting to throw baby an epic first birthday party — after all, you made it through a full year of caring for another human being. That certainly calls for celebration!

But before you go all-out, consider this: What do 1-year-olds know about parties? Not much, actually — which is why you might want to resist the urge to throw a huge birthday party bash. Your baby of honor might end up cracking under the pressure (of too many guests, too much excitement, too much entertainment) and spending much of the celebration in tears.

When it comes to a first birthday, sometimes the sweetest celebrations are the smaller, more intimate ones (kind of like your little one!). So as you brainstorm first birthday ideas, consider following this strategy for planning a party to remember instead of one you'd rather forget:

Two months before

To give yourself enough time to plan properly, start considering first birthday party ideas about two months before the big day. Choosing the theme, making the guest list, picking a date and sending invites are the first things that need to happen.

Narrow in on a theme

wild one birthday party plant decorations

There are so many fun first birthday themes , but here's a shortcut to success: Align the party theme with the theme of baby's nursery. You chose it for a reason — you love it! — and it's an aesthetic you're already familiar with, which makes planning easier, especially when you're a busy new(ish) parent.

You can always tweak the theme for the first year. For example, if your baby has an elephant-themed nursery, the party theme could be Wild One . The other bonus to choosing the same theme is that you already have a lot of decor for it, which helps keep things budget-friendly.

Time it right

Scheduling is everything when it comes to a baby's party. Try to orchestrate the big day’s activities so that your baby is well rested, recently fed and on a normal schedule. Don't plan a morning party if your baby usually naps in the morning or an early afternoon party if he usually conks out over lunch. Inviting a tired baby to participate in the festivities is inviting disaster.

Keep the party brief — an hour and a half to two hours at the most — so your baby won't be a wreck when the party's over or, worse, in the middle of it all.

Keep the invites light

A room crowded with even familiar faces may overwhelm your birthday baby. Unless you're sure your little one can handle a big scene, consider keeping it on the intimate side — maybe just a few family members and close friends.

Go digital

Regardless of the length of your guest list, aim to send invitations out about four to six weeks ahead of time — especially if you're celebrating during a busy season like over the holidays or during the summer.

To save time and money on postage, opt for digital invitations. This significantly cuts down on stress and cost, because once it's done and sent, all of your RSVPs will be in one place. You can also easily send any pertinent updates or reminders with the click of a button (like a link to a birthday registry if guests ask for one).

One month before

You're busy, no doubt. Rather than stress over every last detail, consider passing the baton. And no, that doesn't mean you have to hire an expensive party planner. While you certainly can work with a designer if you'd like to, there are also tons of Etsy shops that can help you customize your party, from the invitations to the decor to the cake topper.

You can also call on a trusted friend or grandparent to help with a few tasks. You're going to want to map out the decor, food and activities — and order supplies accordingly — a few weeks beforehand.

Pick out some decor

one in a melon birthday party balloons

A room decorated with all that your local party store has to offer and then some may be your dream — but maybe not your baby's. Too many balloons, streamers, banners, masks, noisemakers and hats, like too many people, may prove too much for a 1-year-old to process.

So decorate with a light hand. You can really bring a theme to life simply by decorating the buffet table with the right items. Think: a tablecloth, a few props to set the scene and a birthday banner. If balloons will round out your party picture, remember to dispose of them post-party — tiny tots can choke on the rubber scraps after balloons go pop. Or choose Mylar balloons — though remember that any string tied to a balloon can also pose a party safety risk .

Don't forget to add some bunting to baby's high chair for an extra-special and festive touch when it comes time for the smash cake . Simple, safe party favors — including brightly-colored large rubber balls, board books or bath toys — are a fun extra and can be handed to young guests just before the gifts are opened.

Map out the menu

farm birthday party cookies

A big buffet from your local restaurant or a carefully curated candy bar may seem like a sweet idea, but remember that you're hosting a child's birthday party. Be sure you have some kid-friendly options on hand, too.

And note: Many favorite party nibbles pose a choking risk , from M&Ms, Skittles and jelly beans to olives, popcorn, nuts and cocktail franks. So choose the party menu accordingly, or place the snacks out of little ones' reach.

That said, you want the adults present to have some fun, too. While a full bar may not be appropriate, it's a nice gesture to have some adult beverages on hand — you can even do a special Champagne toast to celebrate the parents making it through their first year. To keep things simple, a big-batch cocktail or party punch in a beverage server is a hands-off way to let guests help themselves.

Plan some entertainment

Don't send in the clowns — or magicians, or any other entertainment that might frighten your baby or any other young guests. One-year-olds can be sensitive and unpredictable. What delights them one minute may terrify them the next.

Also, don't try to organize the pre-toddler set into formal party games — they're not ready for that yet. If there are several young guests, however, put out a selection of toys for non-structured play, with enough of the same items to avoid competition, and maybe a few age-appropriate craft activities that little ones and their parents can work on together (or just a pile of paper and washable markers or crayons).

Day of

Don't command a performance

It would be nice, of course, if your baby would smile for the camera or take a few steps for the company — but don't count on it. He might learn to blow out the candles if you give it enough practice in the month before the party, but don't expect complete cooperation, and don't apply pressure.

Instead, let your baby be your baby, whether that means squirming out of your arms during that party pose, refusing even to stand on his own two feet during the step-taking exhibition or opting to play with an empty box instead of the expensive gift that came in it.

Take the cake, and make it a smash

Watercolor Smash Cakes

What first birthday party is complete without a smash cake (or cupcake) for your baby to dive into head-first? Whether it features layers of frosting or something a little healthier, it makes sense to undress your baby to a diaper before serving it up. And for safety's sake, make sure that any candles or choking-risk decorations are removed first.

Skip the presents

Though guests will likely bring some first birthday gifts , refrain from opening the pile in front of the group. Your child is too young to understand what's happening, which makes it a little boring to watch, overwhelming for your baby and, worse, awkward for all involved.

Instead, have a place for gifts to go, open them later in private and then be sure to write thank you notes per standard birthday party etiquette . If there's a family member or two present who really wants to see their gift opened (most likely grandparents or great-grandparents), pull them aside before they leave and open their gift to give them their moment.

Record it, of course

The party will be over much too quickly, so you'll want plenty of pictures and videos — preferably taken by someone else so you can enjoy the event in real time. (If you're have a virtual birthday party , don't forget to press the record button!)

And speaking of enjoying it — make sure you do. Another perk of a smaller, more casual party? You're less likely to stress and more likely to have fun, which, in turn, will mean more fun all around.

Don't stress if things don't go according to plan

Does anything with a baby in tow really go just as you envisioned it? Of course not. And the same goes for first birthday parties. At the end of the day you're celebrating the rollercoaster ride of love and exhaustion you experienced over the past year, and doing so with your support crew.

If your child is having an off day, let them. Let them play, let them eat the cookie, let them play with the balloons and if they don’t want to be passed around the party, don't force them. Get one picture of them in their cute birthday outfit and if they want to wear a onesie from then on, let them. You will remember the feeling and experience of the party, not every little decor and Instagram detail you thought you would when you were prepping.

With these tips, you'll be well on your way to planning and executing the perfect first birthday for your little one. And by perfect we mean fun, sentimental and, yes, maybe a little bit messy. After all, isn't that sort of like life raising a child?