Help Me, Heidi! How Do I Get Baby to Latch After Bottle-Feeding?

How to Get a Latch After Bottle

“Heidi, I need tips on getting baby to latch. I was told to feed my baby formula (from the little bottles they give you in the hospital) because his blood sugar level was down and my milk wasn’t in. Now we’re home, and he won’t latch. He fights the breast and just wants the bottle. How do I get him on the breast? Is it too late now that he’s a week old?” ~ Kyla

Hey Kyla! He wasn’t born yesterday, but your sweet little puppy can almost certainly be taught the new trick of latching on—so he can ultimately turn in bottles for breasts, and switch from formula to breast milk.

It’s a scenario that happens less often than it used to, but still happens: a baby who arrives with low blood glucose levels (hypoglycemia) is prescribed formula from a bottle as a routine precaution to boost blood sugar despite agreement among many experts that breastfeeding usually does as good a job regulating blood sugar as formula does (in all but severe cases), even before mom’s milk comes in.

Problem is, infants who start off with a bottle—which offers maximum chow for minimum effort—may balk at the extra effort it takes to extract milk from a breast. At least, at first. With a little redirection (preferably from a certified lactation professional) and a lot of patience (from you), he’s likely not only to take the breast bait, but learn to love mommy-sourced feedings. And yes, prefer your nature-made nipples to synthetic substitutes.

First up, whatever else you do: make sure your little guy gets enough to eat while you try to make this transition from all bottle to all breast. Don’t stress whether it’s formula or breast milk in the short term, or whether it comes from a bottle or your breast. Also, check in with the pediatrician about your game plan—and about intake, output (wet and dirty diaper wise) and weight gain expectations for baby.

Then, make sure you’re pumping as often as your baby feeds, so that when the latching stars do align (soon!) your supply will be up to his demand. Serve up that liquid gold in a bottle or with an SNS ( supplemental nutrition system ), which offers the added benefit of simultaneously stimulating your breasts to produce more milk. If you’re not yet making enough to satisfy him, mix breast milk with formula as needed (you can do this in the same bottle). Switch to a slower-flow nipple and make sure your baby takes frequent breaks so that he adjusts to the slow pace of suckling at a breast vs. the relative “fast food” style of sucking on a bottle. Tilting the bottle up only slightly (again, so baby has to work for the milk) can also help baby adjust to the slower flow of a breast-dispensed meal.

Next, call in that professional—or pay her (or him) a call, as soon as possible, so you can get help assessing and resolving any latching issues (likely an easy fix, but very occasionally something that needs a little more attention, like a tongue or lip tie). If you don’t know a lactation consultant in your area (and the hospital you delivered at doesn’t offer these services after discharge), call your baby’s pediatrician or your local La Leche chapter for a recommendation. (WIC offers free on-site lactation support ). While you’re waiting for that hands-on help, here are a few other tips to try:

A laid-back position. Also called “biological nurturing” or “baby led feeding,” this position taps into a newborn’s natural instinct to feed, putting him in the driver’s seat—in control of latching on when and how he wants to. Lie back and give it a test drive, preferably skin to skin. Another benefit of the laid-back position: You get rest, relaxation, and the chance to feed hands-free (so you can use both hands for stroking your snuggly sweet pea).

Skin-to-skin cuddles. No matter what position you’re trying to breastfeed in (and even when you’re not trying to feed), skin-to-skin is always in. Not only does that skin-to-skin contact help regulate baby’s blood sugar (aha!) and body temperature, but it releases the amazing multipurpose hormone oxytocin, which among many other phenomenal feats, nurtures bonding, reduces stress for you and baby…and, triggers the release of your breast milk, aka let-down. Swaddled babies may be awkward to position for latching, as well as too sleepy to stay focused on feeding. If you’ve been feeding baby fully-clothed (both of you) and/or swaddled, try placing baby against your skin dressed in nothing but a diaper (under a blanket if it’s chilly). And speaking of skin, don’t wash your nipples or areolas for now—the idea is to let your baby sniff out that food source. Squeeze a little milk from your breast onto your areola to help clue him in.

Chill out. Breastfeeding takes two relaxed partners. So before you feed, find your inner zen (try soft music or a Calm app) and help baby find his (with a gentle massage and some skin-to-skin snuggling). Lower the lights and power down your phone – and let the love (and milk) flow.

Don’t force the breast. Sometimes, the struggle is real—a baby may actually fight the breast because he associates it with force-feeding (force-feeding that doesn’t get him fed). Baby rejecting the breast makes mom stress, a signal baby picks up on, making him battle the breast even more fiercely, making her even more stressed, and so on. Instead, try (with the above strategies and the calming help of your lactation consultant) taking a more relaxed approach, one that never pushes your breast on your reluctant baby. Let your little one get to know your breasts on his terms (even if he just wants to use them as pillows for starters).

Most of all, Kyla, try to keep your eye on your prize. Breastfeeding is ideal, and chances are excellent that with the right support you’ll reach that ideal. But the bottom line that always matters most is a happy, healthy baby…and a happy, healthy mom. Keep me posted!

Hugs,

Heidi

Help Me, Heidi! is a weekly advice column in which What to Expect creator Heidi Murkoff answers your most pressing pregnancy and parenting questions. She’s tackling the stuff you are desperate to know right now — so if you have a question, ask Heidi on Facebook and she might answer in an upcoming column. (Not sure if Heidi's answered one of your questions? Check out the rest of the columns here .)