How to Teach Your Toddler the ABCs

Updates throughout to copy, sourcing and formatting, plus a new medical review for accuracy.

teaching your toddler the ABCs, little toddler girl and mom reading to her

How important is it to teach your child about letters, and when should you start? Introduce the alphabet to your tot with these hands-on learning activities that help teach the ABCs.

Many young children are able to sing the alphabet song from an early age (it’s catchy, after all!). But really understanding their ABCs, then eventually writing some of those letters out, can take longer.

It’s normal to want to give your child a head start on learning . Before you do anything, though, put away those flash cards and educational videos. Playing , singing, talking , and reading with your toddler — all those things you do every day — are already giving him an excellent head start.

In fact, many experts believe that if you force learning on your child at a young age, he may get the idea that it isn't fun (the last thing you want him to think!).

A better strategy may be to let teaching and absorbing new information happen naturally. Trust that as your child builds sandcastles, plays house, and stacks blocks, he's soaking up all the knowledge he'll need to eventually be ready for school. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCognitive Development In Preschool ChildrenSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCognitive Development In Preschool ChildrenSee All Sources

Still, many children show a natural interest in letters and numbers, and learning the alphabet is something that will become increasingly important as your toddler approaches kindergarten. Here’s what parents need to know about introducing the ABCs to their children and how to encourage letter-learning in a fun, low-pressure way.

Learning the alphabet is not really one step: First you likely learn the song, then maybe recognize some letters and associated sounds, then learn them all in the right order, then [remember] what they all sound like.

Dr. Jesil Pazhayampallil, a pediatrician in New York and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

When do children learn their ABCs?

Like all things, children learn at their own pace and in their own time. Some toddlers might be able to recognize many (if not all) of their ABCs around ages 2 or 3. But other kids are still learning the alphabet as they enter kindergarten, according to a report on school readiness from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSchool ReadinessSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSchool ReadinessSee All Sources

In general, most children are able to write some of the letters in their name and recall some letters when a caregiver points to them by age 5, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC's) Developmental Milestones. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Child By Five YearsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Child By Five YearsSee All Sources

"Learning the alphabet is not really one step," says Jesil Pazhayampallil , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician on Long Island, New York, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "First, you likely learn the song, then maybe recognize some letters and associated sounds, then learn them all in the right order, then [remember] what they all sound like. Writing them is yet another skill."

Don’t stress too much — once your child starts school, he’ll master these and countless other literacy skills, including learning how to read the words those letters spell.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

Don't stress too much about teaching your toddler the ABCs too early on — and certainly don't feel like you need to introduce tools like flash cards or educational videos. Kids learn at their own pace, and your toddler is already getting a head start on learning by playing, singing, reading and exploring the world with you.

Kids learn the ABCs at different ages. Some toddlers might recognize many of the letters of the alphabet, but other kids will still be learning as they enter kindergarten.

By the time your child is 5, he'll likely be able to write some of the letters in his name and recall some letters when you or another caregiver points them out, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Developmental Milestones.

There are lots of low-pressure ways to introduce the ABCs to your tot, such as by reading books that highlight different letters, playing with toys like letter magnets or alphabet puzzles, and finding opportunities to reference letters and the sounds they make throughout the day ("What letter does 'Mommy' start with? Yes, that's right, the letter 'M'! It sounds like 'Mmmm!'").

How to teach toddlers their ABCs

There are lots of ways to encourage your child’s interest in the alphabet while you play with him at home and go about your day together. Here, some fun, hands-on learning activities that can help teach the ABCs:

Books. Your shelves (and your local library's) are likely brimming with clever alphabet and counting books for children. Share some with your letter- or number-lover — and see if there are versions that play into his other passions, like trucks, dinosaurs or animals. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursToddler Reading TimeSee All Sources [4] “Right now we’ve got Dr. Seuss's ABC and Learning with Llama Llama ABC, which are great for visual reference to the letters and helping recognize the sound patterns,” says What to Expect Community member bunnybeanNM.

Get a library card. And speaking of the library: Make sure you have a card and get one for your child too. "The library is great for events like storytime and activities to take home, which can involve the alphabet," says Dr. Pazhayampallil.

When you read, don't just say the words. You can activate your child's awareness for letters by engaging with him on every page. "Point out the letter, the sound it makes. Trace it with your finger. If there are associated pictures, talk about them and ask questions," suggests Dr. Pazhayampallil.

Writing his name. Your child's favorite letters are the ones that spell his own name. Write them in simple block letters on a piece of cardboard and post it on the door to his room. Sign art projects on his behalf. Point out his moniker on birthday cards or the label inside his jacket. Soon he'll be telling you how to spell it.

Toys. Look for toys and puzzles that feature letters and numbers. For instance, What to Expect Community parent ccallaway85 recommends foam letters for the bath: “We used [them] every night in the tub. We would introduce three at a time, [and] once she got those down, we would introduce three more.” Letter magnets for the fridge, alphabet puzzles, and coloring books with letters are also popular among the toddler set.

Games. Play bingo and dominoes; both emphasize pre-math and pre-reading concepts. Shape identification is a pre-reading skill too.

Talk about sounds. Understanding the different sounds letters make (like Aaah for “A” or Oooo for “O”) can help kids recall letters. “Sometimes while we’re driving, I practice rhyming and beginning sounds, like ‘What sound do you hear at the beginning of mouse ? Mmmm …’” says What to Expect Community parent gato22.

Take it slowly. If your little one is seeming overwhelmed by the full alphabet (that's understandable — it’s a lot of letters) try focusing on just one at a time. “I go over a letter with [my daughter] once a day, and we do arts and crafts for the letter,” says What to Expect Community member 3-lil-pigs. “Then I have her trace the letters just for fun.”

Weave letter-learning throughout the day. While it’s certainly not necessary to quiz your child or force him to write out letters, look for natural opportunities to encourage his interest in the alphabet. For example, you might use sidewalk chalk to write his name on the driveway, make a letter-shaped pancake for breakfast, or ask him if he wants to sign his name on a birthday card for Grandma or Grandpa.

What if your child doesn't care about the alphabet? That's perfectly natural too. Let it go for now, and let him develop at his own pace. Remember, you're raising a lifelong learner — so you have plenty of time!