Can You Put a Car Seat in a Shopping Cart?

shopping cart

Keep your pint-sized shopping companion safe, sound and satisfied while you cruise through the aisles with these tips for bringing baby to the grocery store.

Babies seem to have two modes on a grocery shopping outing . Either they’re grabby, hyper and generally impatient, or they’ve flat-out fallen asleep in the middle of aisle 5.

Keeping your cutie in her car seat while shopping can help you navigate either scenario, as long as you’re doing it safely. Shopping carts can sometimes injure babies and kids (especially those aged 5 and under), often from cart tip-overs or other falls — and many of those injuries affect the head and neck, which can be serious.

Ideally, with the COVID-19 pandemic, a family member or friend should handle the shopping or watch your little one while you're in the store in order to reduce your child's risk of exposure. If you do take your baby along with you, follow these do’s and don’ts to keep your pint-sized supermarket companion secure in the grocery cart, and find out when she’s ready to move from the car seat to the big-kid cart seat.

How to put a car seat in a shopping cart

You should never try to balance your baby’s car seat on top of the cart’s toddler seat, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Doing so can make the cart top-heavy and increase the risk for dangerous tip-overs, even if the seat seems secure.

If you need to take the car seat into the store, put it in the cart’s large basket, taking care to keep items like raw meat away from your baby since they can harbor illness-inducing germs. (Try sticking them under the cart instead.)

But if you can avoid putting the car seat in the shopping cart, that’s even better. The AAP recommends wearing your little one in a carrier or sling while grocery shopping. That way, she stays safe and you have your hands free to push the cart and pick up your items.

Or, if you’re only getting a few things, shop with your baby in her stroller and load your groceries into the stroller’s cargo basket underneath the seat. Just take care not to overload a bag that could cause the stroller to tip back.

When can a baby sit in a shopping cart?

Strapping your baby or toddler in the shopping cart’s built-in seat can almost feel like a parenting rite of passage. Once your market companion can sit up independently and maintain good head control, she’s ready to make the move. For most babies, that’s sometime between 6 and 9 months.

Always secure your baby with the seat’s safety belt or harness, adjusting the straps as necessary so your sweetie stays put. If a seat doesn’t have a belt or the belt appears to be broken, find another cart.

If the grocery store has carts that are specially designed for babies and toddlers (like a plastic car or truck at the front of the cart), pick that over the standard option. These kid-friendly models typically sit closer to the ground, so there’s less risk for injury.

Once your sweetie is strapped in, always keep a close eye on her and stay within arm’s reach. Never leave your child in the cart unattended.

Should you use a baby shopping cart cover?

Fabric shopping cart covers are nice to have, but they’re not a must. The covers may protect your shopping partner from lingering germs on the cart and make her seat a little cozier, and some even have pockets and loops for holding toys and pacifiers.

If you’d rather not deal with the extra gear though, don’t sweat it. Wiping the cart seat down with a disposable wipe gets rid of germs too.

More shopping cart safety tips

Whether you’re using a car seat or placing your child directly in the shopping cart seat, keep this advice in mind.

Always use the safety straps. It’s so important that it’s worth repeating. When your child sits in the front seat of the cart, always buckle her in with the straps or harness. If a cart doesn’t have a strap or the restraint is broken, find another cart.

Stay within arm’s reach. Never leave your child unattended, even when she’s securely strapped in.

Don’t let your toddler climb on the cart or ride on the outside either. Doing so can cause the cart to tip and put her at risk for getting hurt.

Don’t let your toddler or preschooler push the cart. Having them “help” can keep them busy, but most little kids aren’t tall enough to see over the height of the basket. That can make it tough for them to navigate safely, upping the odds that they collide with a display (or another shopper).

Food shopping with a baby or toddler calls for some extra strategizing. But once you have the shopping cart safety figured out, the most important piece of the puzzle is in place. Now all you have to do is come up with a plan to keep your cutie occupied while you’re waiting in the checkout line.