How Do You Actually Get Your Baby on a Sleep Schedule?

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

sleeping through the night

Healthy sleep patterns start with a schedule. Here's how and when to get your baby on a regular sleep schedule.

Talk to experienced parents about baby sleep, and the one thing you’ll hear over and over is the importance of establishing an infant sleep schedule.

In fact, getting your baby on a sleep schedule early on could be the key to healthy sleep now and for years to come. Here’s when and how to get your baby on a sleep schedule.

Key Takeaways

Newborns can’t follow a set sleep schedule, but by around 2 months, you can introduce loose patterns. Between 3 and 6 months, babies develop more predictable sleep/wake times. Formal sleep training should wait until 4 to 6 months with your pediatrician's guidance.

To start establishing a sleep schedule, track your baby's sleep patterns and wake windows, watch for sleepy cues, use consistent pre-sleep routines, create structured daytime rhythms, and allow brief chances for self-soothing at night.

Predictable sleep schedules comfort babies, support healthy circadian rhythms, and help them eventually learn to fall asleep independently and sleep through the night.

When can you get baby on a sleep schedule?

When your baby is about 2 months old, her internal clock will become a bit more predictable — and you can try implementing a basic newborn sleep schedule .

Between 3 and 6 months, your baby’s bedtime, naptime and wake times will increasingly happen around the same times each day. You'll learn to anticipate your baby's natural sleepy times and work toward putting her down while she's drowsy but still awake, teaching her the valuable life skill of how to fall asleep on her own. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources

Keep in mind that baby sleep training in any form (also known as sleep teaching or self-soothing training) should wait until your baby is at least 4 to 6 months old, if you decide to do it at all. Your pediatrician will tell you when your baby is physically and developmentally ready. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSleeping Through the NightSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSleeping Through the NightSee All Sources

What's the best baby sleep schedule?

There is no one-size-fits-all baby sleep schedule. Little ones vary in when and how much they sleep every night and at naptime. You may have a naturally early riser who likes to wake up before the sun and eat right away ... or your baby may sleep a bit later (lucky you!). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHealthy Sleep Habits: How Many Hours Does Your Child Need?See All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHealthy Sleep Habits: How Many Hours Does Your Child Need?See All Sources

As your baby grows, you'll become familiar enough with her hunger and sleep cues to develop a feeding and sleep schedule that works for your family.

"Baby has been calling the shots, now 4 months, and by reading her cues, there have been very clear patterns," says What to Expect Community user isthisreallyhappening.

Here’s a chart of rough baby sleep schedules by age to get you started:

baby sleep schedule chart

Can you put a newborn on a sleep schedule?

Since your newborn spent the last nine months in the cozy confines of your dark womb, she won’t understand when it’s daytime or nighttime for the first few weeks of life. That means you can’t expect to put your infant on a newborn sleep schedule just yet.

Expect your newborn to sleep between 14 and 17 hours (give or take) over a 24-hour period. Your baby will sleep for two to three hours at a time, then gradually three to four hours at a stretch. Be sure to check with your pediatrician about when it's okay to let your baby consistently sleep for four or more hours at a time. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursSleep and Your NewbornSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursSleep and Your NewbornSee All Sources

Keep in mind that if your newborn doesn’t wake on her own during the night, you’ll need to wake your baby to eat every two to three hours.

Baby sleep schedules by age

Here are some more detailed sample sleep schedules for babies between the ages of 2 months and 10–12 months:

Tips for how to get baby on a sleep schedule

The following tips can help ease your baby into a regular sleep schedule: Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicSleep in Your Baby's First YearSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicSleep in Your Baby's First YearSee All Sources

Start early but not too soon. Newborn babies can’t follow a sleep schedule, but it’s possible to implement a loose eating and sleep timetable once your baby is 2 months old based on her personality and snoozing habits.

Become familiar with your baby's sleep patterns and "wake windows." Keep a sleep log to get an idea of when your baby usually sleeps so you can schedule naps and bedtime accordingly, and keep track of her "wake windows," or the amounts of time babies can handle being awake, which vary by age. For example, newborns are only truly awake and alert for about three minutes of every hour, 1-month-olds for about an hour at a time and 3-month-olds for up to two hours at a stretch. And remember, all babies are different.

Be flexible. When it comes to implementing routines, your baby may prefer things highly planned or more go-with-the-flow. Try to adjust your baby’s sleep schedule accordingly, sticking to her natural rhythms as much as possible.

Watch for sleep cues. Keep an eye out for cues that your baby is tired , like eye-rubbing, yawning, or crankiness. The goal is to put your baby down when she’s drowsy but not yet asleep, so she has a chance to learn how to fall asleep without help from you. If the drowsy drop-off doesn’t work just yet, keep trying!

Follow a pre-sleep routine. Routines are reassuring to babies and reinforce natural circadian rhythms, signaling that it’s time to go to sleep. A good baby bedtime routine might include a feeding with cuddles, bath, book, massage and lullaby. Abbreviate that routine (include just a book or a lullaby, for example) before naptime.

Incorporate a schedule throughout the rest of your day. Babies feel comforted by the additional structure and rhythm of a rough daytime schedule, including the same waking time, nap times, feeding times , and play times. A daytime routine can even make bedtime go smoother. You might want to wake up in the morning with cuddles and a feed, followed by a walk in the stroller or carrier. After your baby’s afternoon nap, it’s tummy time and babbles in the rocker.

Don’t jump at the first noise. Once babies are about 3 months old , they’re capable of self-soothing, so don’t jump to pick up your baby if she fusses during the night or during naps. Instead, wait a few minutes to see if she can fall back asleep on her own. If she continues fussing, try to check on her without picking her up.

Adjust as needed. Remember that kids aren’t predictable, so your baby’s sleep schedule will evolve with time. A little trial and error can help you figure out what works for your baby.

Why is an infant sleep schedule important?

An infant sleep schedule is predictable, and predictability comforts babies, easing the transition from the busy daytime to the lull of bedtime.

A sleep schedule featuring bedtime and naptime routines paves the way for eventually teaching your baby to fall asleep on her own and sleep through the night .

When should I see my doctor?

Never hesitate to see your doctor if you have questions about your baby’s sleep schedule or sleep issues. Many sleep problems have a solution as long as you ask for help.

Healthy sleep patterns start with a sleep schedule — even for infants. Once you learn to anticipate your baby's natural sleepy times and wake windows, you can help smooth the transition to dreamland so you both get the rest you need.

Not sure if your baby's sleep routine is on track? Open the What to Expect app to track your little one's sleep and see what’s typical right now — so all of you can get some more rest.