How to Hide Your Pregnancy

Want to stay mum about becoming a mom? Try these tactics to keep your pregnancy a secret during your first trimester.

Stocksy

One of the hardest parts about early pregnancy for some moms-to-be: You're bursting to share your big baby news , but you also want to wait until you hit that 12-week milestone. And you're sure to be passing on cocktails, which can be a red flag to your curious friends and coworkers, especially if they know you've had babies on the brain.

Want tips for navigating those first few months of pregnancy without letting your secret slip? Here are eight sticky situations you might encounter — and how to deal with them.

Key Takeaways:

You can skip alcohol without tipping anyone off. Simple tricks like ordering mocktails or arriving early to set up a "fake" first drink will help you dodge booze without drawing suspicion.

At work, prep to treat morning sickness on the sly. Stock your desk with crackers, ginger candies, and water so you can quietly ease queasiness.

Simple clothing tweaks can hide a bump. Consider belly bands or stretchy pieces in a size up to keep your first trimester bump under wraps.

When Your Workout Buddy Suggests a 7 a.m. Zumba Class ...

iStock

With pregnancy symptoms like fatigue and morning sickness setting in over those first few weeks, an early morning exercise class may be out of the question. But if you think you can manage something gentle later in the day, try scheduling your workout dates well in advance. Your pal won't even think to ask about that Zumba class if you've already booked an afternoon Pilates session together.

If nausea's keeping you from hitting the gym altogether, beg off for a few weeks by blaming allergies or a persistent stomach bug . Or if you're too tired to lift a magazine — never mind a dumbbell — open up about your exhaustion, but blame a big work deadline that's keeping you up late.

If she continues to press, you might have to fake a minor injury and say you'll be sidelined for a month or two. Runner's knee or a pulled groin (she won't ask many questions about that one) should do the trick.

When Queasiness Strikes in the Office ...

iStock

If you get weak in the knees at work, stock a drawer with bland crackers and ginger candies — or whatever else soothes your uneasy stomach. Sip water or ginger ale throughout the day to keep fluid levels up, as dehydration will only make morning sickness worse.

Also, with your newly acquired symptom of a lack of energy, running between meetings may no longer be an option. Give yourself a few extra minutes to make it to your various appointments so you can stop for some deep breaths or a bathroom break as needed along the way.

When Your Assistant Brings You Your Regular Morning Coffee Order ...

iStock

It's easy enough to pull a no-show on your favorite Starbucks barista, but how do you tell the assistant who always brings your morning latte that your usual order is on hold for the next nine months?

If quitting caffeine cold-turkey (though 200 milligrams a day or less is considered okay) would be way out of character, try this white lie: "I've had a hard time falling asleep at night, so my doctor suggested giving up all caffeine for a few days. We'll see how long this lasts ..."

When a Coworker Suggests a Sushi Joint for Lunch ...

iStock

The $7 lunch special was a fine idea when the mystery fish was just for you. But now that your meal is feeding two, you probably want to be a little more cautious.

The easiest way to beg off sushi lunch is to start bringing lunch from home — no one can blame a girl for cutting costs. If you still crave lunch out but want to avoid certain items, point to yesterday's dinner ("I finished a two-person sushi meal by myself last night! I can't possibly look at another California roll") and have a couple more restaurant suggestions at the ready.

Need help navigating all those real-world pregnancy issues? Get expert tips and support from a Community who gets it in the What to Expect app .

When Your Best Friend Wants to Celebrate a Promotion With Post-Work Drinks ...

iStock

You were first in line at the bar for half-price martini night just last month, so how do you bail when your friend has an actual reason to celebrate? You don't — but you do need to be a little sneaky.

If your partner is joining you at the bar, simply order two of the same drink, then switch glasses as theirs gets lower. (No one will notice if you place identical drinks side-by-side — unless they have an eagle eye on both of your drinks.)

If you're flying solo, make sure you're the first one there, then ask the bartender if you can taste the merlot. After a (fake) sip, ask, "On second thought, can I start with a seltzer?" Take the seltzer and the wine glass when you stake out a table, and your friends will think you're one drink in when they arrive.

If mixed drinks are more your thing, order a virgin version or even juice with ice and a splash of water, and keep your drink in hand so nobody accidentally sips your booze-free beverage. When someone else offers to buy the next round, say, "One is enough for me tonight!" and ask for water.

When the Whole Family's Gathering for a Boozy Weekend Brunch ...

Andrew Cebulka/Stocksy

It might be easy to fib to your friends, but if you skip your regular weekend mimosa (or two) at a family affair, your mom's Grandbaby Radar will instantly start beeping. Simply pull the switcheroo with your partner and discreetly nudge your glass over when theirs gets empty.

While you're eating eggs for two, they can drink for two knowing they have a designated driver. If you're hosting, it can't hurt to invest in some inexpensive, opaque glasses — that way no one will know what you're sipping.

Keep a pitcher of mimosas and a carton of OJ in the fridge, and refill everyone's drinks behind the refrigerator door. If you are on a family trip or tailgating party, simply bring a travel mug. No one needs to know your mug is filled with water.

It's a trick What to Expect Community member Mrs-Pope has dubbed "the Yeti approach." As she shared, "I used to drink vodka, sparkling water, and a squeeze of lemonade flavor in a Yeti when I'd drink with friends and family, so I just did that but used plain ol' water when we were at the beach with my husband's family. They didn't notice a thing and I stayed super hydrated."

When Your Preschooler's Begging You to Hop on the Merry-Go-Round ...

Xunbin Pan/Stocksy

Baby news is probably too abstract for children — who can't wrap their heads around the next nine hours, let alone nine months. But younger kids can likely be distracted from pregnancy-unfriendly activities (that carousel may kick your queasies into high gear).

Try saying, "The merry-go-round is crowded! But look at the swings! Don't you want to swing so high?" If you're too wiped to keep up with rambunctious older children, plan ahead: Have a few new board games on hand for instant entertainment.

And don't feel guilty for distracting them while you chill for 10 minutes — a little Candy Land or Sesame Street never hurt anyone (especially since you already keep overall daily screen time to a minimum).

When You Need to Dress Up for a Special Event — but Nothing Fits ...

Kristen Hines/Stocksy

If you find your clothes starting to get snug in the middle, you can try a few wardrobe adjustments before resigning yourself to a telltale maternity wardrobe. A rubber band looped through the buttonhole of your pants and wrapped around the button can give you a little extra breathing room, or try a maternity band to cover your waist and avoid flashing your undies.

If you're not ready for maternitywear but can't bear another day of squeezing into your regular clothes, invest in a few forgiving pieces in a size up — think stretchy pants and empire-waisted shirts — to hold you over.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Trending On What to Expect

Signs of Labor

Pregnancy Calculator

⚠️ You can't see this cool content because you have ad block enabled. Please whitelist our site to get all the best deals and offers from our partners.

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S.

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S.

Braxton Hicks Contractions and False Labor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window