How to Prevent Car Sickness in Children

Minor copy changes throughout to more specifically address car sickness and a new medical review.

child in car seat

Car sickness can be upsetting for kids and stressful for parents to manage. Learn the best ways to prevent motion sickness and help your little one feel better quickly.

It’s pretty heartbreaking when your little one gets sick to his stomach — and even more so when it happens while you’re on the road. Dealing with your child's car sickness is one of those messy facts of life that’s worthy of a parent merit badge.

If your toddler gets car sick on a regular basis, you should know why it happens, what you can do about it and how to prevent car sickness from occurring in the future.

What causes car sickness in children?

Some toddlers can happily sit in their car seats for a road trip or comfortably ride on a boat or plane, while others don’t do so well.

Car sickness is a type of motion sickness brought on when your little one’s inner ears, eyes, and muscle and joint nerves receive conflicting signals. That can happen when a child riding low in the backseat of your vehicle senses motion but cannot see out the window, for example, which confuses the brain and can trigger symptoms. Some kids also experience motion sickness on trains, planes, boats or amusement park rides. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCar SicknessSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCar SicknessSee All Sources

What causes car sickness in one child and not another isn’t clear. There’s some evidence that kids who are prone to car sickness may be more likely to develop headaches or migraines when they’re older, and there may also be a genetic link. Being stressed or excited may exacerbate car sickness too.

Babies and younger toddlers aren’t usually bothered by car sickness, but kids ages 2 to 12 can be particularly prone. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicWhat causes car sickness in children and how can I prevent it?See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicWhat causes car sickness in children and how can I prevent it?See All Sources

Car sickness symptoms in children

Of course, it’s pretty clear that a child who suddenly vomits in the car is likely experiencing motion sickness. In addition to vomiting, some of the most common car sickness symptoms in toddlers and other children can include: Trusted SourceSeattle Children'sMotion SicknessSee All Sources [3]

Motion Sickness

Upset stomach/queasiness

Cold sweat

Fatigue

Loss of appetite

Dizziness

A toddler may not be equipped to verbalize how he’s feeling, so heads-up if you see any of the following early signs of car sickness:

Pale skin

Restlessness

Yawning

Crying

Loss of interest in food

Car sickness treatments for children

You can feel helpless if your tot says or looks like he’s going to be sick, especially if you’re the one behind the wheel — and managing a case of car sickness while simultaneously navigating the road can be overwhelming for parents. So what can you give your little one to ease motion sickness?

The best thing you can do is have a plan and a few tricks up your sleeve to get everyone involved safely to your destination. That means taking steps to prevent car sickness before you ever leave the house and continuing throughout the ride.

These car sickness treatment tips for children can help ease symptoms:

Feed the belly — carefully. Potentially car sick children need tummies that are neither too empty nor too full — so no heavy meals before or during your trip. Avoid anything greasy, spicy or acidic. If you’ll be on the road for a while, offer a small, light, easy-to-stomach snack, like dry crackers. And be sure to have water on hand (both for drinking and cleaning up messes).

Encourage a bit of shut-eye. Getting car sick kids to sleep while you’re on the road might be a tall order, but it’s worth a try since children are much less likely to feel sick if they’re asleep (even resting with eyes closed can help). If you’re planning a long trip, see if you can schedule it during naptime or even after bedtime to up your chances of avoiding an upchuck.

Give him a window seat and let him feel the breeze. Sometimes a little fresh air can quell motion sickness in children, and looking out at the horizon helps too. Make sure your car has adequate ventilation.

Create a distraction. Count trucks or play spot-the-ABCs to encourage your child to focus farther away, instead of looking at books up close (which can upset a stomach in motion).

Stop the car. Allowing a car sick child a few minutes to stretch out on his back, eyes closed, when the car is stopped may help alleviate symptoms. Have a cool cloth on hand to place over his forehead.

Pack a hazmat kit of Ziploc bags, wipes, spare clothing, an air freshener, and a washcloth and water to make a compress. Keep an old towel in the car too for messes that wipes can’t quite handle. Use the towel to cover your child’s car seat (as long as it doesn’t obstruct the buckles) or the car’s floor or seat, and go back later for a deep car seat cleaning should your tot toss his cookies. If you get enough advance notice (not so common with toddlers), and you’re not the one at the wheel, you might be able to direct your child to vomit into a paper bag (don’t keep plastic bags within a toddler’s reach). If not, use a plastic bag to seal up soiled clothes and towels instead.

Can you prevent children from getting car sick?

Treating your toddler's car sickness can be a challenge. But ultimately, what you really want to do is prevent it from happening at all. The problem is, there's no tried-and-true way to prevent motion sickness in every child.

In addition to being mindful about what you feed your tot before you get into the car, there are a few strategies you can try with your pediatrician's okay. However, don't be disappointed if your toddler still gets car sick. It's also imperative to get your doctor's confirmation that these tactics are safe to try on your child:

Stock up on Sea-Bands. These elasticized, acupressure bracelets (they look like small sweatbands with a hard plastic ball embedded in them) can negate nausea by activating a pressure point on your child’s inner wrist (they might ease a mom-to-be’s morning sickness too). They’re inexpensive, safe and may be effective at preventing car motion sickness, though there's no evidence that they work for all kids. If you do try them, make sure you get the children’s size.

Talk to your doctor about using over-the-counter medication. Check with the pediatrician about whether your child should take anti-motion-sickness medicine before future trips. Antihistamines such as Dramamine and Benadryl can also prevent car sickness and work best if taken an hour before your trip. But always, always ask your child’s pediatrician before giving your little one any medicine. You generally shouldn’t give antihistamines to children younger than 2 because of potentially harmful (or even lethal) side effects, including rapid heart rate and convulsions, and your doctor may advise you to steer clear of them completely. Benadryl should only be used for babies and toddlers under age 2 with the approval of your pediatrician, and then only sparingly if you do get the green light. You should also make sure they're safe if your child is 2 or older.

If your child gets sick despite your best efforts, stop the car as soon as it’s safe to do so and let your queasy tot get some fresh air and a few sips of water (or even a Popsicle if you can find one). If possible, have him close his eyes and rest for a few minutes before you get back on the road.