How to Manage Pregnancy Back Pain, from Belly Bands to Ice Packs

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Woman with pregnancy back pain

Oh, your aching back! Here's what causes stiffness and back pain during pregnancy, and how to find relief.

Aches and pains often tag along during pregnancy, but you don’t have to put up with constant back discomfort. Taking breaks from sitting or standing, maintaining good posture, and wearing supportive shoes can make a difference. Comfort measures like warm baths, massage, or prenatal yoga — along with tools like belly bands or compresses — may also be helpful.

Read on to learn more about why back pain happens during pregnancy and how to get relief.

Key Takeaways

Back pain is common and has clear physical causes. Hormones like relaxin loosen ligaments, while your growing uterus shifts your center of gravity and increases the curve in your lower back — leading to muscle strain, soreness, and stiffness.

It can start early and often worsens over time . Back pain may begin in the first trimester but more commonly starts in the second trimester (around week 18) and can continue or intensify through the third trimester.

Relief is possible with simple daily adjustments . Improving posture, taking movement breaks, wearing supportive shoes, avoiding heavy lifting, using heat/cold therapy, and trying gentle exercise or prenatal yoga can significantly ease discomfort.

What is back pain during pregnancy?

Back pain during pregnancy typically appears as aches, stiffness, or soreness in the upper or lower back and hips. It can sometimes extend into the legs and buttocks.

When does back pain during pregnancy start and end?

Unfortunately, back pain can start early in your pregnancy. Some women experience it in the first trimester , but for many, it starts up around week 18 , early in the second trimester .

"Mild back ache was the first symptom for me for two of my pregnancies," says What to Expect Community mom Eva12345.

It can persist or sometimes worsen as the pregnancy progresses, especially in the third trimester , and can continue until delivery (sometimes transitioning into postpartum back pain ).

What causes back pain during pregnancy?

Throughout pregnancy, the hormone relaxin loosens the ligaments in your pelvic joints to prepare your body for the passage of your baby during delivery.

At the same time, your growing uterus shifts your balance forward, changing your center of gravity. To compensate, your lower back curves more than usual, which can strain muscles and lead to soreness, stiffness, and pain.

"I went on a cleaning frenzy in my house, laundry, mopping, scrubbing the tubs — and now my back is killingggg me," says Community member smpick. "It’s my very lower back almost into my butt! Sooo sore!"

Is pregnancy back pain the same as sciatica?

Not always. Sciatica is a specific type of back pain, and you can definitely experience it in pregnancy. It typically feels like a sharp, shooting pain that starts in the back or buttocks and radiates down the legs.

Get more expert advice, track your pregnancy journey, and connect with other moms-to-be with similar concerns in the free What to Expect app .

How can I relieve my back pain during pregnancy?

The good news is that there are many ways to ease pregnancy-related back pain. Try these strategies:

Watch your posture when you’re sitting. Make sure the chairs you use provide good support — preferably with a straight back and arms and a firm cushion. Use a footrest to elevate your feet slightly, and don’t cross your legs, which can cause your pelvis to tilt forward and exacerbate those strained back muscles.

Take breaks. Avoid sitting or standing for long periods. Walk or stretch frequently, at least once an hour if possible. If you work on your feet, try to place one foot on a low stool to take some pressure off your lower back. "I find even a couple 5- to 10-minute walks a day helps," says Community mom BabyMcDComininHot.

Avoid lifting heavy loads. And if you must, do it slowly. Stabilize yourself by assuming a wide stance. Bend at the knees, not at the waist. Squat down and lift with your arms and legs, not your back. Better yet, ask for help!

Pace your pregnancy weight gain. Gradually gaining pregnancy weight puts less strain on your back.

Wear the right shoes. Extremely high heels are out — as are completely flat ones. Experts recommend a low-heeled shoe with good arch support to keep your body in proper alignment. You might also consider orthotics, special shoe inserts designed for muscle support. "I've had back problems for years and getting into good shoes has changed my world," says Community mom MakMama85. "If I wear shoes without support I suffer for days. I put orthotics in my shoes, and it helps so much."

Get a firm mattress. If yours isn’t, place a board underneath it for the duration of your pregnancy. A body pillow (at least 5 feet long) can also help you find comfortable sleeping positions .

Try a belly band. Designed specifically for pregnancy, these support bands can reduce pressure on your lower back.

Avoid overreaching. Use a low, stable step stool instead of stretching or straining.

Relax. A calm mind can help ease the tension in your back. You can also try some prenatal yoga , which will relax both your mind and your back. "Try cat-cow exercises," recommends Community mom Rose5556. "They've resolved my lower back pain/pelvic pain in both my pregnancies. I do at least 10 sets 3 times a day."

Strengthen your stomach. Do pelvic tilts to strengthen your abs, which in turn support your back. Or sit on an exercise ball and rock back and forth.

Go hot and cold. Soothe sore muscles by applying cold compresses, then warm compresses in 15-minute intervals. "The thing that helps me the most is an ice pack," says Community member Elizacco, who suffers from sciatica while waitressing. "It's not comfortable, but it works wonders!"

Take a warm bath. Or, if you have a pulsating showerhead, turn it on for a back massage.

Get a massage. After the first trimester, seek a licensed massage therapist who knows you’re pregnant and is trained in the art of prenatal massage . "Hot showers and prenatal massages work wonders!" says Community mom jonjonsbaby.

Talk to your health care practitioner. Ask about physical therapists, alternative medicine specialists such as acupuncturists, or chiropractors who might be able to help. You should also call your practitioner if you have severe back pain. "1,000,000% recommend a chiropractor!" says Community mom mc489. "Kept me comfortable my first pregnancy, when I went up until a few days before baby came."

Back pain during pregnancy can be uncomfortable, but it’s a normal part of your body adapting to support your growing baby. With a few simple adjustments and the right support, you can ease the strain and stay more comfortable throughout your pregnancy. And if your pain feels severe or persistent, don’t hesitate to reach out to your healthcare provider for guidance.