During a recent post-move cleanout, I came upon my collection of sonograms from my pregnancy. I used one of the photo strips for my maternity shoot, but three years later, they are just collecting dust in my son’s keepsake box.

I wasn’t ready to throw these away, so I began to research what other moms do with these prints, and it turns out there are many creative ways to preserve your ultrasound photos. Some of these ideas are for seasoned crafters, while others take just five minutes to recreate with items you might already have at home. It’s easy to make something you and your family will cherish for years.

Laminate them

laminated ultrasound

If you plan to keep these photos out on display, laminating them will help prevent the ink from fading.

“We used cold lamination to protect the pictures from fading and we keep them in an album,” says WTE Community member daniiiiela . “Make sure you keep them away from sunlight and heat. I never thought someone might wanna throw them away. I want my grandkids to see them too.”

Once carefully laminated, moms are also turning them into giftable keepsakes.

After placing her sonogram for her first child into a laminating pouch, Courtney Grayden punched a hole at the top and tied an “It’s a boy!” ribbon onto it. “I wanted to give our close family members a simple yet special little keepsake,” she says. “Even though they didn’t attend my ultrasound appointments, the sonograms made those miraculous moments tangible for them.” It also took her less than five minutes — win-win!

Hand-stitch your little love

Handstiched ultrasound

Calling all embroidery gurus! Allison Furlong, the creative behind @thenavystudio , wanted a keepsake that would never fade. The talented embroiderer who sells her work on The Navy Studio website decided to make her very first ultrasound embroidery using her own baby’s sonogram.

She says hand embroidery is a slow craft if you're interested in giving it a try. “Every tiny stitch — the repetitive motion of pushing the needle through the fabric — forces your breathing to slow down and for your brain to quiet down as you concentrate,” she explains.

Fortunately, she adds that it’s an affordable craft, too. “Any fabric will do (I use thrifted cotton shirts, pillow cases, etc.),” she says. “All supplies can be purchased at a local craft store for less than $10.”

She suggests sketching out the ultrasound on the fabric in pencil or chalk as your guide for the stitches. “If you make a mistake, just cut out the stitches and try again,” she adds. “Practice makes perfect, and going slow is key!”

Compile them in a framed collage

ultrasound collage

Natalie MacRitchie ( @natalie_macritchie ), a mom of two, took nine of her sonograms and put them into one large frame. “So much of pregnancy goes by in a blur, and these little snapshots are the moments that made everything feel real — the first tiny heartbeat, the first little profile, the milestones that we didn’t want tucked away in a drawer,” she says. “Having them displayed like this is a reminder of how far we’ve come as a family, and it’s something my kids can look at one day and know how loved they were from the very beginning.”

To replicate this keepsake, MacRitchie recommends purchasing a frame with individual slots or pin-boardsthat will keep your sonograms flat and protected. And if you’re concerned about them fading, especially if your frame will get a lot of direct sunlight, make copies of them to place in the frame. Bonus tip: MacRitchie wrote down the date on the back of each to remember the exact appointment each sonogram was from.

Use them in your baby book

ultrasound keepsake

Jennise Valerio, a WTE community parent, is carrying on a meaningful tradition started by her parents: scrapbooks for each child. “Feeling the pages between my fingers, the scent of the paper, seeing my mom’s handwriting, seeing original copies of my awards and achievements…nothing compares,” she says. “I wanted to make sure my son has something physical he can look back on whenever he wants to, regardless of how technology evolves.”

Valerio visits Walgreens for affordable photo prints, and of course, she features her sonogram in the scrapbook, too. Her number one piece of advice: Don’t stress. “There’s no rush,” she says. “Work on them in your spare time. Have your projects stored together for easy retrieval, and work on your albums during the baby’s naptime or after bedtime.”

Make a holiday memento

ultrasound ornament

Kirsten Robinson, a mom of two from Bozeman, Montana, purchased a hollow glass ball ornament that was designed to be decorated and filled with ribbon or sequins, and then hung on the tree. She says she used it to “bottle up her baby’s little firsts.” Among the baby items Robinson placed inside was a sonogram from her now 4-year-old's 30 week appointment.

“This craft was extra special this year because I made it with my 4-year-old and added her ultrasound photos and hospital bracelets and one of her pacifiers,” she says. “She asked so many questions about pregnancy and her arrival!”