How to Make Sure Your Baby's Crib Is Safe

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

Your baby will spend a lot of time in her little bed, so here's a checklist to ensure you're getting the safest crib possible.

Little babies mean big baby gear purchases — and a crib may be the biggest one you'll make right now, both in size and expense.

And it'll take some big consideration, too. Your baby will be clocking a lot of hours in that crib until she graduates to a bed, so you'll want it to be just right — the right style, right size, and right color. But more than anything else, you'll want it to be safe.

There's plenty to keep in mind when it comes to safe sleep for your sweetie, and brushing up on crib safety basics is a key place to start. Cribs that fail to meet the current standards can pose the risk for entrapment, strangulation, or suffocation. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionFull-Size Baby Cribs Business GuidanceSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionFull-Size Baby Cribs Business GuidanceSee All Sources

Fortunately, the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) has set strict standards to ensure that cribs on the market today are strong, durable, and safe for your baby. That makes shopping a lot easier (and less nerve-wracking) for you.

Key Takeaways

It's important to make sure your baby's crib is safe. Cribs made after 2011 meet strict CPSC safety standards (no drop-sides, stronger hardware, safer slat spacing). Older or secondhand cribs may be unsafe due to recalls, wear, or outdated designs.

Your crib safety checklist: Look for a snug-fitting mattress (use the two-finger test to check), slats no more than 2 3/8 inches apart, flush/smooth posts, secure hardware, nontoxic paint, and no decorative cutouts.

For a safe sleep setup, keep baby's crib firm, flat, and empty — there should be no bumpers, toys, pillows, positioners, or soft bedding. Bassinets should meet the same standards, and wicker/Moses baskets should be avoided.

You'll still want to double-check that the crib you're eyeing meets the latest guidelines, though. (These nursery-worthy picks fit the bill.) That's especially true if you're thinking about using a secondhand crib, which may not be up to snuff. Here's everything you need to know about crib safety for babies and newborns.

Is it safe to use an old crib?

New cribs aren't cheap, and opting for a secondhand model can save a lot of money. There can also be loads of sentimental appeal to using a crib that's been passed down through your family.

But hand-me-downs may not be safe, especially if they're more than 10 years old.

The CPSC made crib safety a top priority in 2011, setting strict standards for both manufacturers and retailers. These requirements include stronger mattress supports and crib slats, extremely durable crib hardware, and rigorous safety testing. The organization also put an end to manufacturing and selling dangerous drop-side cribs. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionCrib Safety TipsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionCrib Safety TipsSee All Sources

Older cribs are less likely to meet these standards, which makes them more of a hazard. They might have slats that are too far apart, have lead paint or cracked or splintered wood, or have unsafe corner posts. It's also possible that the crib could have been recalled, especially in the case of drop-side models.

Even if a used crib seems to measure up at first glance, normal wear and tear could still make it a risky sleeping space. The hardware and joints on an older crib could be prone to cracking or breaking, and screws might be more likely to loosen up.

The wood and glue can warp or become brittle, too, which can set the stage for joint or slat failures down the road — potentially while your little one is sleeping.

How do I know if my crib is safe?

All cribs manufactured since 2011 have been required to meet strict safety standards set by the CPSC. That said, it's still a good idea to double-check that the crib you're planning to buy ticks all the boxes.

Combing through the safety checklist is even more important if you're thinking about a used crib that might not meet current standards, especially if the crib is more than 10 years old. Here's what to look for. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources

The crib is the right size

The crib bars or slats should be no more than 2 3/8 inches wide (about the width of a can of soda), and none of the bars should be cracked or missing. The top of the crib rail in its highest position should be at least 26 inches from the top of the mattress support in its lowest position.

Finally, the corner posts should line up flush with the top of the headboard or be much taller — more than 16 inches. Posts in between these heights could catch your little one's clothes if she tries to climb out.

The corner posts are smooth

Corner posts should be flush with the end panels. If you're considering a used crib with fancy finials or knobs, you'll need to saw them off and sand down the rough edges, outside and far away from your baby's room.

The hardware is firmly secured

In a safe crib, the hardware — bolts, screws, etc. — should be firmly secured, with no sharp edges, rough areas, or spots that can pinch or otherwise injure your beautiful babe. The crib's wood should be free of cracks or splits. (And the entire crib — sides, slats and all — should be very sturdy with tight joints.)

Never substitute a crib's original parts with something from the hardware store. Instead, obtain any replacement parts directly from the crib's manufacturer.

It doesn't have headboard and footboard cutouts or drop-sides

You'll also want to avoid cribs with headboards and footboards with pretty decorative cutouts, which are prohibited by the CPSC. And always pass on a hand-me-down drop-side crib.

The paint is nontoxic

Consider more than the color when it comes to crib paint. Cribs made before 1978 may have lead in their finish, which poses a serious health risk to babies and young children.

If you have a hunch that the paint on any of your baby furniture is lead-based, have it stripped outside your house while following best practices from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Then start from scratch with a high-quality, lead-free enamel. (Check the paint label to make sure your choice is safe as a nursery item .)

Any crib that has peeling or cracked paint (even lead-free) should be avoided or refinished.

The mattress fits snugly inside

Make sure the mattress fits well inside of the crib. To ensure crib safety, try the two-finger test: If you can fit more than two fingers between the mattress and the crib, the mattress isn't a good fit. (The harder it is for you to make the bed, the better it is for your baby.)

Need some sample dimensions? A full-size crib mattress should be at least 27 1/4 inches by 51 1/4 inches and be no thicker than 6 inches.

Also, if the mattress is new, pull off that plastic and throw it away immediately. Make sure, too, that the mattress itself is firm, since soft mattresses raise the risk of SIDS. Instead of going by the firmness level on the mattress label, test it yourself: If you push down hard, the mattress should stay firm and spring right back. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsChoosing a CribSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsChoosing a CribSee All Sources

More crib safety tips

Once you have your crib picked out, you can make it a safe sleep space for your baby by following these guidelines:

Avoid soft toys and bedding for the first year

Make sure never to put plush toys or soft bedding in the crib with your baby (and that includes the adorable pillow and comforter that may come with the crib bedding set) because they can pose a suffocation hazard for the first year.

For babies 12 to 18 months, a transitional object like a small stuffed animal or a thin blanket can help with sleep challenges and is considered safe.

Skip bumpers altogether

The Safe Sleep for Babies Act recently banned the sale and manufacture of bumper pads as they increase the risk of SIDS and other crib deaths, and you should ban them from your home too.

While bumpers likely won't pose a suffocation hazard once your baby is a toddler, a curious tot could try to climb on them in an attempt to wriggle out of the crib — and potentially get hurt.

Don't use positioners or inclined sleepers

Avoid wedges, positioners (such as baby nests and pods), and other devices that lift an infant off the mattress or create an angled sleep surface.

The best baby sleep surface is firm and flat. For that reason, if your babe dozes off in a bouncer, swing, stroller, sling, car seat, or rocker, transfer her to the crib (or bassinet or play yard) as soon as possible.

Pick a bassinet with same safety features

If you plan on having your baby start out in a bassinet or portable crib with bassinet features, you need to follow similar safety practices for that kind of crib too. That includes, among other things, avoiding bumpers, pillows, toys, and soft bedding and making sure the mattress fits snugly into the bassinet (i.e. using only the mattress that comes with it or fits that specific model).

As with cribs, using a newer model is strongly recommended. But if you're trying a second-hand one, always use it with a mattress that matches the type of bassinet you've borrowed, since the product's safety rating is based on the mattress it originally came with.

Wicker bassinets and Moses baskets should be avoided entirely because they have jagged parts that can cause splinters or other injuries and pieces that can break off and become choking hazards for babies.

Picking out the right crib for your baby's nursery can take a fair bit of consideration and shopping around. But while you're thinking about colors, fabrics, and overall look, don't forget to think about safety too.

Opt for as new a model as possible that's up to the most recent and strictest safety standards established by the CPSC. Following the most up-to-date crib safety guidelines will not only help your baby sleep more safely — it will help you sleep more soundly.

Have more questions about your baby's sleep? Open the What to Expect app to track baby’s sleep and see what’s typical right now — so your whole family can get some more rest.