How to Help Babies and Toddlers Adjust to Daylight Saving Time (and Back Again!)

Minor text and link updates

sleepy toddler adjusting to time change

Even small seasonal shifts on the clock can mess with your baby's sleep schedule. Here's how to handle switching to and from daylight saving time so your little one can stay the course with his regular nighttime routine.

It's already tough enough to get your stubborn sleeper to hit the hay. But if your little one is also adjusting to daylight saving time ("falling back" in November), he may have an even tougher time winding down — and could morph into an extra early riser .

Either way, there are some simple things you can try to get your baby or toddler back on the sleeping track.

How will daylight saving time affect my baby?

Making the switch to "spring forward" or "fall back" only involves a time change of one hour — but even that can affect your little one's sleep. Different babies have a range of sleep needs, which means daylight saving time (DST) starting or ending may not affect some very much. Others, however, may be grumpier as parents strive to match what's happening on the clock with their tots' normal sleep routines .

Babies, toddlers and changing clocks can be a tough mix. A few early birds may wake up even earlier in the morning than usual when the clock shifts. And when it's time to head to bed, some babies and toddlers might end up overtired as they struggle to keep pace with the new hour.

How long does it take for babies and toddlers to adjust to or from daylight saving time?

As with any shift in a set routine, adjusting to the clocks changing is a process. It may take just a few days before your baby or toddler is back to his normal sleep schedule , while others with more sensitive body clocks can take longer.

Fortunately, the switch to or from DST is a temporary setback in a tot's sleep routine — and even if yours is having a harder time adjusting, most kids tend to settle into the time change within a week or two.

How do I prepare my baby or toddler for daylight saving beginning and ending?

There are a few different ways to help babies and toddlers stay in sync with their body clocks, so try these to see which one is best for your child:

1. Stay the course

That means changing the clocks as you normally would and nudging your tot to wake, eat, play, nap and go to bed at the usual times according to what the clock says. He may be grumpy for a while, but the more you stick to your routines, the faster he'll adjust to the time change.

2. Keep bedtime habits the same

Babies and toddlers thrive on a solid bedtime routine , including a feed, books, cuddling and songs, so follow yours as usual to show your tot that it's time to settle down, even during daylight saving time.

3. Make the room dark

Unfortunately, you can't explain to a baby or toddler what daylight saving time is or why it's still light outside at bedtime (or the reverse when it ends). But you can try to fool your little one's internal body clock by blocking out the light in his room. Trusted SourceUniversity of MichiganSurviving Daylight Saving Time's End with KidsSee All Sources [1] Use room-darkening shades, curtains or blinds, and hopefully they'll help speed up sleep.

Trusted SourceUniversity of MichiganSurviving Daylight Saving Time's End with KidsSee All Sources

4. Let the sun shine

On the other hand, light exposure is important in the morning, as it signals to babies and toddlers that it's time to wake up. Open the shades in your baby's room or turn on the lights when you greet him to start the day.

5. Safeguard naps

It's tempting to shorten, lengthen or even nix a regular nap in order to help your infant or toddler adjust to or from DST, but it isn't recommended. Instead, continue to keep any naps your child normally takes.

6. Adjust gradually

If your little one is sensitive to time changes, slowly shift bedtime and wake-up time a few days before "springing forward" or "falling back." Trusted SourceChildren's Hospital of Philadelphia5 Ways to Help Kids Adjust to Daylight Saving TimeSee All Sources [2] For example, if he typically wakes up at 7 a.m., he'll be awake at 6 a.m. after the fall change. So on day one, put him to bed 15 minutes later than usual to encourage him to sleep 15 minutes longer, until 7:15 a.m. On day two, put him down 30 minutes later so he's up at 7:30. By the time DST ends, he'll (hopefully) be up at 8 a.m. (7 a.m. when you change the clocks) — right on schedule!

Trusted SourceChildren's Hospital of Philadelphia5 Ways to Help Kids Adjust to Daylight Saving TimeSee All Sources

7. Shorten the routine as needed

Got a tot with droopy eyelids? It's fine to streamline your daylight saving baby sleep routine on some nights if it makes sense. Skip that extra book or the long song in favor of heading to bed more quickly.

Try not to worry too much in the face of daylight saving time beginning or ending. With patience and a few micro adjustments, coaxing your baby or toddler to match the clock's new hour is a process that nearly every tot comes through with flying colors.