How Much Should My Baby Eat?

Updated with new chart reflecting latest brand colors and updated maximum amount of breast milk and formula to offer baby.

how much should my baby eat, baby mother feed

It can be hard figuring out how much your baby should eat, whether you’re breastfeeding or formula-feeding (or both). Here are guidelines on how much milk to feed baby.

Next to "will I ever sleep again?" the biggest questions many new parents have are all about feeding.

Whether your little one is breastfed, formula-fed or a combination of both, figuring out how much he should be eating — and whether that fussing is related to hunger or something else — can feel overwhelming, especially in the very beginning.

The good news is that babies tend to be really good at letting you know when they’re ready to eat, eating when they’re hungry and stopping when they’re full.

So with a little bit of knowledge on your part, you can learn to tell when it’s time to offer a meal, how much milk your little one needs and whether he’s getting the right amount.

How much should my breastfed baby eat?

Breastfed babies should eat as often and as long as they want, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Most newborns nurse every two to three hours, counting from the beginning of each nursing session. That adds up to around eight to 12 feedings a day.

But you should let your baby guide you instead of the clock, so offer your breast whenever he shows signs of hunger. If your baby seems very sleepy, you should wake him to make sure he gets at least eight feedings within 24 hours.

As for how much he should drink during each nursing session? Again, there’s no right or wrong answer. But you can generally expect your newborn to nurse for 20 to 30 minutes per feeding.

It’s time to end the session when your baby lets go of the nipple, or when his sucking pattern slows down to four sucks per swallow. (That’s a sign that he’s probably just comfort sucking and not actually drinking anymore.)

Another thing to keep in mind: It’s totally normal for your little one to occasionally want to nurse nonstop. Called cluster feeds , these bursts of hunger tend to coincide with growth spurts. It can feel like all you’re doing is nursing, but just follow your baby’s lead — and know it’ll probably only last for a day or two.

How much should my formula-fed baby eat?

There’s no single number that works for everyone. The amount your formula-fed baby eats will depend on his weight, age and appetite (which can vary from one day to the next, just like yours does).

As a rule of thumb, infants under 6 months who haven’t yet started solids will take in 2 to 2 1/2 ounces of formula per pound of body weight within a 24-hour period. (That’s 20 to 25 ounces per day for a 10-pound baby.)

Your baby will need to eat more frequently in the beginning, but his feedings will space out more as he gets older and his stomach gets bigger.

Here’s a general idea of how much formula your bottle-fed baby will take:

During the first few weeks: 1 to 3 ounces of formula every three to four hours (closer to 2 to 3 ounces a feeding after the first few days or week). Wake your baby for a feeding if he sleeps longer than five hours.

By the first month: At least 4 ounces every four hours.

By 6 months: 24 to 32 ounces spread out over four or five feedings a day.

Still, keep in mind that every baby is different, so pay attention to your little one’s cues.

If your baby is still showing hunger signs after finishing a bottle, offer more. If he seems fidgety or distracted before the bottle’s empty, he’s probably had enough, so don’t force him to finish it.

How much should my baby eat if I’m breastfeeding and formula-feeding?

Combination feeding doesn’t have to be complicated. You can adapt the basic guidelines for breastfeeding and formula-feeding based on your baby’s age. Paying attention to his hunger and fullness cues can help you figure out the right rhythm too. If you’re still unsure about amounts, your baby’s pediatrician can offer more guidance.

How much breast milk or formula should I give my baby after starting solids?

Breast milk or formula should make up the bulk of your baby’s nutrition until he’s a year old. But as he starts eating more solid food , the amount of breast milk or formula he drinks will slowly taper off. Specific amounts are different for every baby, of course, but here are some basic rules of thumb:

6 months: Nurse five to six times a day for a total of 24 to 32 ounces of breast milk, or offer four to five bottles a day with 6 to 8 ounces of formula each.

7 months: Nurse five to six times a day for a total of 24 to 30 ounces of breast milk, or offer four to five bottles a day with 6 to 8 ounces of formula each.

8 months: Nurse four to six times a day for a total of 24 to 30 ounces of breast milk, or offer three to five bottles a day with 7 to 8 ounces of formula each.

9 months: Nurse four to six times a day for a total of 24 to 30 ounces of breast milk, or offer three to four bottles a day with 7 to 8 ounces of formula each.

10 months: Nurse four times a day for a total of 24 to 30 ounces of breast milk, or offer three to four bottles a day with 7 to 8 ounces of formula each.

11 months: Nurse or bottle-feed three to four times a day for a total of 24 ounces (or less) of breast milk or formula.

12 months: 24 ounces (or less) of breast milk or formula a day, edging closer to 16 ounces by your baby’s first birthday.

Baby eating chart

Here's a handy baby eating chart summarizing how many ounces of milk a baby should be getting depending on the situation:

how much should baby eat chart

Signs baby is hungry

Picking up on your baby’s hunger cues helps you know when he’s ready to eat (or have some more). Plus, taking notice of his early hunger signs means you can get him fed before he starts crying. Your little one might let you know he’s looking for a meal by:

Nuzzling against your breasts

Sucking on his hands (or on other things, like your arm or shirt)

Opening his mouth

Showing the rooting reflex — turning his head to the side with his mouth open, often after his cheek is stroked

Sucking on his lip or tongue, which might look like he’s sticking his tongue out

Smacking his lips

Crying, often with a short, low-pitched wail that rises and falls

How can I tell if my baby isn’t getting enough to eat?

Your baby’s mood will often be the first indicator. If your little one isn’t getting enough to eat, he might cry, fuss or suck on his fingers even after a full feeding. (Keep in mind that these could also be signs of colic or gas, though.)

Some other signs that your baby isn't eating enough and may need more:

Too few wet or dirty diapers. Infants should have at least six wet diapers within a 24-hour period, and the urine should be pale yellow. As for bowel movements? Breastfed newborns should have at least five poop diapers within 24 hours, and formula-fed newborns should have at least four.

Little or no weight gain. The average newborn gains 4 to 7 ounces per week, so if your baby is gaining less, he may not be getting enough to eat. The pediatrician can help you figure out whether your baby's growth is on track.

If you suspect that your baby isn’t eating enough, let the pediatrician know. He or she can determine whether your baby has an underlying feeding issue (like a mouth, tongue or palate problem or GERD ) and help you figure out a healthy feeding plan for your little one.

How can I tell if I’m feeding my baby too much?

Babies are good self-regulators — they tend to eat when they’re hungry and stop when they’re satisfied. But it’s still possible for infants to have a little too much, especially if they’re being bottle-fed, since it takes less work to drink from a bottle than from the breast.

Babies who’ve overeaten might come away from a meal with stomach pains or gas , or they may spit-up or even vomit. Overfeeding can also up the risk for obesity later in life, but just because your baby is on the bigger side now doesn’t mean he’s eating too much.

Still, it’s a good idea to talk with your baby’s pediatrician if you’re worried about his eating habits.

Figuring out how much milk to give your baby can feel a little overwhelming. But take heart in knowing that your little one tends to be good at getting what she needs, so follow her lead while keeping the general guidelines in mind. You’ll settle into a comfortable routine before long — and become a baby feeding pro.

Frequently Asked Questions

How do I know if my baby is hungry?

Your baby will typically show signs of hunger, such as rooting , sucking on his hands or smacking his lips. When your baby gets very hungry, he will typically begin to cry.

How can I tell if my baby is getting enough to eat?

The biggest indicators that your baby is getting enough to eat are steady weight gain , and plenty of wet and dirty diapers each day. Babies will often seem relaxed and even sleepy after feedings when they're getting enough to eat.

How often should I feed my baby?

Newborns generally need to eat every 2 or 3 hours, or 8 to 12 times per day. As your baby grows, he may be able to go longer between feedings, especially at night. When your baby starts eating more solid food, the amount of breast milk or formula he drinks will slowly decrease.