How Early Should You Start Taking Prenatal Vitamins?

prenatals

Just how early is too early? Whether you're TTC or you're not sure just when you'd like to start, here's a guide.

There are lots of things to do to prepare for pregnancy . Taking prenatal vitamins is certainly at the top of that list — and for good reason.

Prenatal vitamins are vital for both your health and your baby's health and development during pregnancy. Most importantly, their nutrients, especially folic acid, help your baby's brain and spine develop normally throughout pregnancy, says Kerry Krauss, M.D ., OB/GYN in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Not to mention, most prenatals contain calcium, iron and vitamin D , she adds, which are vital for you and your baby's growth and health too.

However, when to take prenatals is often a topic of confusion. When exactly should you start taking prenatal vitamins if you’re trying to get pregnant ? Read on for advice on when to take prenatals to ensure you and your baby get all the nutrients you need.

When should you start taking prenatal vitamins?

If you’re considering having a baby, The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends starting them at least one month before pregnancy. In fact, it may be a good idea to start taking prenatal vitamins two to three months before trying to get pregnant , advises Dr. Krauss.

While this may seem early in the process, this time frame ensures that you have enough time to reach adequate levels of the nutrients needed before conception. “The most important time to be taking prenatal vitamins is before some women even find out that they’re pregnant,” she adds. In other words, as soon as you start thinking about getting pregnant, you should make taking a prenatal vitamin part of your daily routine. Your baby's brain and spinal cord are developing super early on in the first trimester, which is why Dr. Krauss recommends "everyone who's trying to conceive, or has a reasonable chance of pregnancy, take a prenatal vitamin."

If you’re planning your baby timeline even earlier than three months, you can already start taking this vitamin. This way you get into the habit of taking the pill daily — it will ensure a healthier baby and a more comfortable pregnancy.

Once you start taking a prenatal vitamin, Dr. Krauss says you can stop taking other multivitamins or supplements unless you review them with your doctor. Here’s why: Some supplements are not safe in pregnancy , and even if they are, taking too much of certain nutrients that may also be in your prenatal can actually be toxic and cause health issues, she explains. If you are not sure if you should continue taking a medication or supplement while trying to conceive, speak with your OB/GYN or general practitioner.

But what about women who aren't sure they're ready to start TTC ? The same goes for you too: If you’re even thinking about having a baby but not quite ready to get pregnant, Dr. Krauss says it’s safe to start taking prenatals even before you’re intentionally TTC. Again, if there's a likelihood that you may get pregnant, it’s best to start taking prenatal vitamins.

And just like it’s never too early to take prenatal vitamins during the TTC process, it’s also never too late to start taking them. So if you pee on a stick and find out you’re pregnant but it wasn’t planned , for instance, Dr. Krauss advises heading to the store to get those prenatal vitamins as soon as possible. “Taking prenatal vitamins ensures you are getting what you need to help sustain your body and your baby, so better late than never,” she says.

What to look for in a prenatal vitamin

The type of prenatal vitamin you take is important as not all over-the-counter prenatal vitamins are created equal. Gummy vitamins, for example, usually don’t contain the amount of iron some women need during pregnancy, notes Dr. Krauss. With that in mind, it’s best to go over your specific prenatal with your provider to make sure they contain everything you need.

In general, the most important thing to look for in a prenatal is folic acid . You'll want to pick an option with at least 400 micrograms of folic acid, says ACOG. And iron is another nutrient you'll need more of during pregnancy (27 micrograms per day to be exact). Most prenatal vitamin options have that amount or more. Other things to look for when you're reading vitamin labels? Here's a quick list:

calcium

vitamin D

iodine

choline

vitamin A

vitamin C

vitamin B6

vitamin B12

As far as specific amounts of these vitamins, ACOG has a helpful list , but again, it's best to go over the labels with your provider just to be sure. Prescription prenatals are available through your provider, too, if you're in need of extra amounts of certain nutrients like iron.

Does it matter what time of day I take my prenatals?

The time of day you take your prenatal doesn’t matter, says Dr. Krauss. However, most people take them in the morning. If your vitamins are making you feel yucky or nauseous though, she recommends taking them with food or orange juice which can help your body absorb the iron more easily (the high amount of iron is usually the culprit when it comes to nausea).

JAMA, Folic Acid Supplementation for Prevention of Neural Tube Defects , 2017 ACOG, Nutrition During Pregnancy , December 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Folic Acid: The Best Tool to Prevent Neural Tube Defects , September 2022. ACOG, Nutrition During Pregnancy, June 2023. What to Expect When You're Expecting , Heidi Murkoff.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Can You Take Prenatal Vitamins Without Being Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Folic Acid During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Which Vitamins Do I Need During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Prenatal vs. Postnatal Vitamins: What’s Actually the Difference? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Can Prenatal Vitamins Really Help Your Hair Grow? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

How Much Vitamin C Do You Actually Need During Pregnancy? A Doctor-Approved Guide Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

The 9 Best Prenatal Vitamins That OB/GYNs Recommend — and Moms Actually Take Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnant and Low on Vitamin D? Here’s How to Boost Your Levels Safely Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

How Much Calcium Do You Really Need During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Why Omega-3s Matter During Pregnancy and How to Get Enough Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Eating Vegetarian and Vegan During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Your Preconception Nutrition Plan: How to Prep Your Plate for Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

When Does Your Baby Develop a Brain? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Do Fertility Supplements Really Work? What the Science Says Before You Try Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Trying for a Baby? Folic Acid May Matter for Men Too Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window