How to Get Your Baby to Stop Fighting Sleep

Light copy changes, updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

baby fighting sleep, sleepy baby held in mom's arms

You know your baby is tired and ready for bed, so why is she suddenly protesting? Here are a few reasons behind it and some tips for ending the war on sleep.

Babies and their new parents look forward to bedtime and enjoy the familiar tuck-in routine. But even after a nice warm bath, one last feeding and that special ditty you croon each night, your baby might fight the sleep that you're sure she's ready for.

"My girl cries going down for every single nap," says What to Expect Community user Recu717. "The more tired she is, the worse the fight is."

Take heart and know that while protesting the crib put-down is pretty common, there are several potential reasons behind it. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources [1] Read on for more so you can get your babe back on the bedtime track.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources

Key Takeaways

Common causes for babies fighting sleep include overtiredness, overstimulation, sleep regressions, separation anxiety, teething pain, developmental milestones, travel disruptions, dropping naps, or simply needing less sleep as they grow.

To help your little one get to sleep, stick to a consistent routine, watch for early drowsy cues, keep the environment calm, try to follow age-appropriate wake windows, and offer plenty of daytime practice for any milestones your child is working on mastering.

Remember, too, that your baby's sleep schedule will change with time. Be flexible with bedtime, naps, and routines — and rest assured that sleep resistance is usually a normal, passing phase.

Why does my baby fight sleep?

A few tears at bedtime are standard operating procedure for most babies. In fact, many babies can't get to sleep without crying first. But if the fuss goes on and on, even after you’ve ruled out hunger, a wet or dirty diaper, and illness, consider these other factors:

Overtired baby . It may sound a little crazy, but not getting enough Zzzs can lead to a baby who’s so wiped out she's wired and has trouble settling down at night.

Overstimulated baby. A bright, busy household, screens, beeping toys, or a crying spell can be too much to handle, resulting in overstimulation and the urge to fight sleep. Try to avoid stimulating activities at least an hour before baby's bedtime. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsWhy to Avoid TV for Infants & ToddlersSee All Sources [2]

Sleep regression . This setback in your baby’s regular nighttime routine can crop up throughout the first year, including at 4 months , 6 months, between 8 and 10 months , and once more at 12 months.

Separation anxiety. Around 8 months (though it can happen a bit earlier or later), this clingy phase may kick in, resulting in tears when you leave your babe alone in the crib. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Ease Your Child%u2019s Separation AnxietySee All Sources [3]

Teething. Most infants start to cut teeth around 6 months (though it can happen earlier or later), and teething pain can cause a baby to wail and fight sleep. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsTeething & Tooth CareSee All Sources [4]

Hitting a milestone. Babbling, rolling, sitting up, crawling, and walking are all big developmental milestones that some infants like to practice at night.

Traveling. A vacation means a different crib or a shift in the usual bedtime schedule, which can prompt a baby to fight sleep.

Baby's not tired. Between 1 and 2 years, babies sleep 11 to 14 hours, rather than the 12 to 16 hours they logged when they were younger. If your baby isn’t hitting the hay easily, she may not need as many Zzzs now. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicHelping Baby Sleep Through the NightSee All Sources [5]

Baby dropped a nap. Around 12 to 15 months, babies start to skip their morning nap, so if yours isn’t keen to be put down, it could signal she's a one-nap tot from now on.

How do I get my baby to stop fighting sleep?

Consistency is key when it comes to getting your baby to stop fighting sleep. Your best bet is to stick to your plan and the tuck-in should become easier over time. Here's how:

Memorize drowsy signs. An overtired baby is too worked up to sleep, so strive to spot the signs that she’s drowsy, such as yawning, ear pulling, eye rubbing, thumb sucking , and fussing. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsResponding To Your Baby's CriesSee All Sources [6]

Keep things low-key. Overstimulation can be caused by too many people around, bright lights, or a noisy environment. Do what you can to remove your baby from the din.

Practice separating. You go away, but you always return. Teach this by leaving the room for a few seconds at a time and your tot will get better at being away from you.

Get to know your baby’s "wake windows," or the amount of time your baby can handle being awake at a stretch, which varies by age. A 1-month-old, for instance, can be awake for about an hour at a time, and a 3-month-old can go for up to two hours. "[My baby] delays naps and night sleep by up to an hour, which makes him overtired," says What to Expect Community user meghanelizabeth912. "Slightly longer daytime wake windows has helped us."

Make daytime for playtime. Give your sweetie lots of practice with her newly minted milestones (sitting up, crawling) so she nixes the urge to try them at night and stops fighting sleep.

Take the routine on the road. Bath, bottle, cuddle, bed! Babies with a solid bedtime routine will cry less and sleep more, so stay the course even when you’re traveling.

Change her bedtime. A bigger baby needs a little less shut-eye, so be ready to push your little one's bedtime back a bit as she ages.

Plan a longer afternoon nap. If your babe seems ready to drop her morning nap, consider moving lunch up a bit and putting her down for a longer afternoon snooze. Trusted SourceHarvard Health PublishingNaps: Make the Most of Them and Know When to Stop ThemSee All Sources [7]

Wondering if your fussy baby will ever settle down in the crib? Keep in mind that fighting sleep is likely due to a predictable phase. Once you’ve identified the issue, you can help her through it and then ease her back to the sleep you’re both craving.

Is your little one still fighting sleep? Open the What to Expect app for more tips on implementing a healthy sleep routine, plus a community of parents who have been there.