Brushing Your Toddler's Hair

toddler brush

Can't get a brush or comb through your little one's locks? Get some insider tips that'll make brushing a breeze.

If there's one thing toddlers won't stand for, it's standing still. So don't be surprised if brushing your little one's hair becomes an epic battle, complete with shrieks and screams.

But brush you must to protect your little one's strands. And with the right toddler hair products and tools, plus a few tricks of the trade, you'll be able to brush in peace and help your cutie rock an adorable toddler hairstyle. Read on to find out how to do both.

What to do if your child refuses hair brushing

There may not be much hair on that little head, but you need to brush or at least comb it out once a day. What happens if you don't brush your toddler's hair? It'll become a nest of tangles, especially since baby hair tends to be fine and delicate.

Besides detangling those delicate locks, brushing loosens up the dirt, grime, and who-knows-what in your tot's hair — and for kids with dry scalps, it'll help bring more oil to the surface. So now that you know the reason, minimize your tot's tears by:

Making it fun

The great thing about toddlers is they're always game for playing pretend . All it takes to play hairdresser in your bathroom is a chair, a hairbrush and some acting chops on your part.

If you call your little client "Ma'am" and make a fuss about pampering her, she probably won't mind as much as you work your brushing magic. Boost the fun by suggesting she do some primping on a customer of her own — a long-haired doll, say, or even her fave stuffed lovey .

Giving her a chance

Sometimes all it takes to get your pint-sized protester to pipe down is to cede some control over what's going on.

Let your tot take a shot at brushing her own hair and creating her own one-of-a-kind toddler hairstyle. Take turns, letting her go first — and you go last to smooth out the tangles. Or if you're feeling really gutsy, give her a go at styling your 'do first. Then do hers.

How to keep your toddler's hair from tangling

The best strategy for dealing with troublesome tangles is to avoid them in the first place. Of course, you can't prevent knots altogether (especially if she has a hair twirling habit ), but these tips can help.

Keep hair short(er)

If there's less of it, less will tangle or dip into food or other sticky substances, which are tough to comb through when they dry out.

Put it up

Tie back hair into a loose ponytail, pigtails or braids. Avoid pulling on the hair or scalp too tightly when braiding it; you don't want to damage your tot's hair.

Always use kid-friendly covered hair ties and elastics to protect delicate hair even more. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Dermatology AssociationTeaching Your Child Healthy Hair HabitsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Dermatology AssociationTeaching Your Child Healthy Hair HabitsSee All Sources

Shampoo with care

Before you wash your tot's hair, comb out all the tangles. (See below for tips on how.) Then pat shampoo through the hair rather than lathering it into a big sudsy froth on top of your tot's head.

How to detangle your toddler's hair

Tangles happen, even if you try to head them off at the pass. When that happens, try these tactics. Trusted SourceNationwide Children's HospitalPatient Hair CareSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNationwide Children's HospitalPatient Hair CareSee All Sources

Wet or spray your toddler's hair with warm water. It's easier to detangle wet hair.

Spritz some detangling spray, or dab on some detangling foam.

Use a wide-tooth comb or a detangling brush. (You can find toddler-friendly ones online.)

Start combing the ends of the hair, working your way up to the scalp.

Do things gently. Your toddler's scalp is sensitive, so try not to tug.

How to choose kids' hair brushes and toddler hair products

You don't need to get fancy when it comes to toddler hair products, but having the right tools will make brushing and detangling much easier. Look for the following:

A comb with non-scratchy teeth that are spaced far apart

A flat brush with rounded ends for bristles

Bristles or teeth that are long, firm and widely spaced for thick, tight or curly hair

A leave-in detangler or conditioner free from phthalates, parabens, sulfate and alcohol Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Choose Safer Personal Care ProductsSee All Sources [3]

No matter what tools you use, avoid sharing them, even among your tot's siblings. Sharing combs and toddler hair brushes can sometimes spread head lice , so give your child her own and wash them in a sudsy bath from time to time.

More hair tips that will keep your toddler happy

Up your toddler hairstyling know-how with these pointers:

Add some glitz and glam

After you get what you want — tangle-free locks — give your budding fashionista what she wants: a choice of bows, barrettes, hair clips and the like. Shop for hair accessories together (let her pick them out), and keep them in a special drawer or satchel that's out of reach from prying toddler hands.

Be sure anything you buy is large enough to prevent a choking hazard, and securely fasten it so she can't pull it out.

Make your detangler do triple-duty

Leave-in detanglers aren't just for easier comb-outs. They can also tame fly-aways and frizzies. Plus, a little spritz and a comb can remove food from hair when there's no time for a shampoo and your little one's wearing lunch in her locks.

Your toddler may not like having her hair brushed any better, but at least these strategies will help lower the volume when she complains. And if nothing else, you're laying the foundation for healthy habits when she takes over caring for her own hair.