How to Safely Lift Your Older Baby or Toddler During Pregnancy

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Pregnant woman holding toddler

"People keep telling me that I shouldn't be picking up my son (who is 25 pounds and just a baby himself) while I'm pregnant. But I can't avoid it. What should I do?"

If you're a mom-to-be with younger children at home , it can be understandably challenging — if not impossible — to completely avoid lifting your little ones while you're growing another little one inside you.

As long as your doctor hasn't restricted your activity (or your lifting), it's not a problem to lift your big baby, suggests data from the American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists (ACOG) . Just get clearance for baby lift-off from your doctor first. And always let your practitioner know if you experience any pain or spotting after lifting a younger child.

Key Takeaways

If your provider hasn’t restricted lifting , it’s generally okay to pick up your older child — just get the green light first.

Use safe form: wide stance, butt tucked, bend at the knees, and lift slowly with your legs (not your back).

Stop and call your provider if you have pain or spotting, and switch to seated snuggles if your back protests.

“I’m a 3rd time mom and I have a 2-year-old daughter (will be 3 in March) and a 1-year-old daughter (will be 2 in May), and I’m a stay-at-home mom, so I carry them 24/7,” reports What to Expect Community mom G1rlM4m4.

Juggling pregnancy with a big kid (or two)? Get the What to Expect app for guidance and support.

As long as your lifting is unrestricted, make sure you're doing it in a way that doesn't hurt your back. To safely pick up a bigger baby or younger toddler during pregnancy, keep these steps in mind before you lift:

Stabilize your body first by assuming a wide stance (feet shoulder-width apart).

Tuck your buttocks in.

Bend at the knees, not at the waist, and lift (not abruptly) with legs rather than your back.

If lifting your younger child does hurt your back, blame your back — not the baby (no need to set the stage for sibling rivalry just yet!). Or just do more sitting and cuddling!

Good luck,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, 8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler , May 2021. American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists, Physical Activity and Exercise During Pregnancy and the Postpartum Period , April 2020, reaffirmed 2023. Mayo Clinic, Back Pain During Pregnancy: 7 Tips for Relief , March 2024. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Provisional Recommended Weight Limits for Manual Lifting During Pregnancy , February 2014.

Updates history

October 24, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Strength Training in Pregnancy: How to Safely Lift Weights While Expecting Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

These Are the Exercises You Should Avoid During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Are Squats Safe During Pregnancy? What to Know (Plus Easy Modifications) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises That Keep You (and Baby!) Feeling Great Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Walking for Two: How This Simple Workout Helps You (and Baby!) Stay Healthy Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Stretching During Pregnancy: 9 Feel-Good Moves Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

These Pregnancy-Safe Leg and Booty Moves Boost Stability And Ease Aches Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Strengthen Your Core Safely With These Pregnancy-Friendly Ab Workouts Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

How to Do Pelvic Tilt Exercises When You're Pregnant and How They Can Help Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

What Happens If You Fall While Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Is It Safe to Go to a Chiropractor During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler Fact Checked by Jill Malter

How to Safely Support a Newborn's Head and Neck Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When and How Babies Lift Their Heads Up Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window