How to Relieve Itchy Skin During Pregnancy

Updated with Ask Heidi video.

pregnant stomach itchy

An itchy stomach can drive a pregnant woman to distraction (and scratching), but there are a number of easy ways to deep-six your itchiness during pregnancy.

Suddenly feel like you've got an itch you just can’t seem to scratch? If you've got an itchy belly during pregnancy, you’re not alone.

Skin irritation is a common problem for many mamas that tends to appear during the fifth or sixth month of pregnancy, when you’re really starting to show, and it only seems to get more pronounced as time passes (and your belly continues to grow).

What causes an itchy belly during pregnancy?

When skin expands (and the skin on your abdomen is expanding big-time right now), it becomes increasingly moisture-deprived — and dry skin tends to feel itchy and uncomfortable. (Your butt might have a serious case of the itchies, too, if it's expanding along with your belly.)

When to call your doctor about an itchy belly during pregnancy

Call your practitioner if you:

Are experiencing an itch on other parts of your body not related to dry or sensitive skin

Are itching everywhere

Have an itchy rash on your belly (especially in the third trimester), which could be PUPPP — an annoying but very treatable pregnancy symptom Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

What can you do for an itchy belly when you're pregnant?

Luckily, there are some effective itchy skin treatments and ways to find relief for this pregnancy symptom . Try these tips to soothe itchy pregnancy skin:

Don't scratch. Tempting as it may be, grating away at your skin only causes more irritation.

Moisturize. A light, gentle, fragrance-free moisturizer can temporarily curb the itching; apply it frequently and liberally.

Dab on anti-itch cream. The pink calamine lotion your mom put on your chickenpox works in particularly tough cases.

Smooth on vitamin E oil. It's very healing — and great for sore nipples after pregnancy too.

Soak it up. A gentle oatmeal bath with warm water can work wonders for dry skin. Just make sure the water's not too hot, which can dry out your skin even more.

Use a humidifier in your bedroom . It may help keep your skin from drying out — but proceed with caution, as it can also spread germs and trigger allergies if used improperly. Follow the manufacturer's directions about keeping the machine spick and span. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicHumidifiers: Ease skin, breathing symptomsSee All Sources [2]

Try cool compresses. Put a cool, wet washcloth on an itchy spot for five to 10 minutes to get some relief.

For extreme itching, try hydrocortisone cream. It can be especially helpful for itching caused by PUPPP. Just try to save it for when you really need it, applying a small amount no more than once a day.

Try to take comfort in the fact that though this is one of those particularly annoying pregnancy symptoms, it's totally temporary and you'll stop scratching after you have your baby.

Creams to soothe itchy pregnancy skin