Bundle of Bargains

Raising a child isn’t cheap — especially during the first year of life. But it doesn’t have to break the bank. Here's the the ultimate guide to finding deals on baby gear, from shopping tips to sales events.

Make Your Dollar Go Further

At What to Expect, we pride ourselves on helping you find the best baby gear that meets your family’s individual needs, lifestyle and, above all else, budget. Because, as we all know, babies are expensive . Fortunately, we aren’t just experts on shopping: We’re experts on saving, too. In addition to helping you sort through the endless supply of baby gear, What to Expect is also here to help stretch your dollar further by finding the best deals and money-saving tips.

To start, our weekly Best Baby Deals roundup highlights all the sales on on must-have parenting and baby gear from your favorite retailers, like Amazon, Target and more. We also scour major sales events, like Prime Day and Black Friday , for deals that will cut costs on your parenting and baby essentials. Finally, we share money-saving tips that we’ve learned through our years of research and personal experience, like creating a Buy Buy Baby registry to save 15 percent on items. (More on that in a bit!)

Here, your ultimate guide to cutting costs on baby-related expenses, because even small discounts can add up to a big impact on your finances.

Deals All Year

Weekly deals and annual sales events from your favorite brands.

Money-Saving Tips

Ways to cut costs on all your baby and parenting essentials.

The Best, Affordable Baby Gear

High quality baby essentials that don't break the bank.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window