How to Encourage Your Baby to Eat Finger Foods

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

If your baby is more interested in playing with the food on his high chair than eating, try these tips.

"My 9-month-old can pick up the finger foods that I give him, but they don't seem to make it to his mouth — he just squishes them with his fingers. How can I encourage him?"

Feeding the average 9-month-old can be a frustrating experience for parties on both sides of the high chair . Frustrating for you because there's more squishing, squashing and smashing of finger foods than eating; frustrating for your baby because you're pushing him to eat when all he really wants to do is squish, squash and smash.

Instead of hovering over the high chair, sit back and try to relax. At this age, mealtimes aren't only for nourishment; they're for exploring and discovering as well. Just as he does in the bathtub and sandbox, during mealtime your baby is learning about cause and effect, textures and temperature differences.

Expect this mealtime mayhem (and your need for paper towels by the case) to continue over the next few months. In the meantime, there are steps you can take to encourage your baby to eat — and not just play with — his finger foods:

Keep the portions small. Try not to offer more than two or three finger foods at a time — or too large a serving of any item. Babies can be easily overwhelmed by too many choices.

Remain neutral. Babies are natural-born performers. If you respond by laughing at or criticizing his antics in the high chair, you're likely to encourage more of the same. Instead of responding, try to act like there's nothing unusual about what he's doing with his food (there isn't). Chances are, he'll surprise you one day by actually shoving it into his mouth and chewing.

Sneak some food in. While your baby is busy pulverizing that diced banana, take a pea-sized piece of it and put it into his mouth. He'll be eating (which will keep you happy) and he'll be playing (which will keep him happy), and he might begin to realize that a banana is not only fun to smash but also tastes good. No force-feeding if he resists, though. It's important that the high chair doesn't become a battleground.

Know when to call it quits. Remember this fact: Your son will eat when he's hungry. Healthy babies are smart enough not to starve. (Talk to your baby's doctor if you have any concerns about his health.) If you find mealtime has degenerated into all play and no eating, it's time to call it a meal. Your son just isn't hungry anymore.

Bon appetit!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Introducing Solid Foods to Your Baby , December 2020. WhatToExpect.com, Best Finger Foods for Babies , December 2020. KidsHealth.org, Finger Foods for Babies , June 2018. Mayo Clinic, Solid Foods: How to Get Your Baby Started , May 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, Starting Solid Foods , March 2021.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Best Finger Foods for Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Baby Self-Feeding Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Homemade Baby Food Recipes Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby-Led Weaning Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Introducing Solid Foods to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Nutritional Needs of Babies: the First 12 Months Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Introducing Cucumber to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Feeding Schedules & Baby Food Chart for the First Year Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Introducing Oranges to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

8 Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Introducing Bananas to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 9-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Introducing Bread to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Why Babies Put Everything in Their Mouths Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Feeding a Sick Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window