How to Deliver Your Baby in an Emergency or if You're Alone

Updates to copy, headlines, formatting, and sources, and new medical review.

woman in emergency labor

Worried you'll go into labor when you're by yourself and can't get to a hospital? Although the odds of this happening are very slim, here's a step-by-step rundown of what you should do.

As you near your due date, you’re likely brimming with excitement — and, if you’re like many pregnant moms, also brimming with “what ifs.” Like: What if I go into labor when I’m home alone and can’t make it to the hospital?

Although that scenario is common in soap operas, an unplanned home birth isn’t nearly as likely in real life. According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), fewer than 1% of births occur in the home, and only a quarter of those are unplanned. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsPlanned Home BirthSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsPlanned Home BirthSee All Sources

But to lay your fears to rest (or in the case you are that rare mom who finds herself snowed in on delivery day), here’s what you should know for an emergency labor by yourself at home:

1. Assess the situation

First things first: How do you know if the baby’s coming quickly and you won’t make it to the hospital?

While every woman's labor is different, if you’re having strong, long, frequent contractions (generally occurring fewer than five minutes apart), and/or if your water has broken and you have a strong urge to push, you’re experiencing signs that delivery is imminent. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHow to Tell When Labor BeginsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHow to Tell When Labor BeginsSee All Sources

Every labor is different, but on average, First babies do tend to take longer than subsequent ones — so if you’re having your second or third child, your little one may make his grand entrance a little more quickly.

2. Call 911

Sounds obvious, but in all the excitement (baby’s on the way!) you don’t want to forget to call 911 as soon as possible. They’ll get medical professionals en route. Ask them to also call your practitioner.

Most emergency dispatchers are also trained on how to talk you through the basic steps of a home birth, so if possible, put them on speaker phone. And, if you can, unlock your door so the EMTs can enter easily, as you may not be in any condition to usher them in by the time they arrive.

You’ll also want to take off your pants and underwear and try to get as comfortable as possible. Settle yourself in a semi-reclined position or, if lying down, place a rolled-up towel under your left hip. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineEMS Prehospital DeliveriesSee All Sources [3] Now, breathe, long deep breaths. Reassure yourself that help is on the way.

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineEMS Prehospital DeliveriesSee All Sources

3. Stay calm and make yourself as comfortable as possible

While an unplanned delivery at home may seem frightening, try your best to keep calm and remember: Your body knows how to do this!

Wash your hands and your vaginal area with soap . Grab a bucket of warm water and at least four clean towels, which you can use to wipe your baby down and keep him warm.

Though your first impulse might be to lie in the tub to avoid a messy cleanup, you won’t be comfortable there — or easily accessible to the EMTs. Instead, lay clean sheets, towels, or a waterproof covering such as a plastic bag or shower curtain over your bed or on a rug on the floor.

Lie down, and to get more comfortable, try to prop yourself up with a bunch of pillows. In this position, you can also easily reach down with both hands and help ease your baby out.

If someone’s around to help you (i.e., you go into labor in a Walmart parking lot or are at home with your partner and can’t get to the hospital), most of the advice is the same.

4. Resist the urge to push — until you can't

When having a baby unexpectedly, it’s better not to bear down, since you could risk the baby coming out quickly and damaging your delicate tissue. Panting can help, since this keeps you from holding your breath and adding to the internal pressure.

If your baby starts to arrive despite all your best efforts, try to ease him out gently by pushing each time you feel the urge. Once your baby's head becomes visible, gently press your hands against your perineum (the area between your vagina and anus) to keep the head from popping out too fast.

Do not pull; just guide your baby out gradually. If you find the umbilical cord around your baby’s neck, hook a finger under it and slowly, gently loosen it enough to ease it over his head.

Once the head is out, gently push it slightly downward while pushing with the next urge (this should deliver the shoulders). The rest of the body should come easily after that.

5. What to do once baby’s out

Wow, you’ve got a beautiful new baby! As soon as you’ve delivered your little one, bring him up onto your belly or chest; skin-to-skin contact will keep him warm and calm, and dry him off with a clean towel.

Once the initial fluid is wiped clean off your new baby, discard the now wet towel for a fresh, clean towel to wrap him against your body. Newborns are not great yet at regulating their body temperature, so this is an important step in keeping them warm and safe.

To help drain the amniotic fluid and stimulate first breaths, wipe baby's mouth and nose, and run your fingers from the corners of the eyes down the outsides of baby's nostrils. Then vigorously rub the sides of the back on the rib cage up and down at about the pace and pressure of washing your hair, keeping the head lower than the feet until baby starts breathing.

Today, the majority of doctors don’t use an aspirator, as it's not necessary: Most babies will start to breathe on their own without any intervention or stimulation, with only 1% requiring advanced methods of resuscitation.

In the rare case that your baby is among those who need help, clear out his mouth some more with a finger, then give two quick and extremely gentle puffs of air into the mouth and nose.

After baby is born, avoid tugging on the umbilical cord. Your uterus should expel the placenta on its own in anywhere from five to 30 minutes or more, but it's safest not to try to force it. If the placenta delivers itself, don't cut the cord (more on this below) and wait for help to arrive.

6. Don’t cut or tie the umbilical cord

Cutting the cord yourself in a sterile fashion may be difficult if you're alone — and doing so improperly could expose your baby to infection. Not to worry — at the time of birth, about 30% of your baby’s blood is still in the placenta, which can give him two to five minutes of oxygen (this can be lifesaving if he hasn’t started breathing on his own and the EMTs haven’t arrived yet).

“When the ambulance arrived [after my unplanned home birth], they clamped the cord for us and my partner cut it,” says What to Expect Community user 3beanzz. “They let me remain skin-to-skin as they helped me onto a stretcher. They were really warm people and excited for us.”

So with the cord attached, wrap the placenta in a clean towel elevated above the level of baby, if possible, and wait for the EMTs, who will cut it using sterile instruments.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

The thought of experiencing an unplanned home birth can be understandably scary, but know that this is very rare: Fewer than 1% of births occur in the home, according to ACOG, and only a quarter of those are unplanned.

If you do find yourself having an unplanned birth by yourself or at home, though, the first thing to do is to call 911. Put the emergency dispatcher on speaker phone; they can help talk you through what to do next. Make sure to leave the door unlocked so the EMTs can enter easily, too.

Having an emergency birth kit is always a good idea, especially if you live in a rural area. Your kit should include clean towels, sterile gloves, sheets, clean scissors, sanitary pads, diapers, water, and instructions for infant rescue-breathing.

Try your best to stay calm. And remember: Your body knows how to do this, and help is on the way.

What to include in an emergency birth kit

If you live in an area prone to natural disasters, the nearest hospital is quite a distance away or you’re at risk of preterm labor , put together an emergency birth kit — it could come in handy in the slim chance you go into labor and can’t make it to a hospital. Your kit should include:

Clean towels

Sterile gloves

Sheets

Clean scissors

Sanitary pads

Diapers

Water

Instructions for infant rescue-breathing

Remember, in all likelihood you won’t have to use any part of your emergency plan — but you will be happy to have it if you need it.

Other ways to be prepared for the unexpected? Give your doctor’s contact information to a few select people in case something happens and you aren’t able to make a call yourself (also, print out a copy of the information and hang it on the fridge or another prominent place in your home).

Bottom line: Do your best to stay calm if you find yourself in this situation, call 911 and trust your body while you wait for help to arrive. Your body and baby can do a lot more on their own than you might think!