How Many Calories Do You Need During Pregnancy?

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

Calories in a Healthy Pregnancy Diet

Your caloric intake during pregnancy is one of the most important ways you can ensure your baby is getting all the nutrients she needs.

Does eating for two really mean you get to eat twice as much of everything? Not quite. While it's critical to eat enough during pregnancy to nourish your growing baby, one of the two you're eating for is a tiny growing fetus (just pea-sized or smaller, in fact, for much of the first trimester).

Here's what moms-to-be need to know about caloric intake during pregnancy, plus how to make sure you're getting all the nutrients you need right now.

Key Takeaways

When you're pregnant, try not to obsess over counting calories. Instead, make sure to attend all of your prenatal visits, where your practitioner will monitor your weight gain and overall health.

Wondering if you're getting enough to eat? Most moms-to-be need no extra calories in the first trimester, about 340 more per day in the second, and about 450 more day in the third (but you'll need more if you're carrying multiples — check with your provider).

Focus on balanced nutrition and listen to your body. Prioritize protein, healthy fats, and fruits and veggies, and allow for occasional treats. For personalized guidance, always consult your practitioner.

How many calories should a pregnant woman eat?

If your weight was within normal or average ranges and you were moderately active before becoming pregnant, your recommended daily intake was about 2,000 calories a day. Here's what you'll need now that you're expecting: Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHow much weight should I gain during pregnancy?See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHow much weight should I gain during pregnancy?See All Sources

First trimester: You probably won't need any additional calories during your first trimester. Instead, focus on choosing nutritious foods that keep your energy up (and, if you have morning sickness , don't make you nauseous!) while supporting your baby's development.

Second trimester: Up your daily calorie intake by about 340 calories per day — that's the equivalent of, say, two glasses of skim milk and a bowl of oatmeal.

Third trimester: You'll need about an extra 450 calories per day.

If you're carrying multiples: If your weight gain was average before pregnancy, your daily intake should be around 600 calories per day. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicTwin pregnancy: Getting ready for twins or multiplesSee All Sources [2]

There are exceptions to this (for example, if you're a teenager or were significantly underweight to begin with, you'll probably need more calories). So be sure to check with your practitioner to outline your daily caloric needs.

Looking for parent tips and expert advice about what and how to eat when you're pregnant? You can find helpful info about nutrition during pregnancy and more in the What to Expect app .

How can you tell if you're getting the right amount of calories?

Now that you know how many calories you need, is it the time to break out the old calculator and start counting? Absolutely not. The best way to watch what you eat isn't to keep tabs on every bite (who has the time or the patience for that, anyway?).

Instead, keep up with your prenatal appointments, as your practitioner will monitor your weight gain. If you conceived at a normal weight, during pregnancy you should gain about three to four pounds during the first trimester, then about one pound per week in the second and third trimesters. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionWeight Gain During PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionWeight Gain During PregnancySee All Sources

Of course, these guidelines also vary based on your pre-pregnancy BMI and other factors, so be sure to ask your practitioner for your personalized recommendations.

If your practitioner tells you that you're gaining weight too quickly or not gaining enough, fortunately, there are steps you can take to get back on track. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusEating right during pregnancySee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusEating right during pregnancySee All Sources

If you're not gaining enough weight, especially once you hit your second trimester (when morning sickness and food aversions subside), you may not be getting enough of the foods that are prime for a healthy pregnancy. Focus on protein-rich foods and healthy fats such as avocado, nuts, seeds, salmon, and whole fat dairy. If you're still having trouble gaining enough weight, talk to your practitioner.

If you're gaining weight too quickly, you may be getting more calories than you need. Check in with your doctor and make some healthy adjustments to your diet. Try cutting back on processed, calorie-dense foods with little nutritional value, while ensuring you're not cutting out the valuable vitamins and minerals you and your baby need.

Balance is key, as is listening to your body: "I'm trying to make healthier choices than I would normally make, trying to eat plenty of veggies and fruits and exchanging for better carbs. That being said, I also allow myself to have treats when I crave them," says What to Expect Community mom Kristentlr4.

Says mom leahud0611: "This pregnancy, I don't feel very good when I eat junk food, so I've been doing what feels best for my body, which is eating relatively healthy (with some craving splurges) and smaller, more frequent meals."

The best thing you can do is to try not to obsess over everything you eat or every pound you gain. As long as you're following a healthy, balanced diet most days, you should be fine. And as always, if you have any questions or concerns at all, your practitioner can help.