How to Handle Toddler Tantrums When Leaving the Playground

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

tantrums when leaving the playground

Just about every parent has at some point endured a temper tantrum when trying to leave the playground. Here are some strategies to avoid meltdowns.

"My daughter has a fit every time we try to leave the playground. She cries, kicks, collapses on the ground, and generally makes a scene. What should I do?"

First of all, know you're in good company. Just about every parent has at some point endured a playground-parting temper tantrum . Toddlers have trouble making transitions , especially when the transition means saying bye-bye to the slide, sandbox and swings.

You'll get through it — or, ideally, avoid it in the first place — by being calm and clever but still the boss.

Here are some tricks to try to prevent toddler meltdowns when leaving the playground:

Join in the fun. It will be easier to persuade your little one to stop playing if she doesn't have to do it alone. About 10 minutes before you plan to go, join her on the swings, help her put the finishing touches on her sand castle or ask her to show you how well she can climb on the jungle gym. Then, when it's time to go, you can make the transition together, accompanied by heaps of praise over her accomplishments.

Give notice. You may dread her response to leaving, but she'll handle it better if she has time to get used to the idea. Give her fair notice that you'll be going, starting with a 10-minute warning. At the five-minute mark, offer another reminder, and ask her to finish up what she's doing.

Stick to your word. Be careful not to let her negotiate more time out of you, because once two more turns on the slide morphs into 10, she'll get the idea that "we have to go now " can be turned into "eventually," and you'll set yourself up for a lot of future going-home battles.

Make the trip home as fun as the playground (or almost, anyway). Come up with a game to play on the way back — see how many dogs you can spot, or look for pretty flowers, or bring along a favorite toy that she can play with.

Pack snacks. Be prepared to offer snacks on the road since toddlers often realize they're hungry as soon as the fun is done.

Finally, on the way home, let her know what she'll be doing when she gets home — having dinner, making cookies, going to visit Grandma — so she'll know what to expect and will have something else to look forward to.

Good luck,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the Second Year , Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Temper Tantrums , April 2022. WhatToExpect.com, 7 Ways to Discipline Your Toddler , July 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities , November 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics, Caring for Your Baby and Young Child, 6th Edition: Birth to Age 5 , 2014. Dr. Marion Newman, How to Become Smart and Good: A Blueprint for Parents, Caregivers and Teachers , 2014. American Academy of Pediatrics, Pediatrics , The Power of Play: A Pediatric Role in Enhancing Development in Young Children , September 2018. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline Plus, Toddler Development , August 2021.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Toddler Temper Tantrums Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Use Time-Outs Effectively With Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Tips for Handling the First Days of Preschool

Why Toddlers Wander — and How to Keep Them Safe Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Crying at Drop-Off — Perfecting the Preschool Separation

7 Ways to Discipline Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Managing Aggressive Toddler Behavior Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Separation Anxiety in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Losing Your Cool With Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Toddler Impatience, Explained: Simple Ways to Help Your Child Practice Patience Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Avoid Spoiling Your Child Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Help Me, Heidi! How Do I Deal With My Toddler's Tantrums? Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Why Can't Toddlers Sit Still? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window