How to Survive the 6-Month Sleep Regression — and Stay Sane Too

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

6-month sleep regression in babies, older baby awake on stomach in crib

When your baby’s finally sleeping a long stretch, you can hardly believe your good luck. But since nighttime setbacks are common, here’s what you should know about the 6-month sleep regression.

Tracking your baby’s sleep progress seems like a full-time job for new parents. Will she add another hour this week (hurray!) or will she decide to pop awake repeatedly like last month?

But in some cases, your tot may rouse because she’s experiencing a 6-month sleep regression, a minor — but normal — glitch in her regular routine. Here’s more on sleep regression , including why it happens and how to handle it.

Key Takeaways

Baby sleep has ups and downs — and this is expected. While not every infant will go through a sleep regression, it’s normal for some to have disrupted naps, difficulty settling down, and more waking at night around the 6-month mark.

Sleep regressions are multifaceted. Yup, there are a whole bunch of reasons your little one may not be sleeping well, such as teething pain, learning new physical skills (rolling over, crawling), and experiencing separation anxiety.

Stick to the schedule for sleep success. A solid routine is key right now. Keep your baby’s tuck-in times and naps consistent and strive to put her down drowsy, not sound asleep. And remember, this phase is a temporary one — hang in there!).

Is there a 6-month sleep regression?

Yes, a 6-month sleep regression can occur, though it’s more common for babies to experience a 4-month sleep regression . Sleep regressions also typically crop up at 8 months and again around the 12-month mark though it can happen at any age. But a 6-month sleep regression is quite possible, in part because your baby’s world is swiftly expanding.

The first year is marked by incredible growth and at 6 months she’s learning new motor skills and starting to babble, so this explosion of fresh experiences just might leave her more interested in staying awake (maybe to practice?) rather than drift off the way she has in the past.

What is the 6-month sleep regression?

A 6-month sleep regression is an unexpected interruption in your baby’s usual slumber schedule. For example, after her regular nighttime routine (bath, nursing or a bottle, a book or song), she may tuck in nicely — but then a few hours later she’ll suddenly start to fuss for no apparent reason.

Since you know she’s been feeding regularly throughout the day and she just had a diaper change before bed, you might be puzzled as to why your tot is starting to wail.

By the 6-month mark, most babies are able to snooze close to eight hours at night, especially if you’ve established a healthy bedtime routine. And waking to feed shouldn’t be necessary since infants this age typically don’t need a snack in the wee hours (though she may still crave that quiet closeness with you).

Keep in mind that it’s pretty normal for 6-month old infants to wake in the night and then drop back to sleep shortly after.

How long does the 6-month sleep regression last in babies?

Fortunately, a 6-month sleep regression should be short-lived, like many other stages in your little one's life. A sleep regression is a temporary phase that’ll probably ease up in a matter of weeks (often two or more, but it can vary) once your babe gets used to her newfound skills and realizes that nighttime isn’t the right time to try them.

At this point, you might also be trying to sleep train your tot as the 5- to 6-month mark is a smart time to begin, so you can take confidence in the fact that letting her cry it out a bit is okay for now — and may be a good way to approach sleep regression at first.

Causes of the 6-month-old sleep regression

The reasons behind the 6-month sleep regression are rather varied and may include:

Rolling over. Most babies can flip from one side to the other between 5 and 6 months — and yours might roll more than once. In fact, she could end up stuck in the crib and then start to complain about it.

Babbling. That string of sounds you hear (ba-ba-ba) is cute, but not at 3 a.m.! Your baby’s new ability to babble and coo could be busying her in the crib.

Creeping and crawling. Your tot may be starting to motor around during playtime and tummy time , and this new development may leave her wanting more at night.

Starting to sit. Between 6 and 7 months, some babies will be able to push themselves to a seated position, which may come as a surprise to your tot — and bring on the tears.

Separation anxiety. Social developments can also interrupt a baby’s sleep, including separation anxiety which can start up for some tots when they hit the 6-month mark.

Tooth eruption. Most infant teeth start to emerge between 6 and 12 months, and the pain behind it might get in the way of your baby's Zzzs. What to Expect Community parent ohmyababy knows this situation all too well. "With my first, teething messed up everything!! "We knew every time she had teeth coming in because nights got so bad."

Signs your baby is going through the 6-month sleep regression

If your baby is experiencing a 6-month sleep regression, you might notice the following:

Fitful sleep. Not getting enough Zzz's at night because of a sleep regression or more night wakings than usual can disrupt the shut-eye she does get.

Extra fussiness. You can draw a straight line from your baby not getting enough nighttime sleep to a big case of the crankies and rubbing her eyes during the day.

Longer naps. If your tot isn’t filling her sleep tank at night, she may try and make up for it with a longer daytime snooze. Keep in mind that infants under a year need between 12 and 16 hours of sleep a day, including two or three naps.

Need more information about your baby's schedules and these pesky sleep regressions? Track your little one's sleep with our Baby Tracker, keep notes in My Journal, and get expert-backed advice (plus real-work tips from parents who know the deal) in the What to Expect app , your go-to for all things baby sleep.

Tips for managing the 6-month sleep regression in your baby

Here are some quick ways to handle a sleep regression and ease your babe back to dreamland:

Untangle her. If your baby rolls into a ball in her crib corner or at the slats’ edge and can’t find a way out, gently help her move back to the middle.

Let her babble — or fuss a bit. Once you’ve determined she’s okay in the crib (peek into her room carefully), it’s fine to let her talk to herself for a while or cry it out, especially if you’re in the process of sleep training anyway. Usually picking your baby up or intervening will stimulate or arouse her, bringing her further away from falling asleep

Reassure her. If she’s cried for several minutes during her sleep regression and still hasn’t settled down, go into her room, stroke her head, arm or tummy lightly, and whisper gently. By doing this, you’re reminding her that it’s nighttime, you love her — and she can get back to sleep on her own.

Stick to your schedule. Try not to let a 6-month sleep regression become a big hiccup in your normal tuck-in routine. Keep your healthy bedtime schedule in place so you can both rely on the lineup you’ve come to love.

When to call the doctor about a 6-month sleep regression

You probably won’t need to speak with your baby’s doctor during the 6-month sleep regression, but it’s certainly something you can bring up at her next well-baby visit .

Keep in mind that a few episodes of baby crying actually have no reason behind them, even ones that last up to an hour.

Be sure to take a break from baby duty during a sleep regression and let your partner, caregiver or other loved one step in for a while. And if you’re at your wit’s end and can’t figure out what’s behind your baby’s crying, a call to your doctor for a bit of reassurance is perfectly fine.

Of course, it’s easier said (or read) than done, but try to hang in there when you’re faced with a 6-month sleep regression — and know that the reasons behind it are actually good ones. Your baby is learning to move her body and gaining new skills, which are leaving her restless and excited. But once she’s over the newness of these tricks, she’ll settle down to rest — and so will you.