How to Stop Pumping

How to stop pumping

Ready to stop pumping breast milk? Follow these tips to gradually and safely wean from your breast pump.

As with the decision whether to feed your baby at the breast, exclusively pump or supplement with formula, there is no right or wrong time to stop pumping.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends breastfeeding exclusively for the first six months and then continuing to offer breast milk (along with complementary food) for as long as both you and baby want — potentially for two years or maybe even more. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBreastfeeding and the Use of Human MilkSee All Sources [1] If you've chosen to pump exclusively and are able to do so for six months, a year or more, kudos! If not, you're human.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBreastfeeding and the Use of Human MilkSee All Sources

Whatever you do, don't go cold turkey on the pumping. Weaning takes time, and it's a little different for everyone depending on the age of your baby and how often you were pumping before you decided to stop.

Here's how to start the transition to "pump-free-living" in a way that's safe and comfortable for both you and your baby.

How long does it take to wean from a breast pump?

Because there are no set rules about weaning from the pump, the time it takes varies for everyone.

If you were exclusively pumping for a preemie and now want to feed at the breast, it could take a while to reduce your production, sometimes months. (Too much milk can overwhelm your baby at the breast.) Talk with a lactation consultant about a strategy that is right for you.

The time it takes for other moms to wean from the pump can be a week or two. Most start by reducing each pumping session by a few minutes at a time.

How to wean from pumping breast milk

The key is to gradually decrease the number of pumping sessions per day as well as how long each session lasts.

Let's say you pump three to four times per day, with the first session in the morning before you get ready for work. Maybe you have one or two pumping sessions during the workday, and another when you get home. Drop one pumping session per week until you can get through the workday without full engorgement.

In addition, reduce the amount of time you spend pumping at each session and extend the time between sessions. For example, instead of 20 minutes per session every three hours, pump for 10 to 15 minutes every three hours, and then switch to 10 to 15 minutes every four hours, and so on. Every week, drop a few more minutes. Eventually, you'll get down to pumping only five minutes per session.

Gradual weaning prevents your breasts from becoming too full of milk. Listen to your body! Going slow with this process also gives your baby time to adjust to new patterns in her eating.

How to prevent clogged ducts and mastitis when weaning from a pump

You know the feeling when you can't pump: your breasts swell up and feel like heavy (and painful) bowling balls attached to your chest. If you wait too long, the pain you experience (called engorgement) puts you at risk for clogged milk ducts and possibly even mastitis .

You can help prevent or treat clogged ducts by massaging an area of the breast that tends to empty slower while you pump. Mastitis usually occurs when bacteria enter the breast through a cracked or sore nipple. You can help prevent soreness or cracking by:

Applying one to two drops of pure vegetable oil (olive, canola, corn) to the nipple just before pumping.

Applying modified lanolin cream or ointment (Lansinoh, Tender Care Lanolin) after every pumping session.

If you develop a reddened area on your breast with pain, swelling and flu-like symptoms with a fever, call your doctor. Mastitis does require antibiotic treatment.

Tips to make weaning from a pump easier

Here's how to keep your sweetie hydrated, fed and comfortable — no matter her age — as you make the switch:

If you are weaning from the pump before 12 months, the AAP recommends you switch over to a stash of frozen breast milk (if you have one) or formula. Remember, breast milk stored in a freezer should be used within 6 months for best quality. Up to 12 months is acceptable, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionProper Storage and Preparation of Breast MilkSee All Sources [2] If your baby doesn't want to drink the thawed breast milk, talk with your doctor or lactation consultant about ways to help neutralize the lipase enzymes and lessen the smell.

If you are weaning from the pump around 12 months, consider transitioning your child from bottle to cup too. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsDiscontinuing the BottleSee All Sources [3] Prolonged bottle use can impact your child's teeth, causing more cavities, and some research shows it is linked to other health problems such as ear infections. All good reason to nix the bottle around the first birthday bash.

If you are weaning from the pump after 12 months, but continue to nurse your child at the breast at least three to four times in a 24-hour period, offer your child water with meals. If you're no longer nursing, you can switch over to cow's milk at meals now that your child is older than 1. Your little one should drink about 2 to 3 cups total per day.

Make the weaning process easier on yourself too by doing the following:

Invest in a bra that fits you well. You want one that isn't too tight or restrictive.

Stock up on nursing pads. While you decrease the amount of time you're pumping, slip nursing pads in your bra to prevent leaking. You may also want to keep a spare shirt in your bag for a while.

Use ice. Cold packs or a bag of frozen peas on each breast for five to 15 minutes after pumping can help decrease milk production. Avoid heat on your breasts, such as a hot compress.

Ease pain. Ask your doctor if it's safe for you to take over-the-counter pain medications such as ibuprofen (like Motrin or Advil) or acetaminophen (e.g., Tylenol).