How to Tell If You Need to Rehome Your Pet When You Have a Baby

rehoming pet

Even the thought of rehoming a pet can send you down a spiral of sadness or guilt. But experts insist that sometimes, it’s the most compassionate choice.

What to Expect Community mom khipper24 recently found herself in an unenviable situation: “My dog bit my 10-month-old baby today,” she writes. “It was probably a warning bite, but a bite is a bite. I’m gutted because my child got hurt on my watch by my own dog. We are so lucky that it wasn’t worse. I’m never going to be able to trust this dog again, and I refuse to let there be a next time. I want to rehome her.”

Just the thought of rehoming a pet who’s a beloved member of the family can stir up a lot of emotions, like sadness, worry, or shame. But your family’s safety must come first, and rehoming a pet can be the most loving choice for your animal, too.

“It's important to remember that you're not a bad person for considering rehoming, especially when safety is a concern [like aggression toward a child],” says Daniel Ganjian, M.D., FAAP , a California-based pediatrician. “Making the best decision for everyone involved, including your pet, is an act of love.”

There isn’t a one-size-fits-all solution when it comes to something like this. Here are tips to help you make the right choice for your family, all loaded with compassion and no judgment.

Key Takeaways

Unfortunately, some pets don't mesh well with babies, so you might have to discuss other options, like rehoming.

Preparing your pet for a new baby can help them get used to the idea of someone else joining the family, but it doesn't always work for every pet.

Finding loved ones — or a reputable local organization — may give you peace of mind if you have to make that tough decision.

Is it safe to have a pet around a baby or toddler?

Absolutely. Pets can be safe and gentle with babies and small children , says Liza Cahn, D.V.M., a veterinarian with Embrace Pet Insurance. “Growing up with pets can be extremely rewarding for children,” she says. They help teach empathy, compassion, and responsibility, among other developmental gains.

But as a new parent, you'll need to take the reins of preparing your pet for the baby’s arrival.

“A new baby is a huge transition for the whole family,” says Dr. Cahn. “They come with many changes in routine as well as new smells and sounds, which can be scary and overwhelming for family pets. The best thing you can do is thoroughly prepare your pets beforehand.”

She swears by these pet-preparation steps:

Training a pet to follow basic commands, like “drop it” and “go to your place.”

Introducing the pet to new sounds, like playing crying baby videos on your phone, leading up to your delivery.

Creating a pet-only sanctuary with a cozy bed, water, and toys that they can retreat to when stressed (and eventually “training” kids to respect the animal’s space).

What to Expect Mom Ashleyburgess1 says all the prep they did really helped her dog get comfortable around her child. “I love nothing more than watching my 2-year-old daughter and 3-year-old golden play and love each other,” she adds. “Now, there’s effort and training that need to happen with both, so they respect each other's boundaries. But I love my dog more since watching her with my daughter.”

Even with all of the proactive preparation, love, and care, it's hard to know just how your pet will act around small children until you're in that situation — and sometimes, it just doesn't go as planned.

How to tell if your pet might be a danger to your little one

Biting and scratching are the biggest flags that a pet might be a danger to your baby or toddler, says Dr. Cahn. These issues are usually a result of your pet being chronically stressed or scared, which can understandably happen when there's a big life change.

Every animal and breed handles stress differently, but dogs, cats, and pocket pets (guinea pigs, hamsters, and rabbits) may show the following warning signs:

Changes in appetite

Peeing or pooping somewhere new, such as outside of a litter box

Hiding

Vocalizations, like yowling, hissing, growling, whimpering, or barking

Changes in grooming, like chronic licking, plucking, or full barbering (pulling) of feathers, fur, and whiskers

Panting

Drooling

Yawning

Lip licking

Shaking or trembling

All of these signs may not lead to aggressive behavior, but they can. You may also realize your pet isn't a good fit for your home and family because of other things, too, according to Dr. Cahn, including:

Losing a home in a natural disaster

Financial setbacks, such as day care costs, layoffs, or unexpected medical bills

Lack of time to care for a pet

An allergy to your pet

“As difficult as this situation may be, the health and safety of human children have to take priority,” Dr. Cahn says. Which means, although it's tough, in the long run, it is the safest thing for you and your family.

If you notice signs of stress in your pet, Dr. Cahn advises against punishment, as it can only make your pet more fearful. Instead, she suggests calmly removing the pet from the situation, keeping them separate from the baby, and contacting a vet or veterinary behaviorist immediately to see if they can help you figure out what might be helpful.

Remember that this is a decision motivated by safety and is good parenting.

Emily Guarnotta, Psy.D., PMH-C, psychologist

However, sometimes, a vet or specialist will not be able to help improve your pet's behavior with training and treatments. “Not all pets are comfortable around children… and rehoming may be the most compassionate choice for all involved,” Dr. Cahn says.

What to do if you think you may need to find a new home for your pet

If you’ve made the difficult but loving decision to rehome a pet, know that you’re doing the right thing. These tips may help you navigate the process:

Reach out to your personal network and reputable organizations. Contact people you know, like friends, family, and your veterinarian, first, says Dr. Cahn. Placing a pet directly (even if just temporarily) with someone you know and trust can ensure the pet is safe and loved and may help you feel a little less sad or guilty (which are all natural feelings, by the way). If that doesn't work, look for breed-specific rescues, local shelters, and private platforms like Home To Home that you know will take good care of your loved one.

Create an honest profile for your pet. When posting information about your pet on websites, be transparent about their health, temperament, and daily needs. This step helps prospective caregivers make the best decision based on their lifestyles, and helps your pet land in the type of permanent home that's best for them.

Screen applicants thoroughly. If you're able to, get to know the prospective families to help determine whether your pet is a good fit for their family. Try scheduling a phone interview and in-person visit, so you can take note of things that might be helpful, like a fenced-in yard.

Have fun on the last day. On the last day with your pet, you can make it positive — taking them to their favorite park or taking a photo with them (if it's safe) can help bring closure.

Even if you check all of the above boxes and say a heartfelt goodbye, friends, family, and older children may still have questions, comments, or judgments about the decision. “Frame the decision as an act of love and safety, but also acknowledge the sadness that everyone feels," says Emily Guarnotta, Psy.D., PMH-C, psychologist and founder of Phoenix Health .

Hopefully, the questions will stop. Regardless, know that you have done the very best for your family, even if some people don’t understand. They haven’t walked in your shoes or your pet’s paws (or swum with their fins or flown with their wings).

“Remember that this is a decision motivated by safety and is good parenting,” she adds. "Give yourself the space to acknowledge your feelings and remember, you are doing the best you can for everyone involved.”

Daniel Ganjian, M.D., FAAP , a California-based pediatrician at Providence Saint John’s Health Center. Emily Guarnotta, Psy.D., PMH-C, psychologist and founder of Phoenix Health . Liza Cahn, D.V.M., a veterinarian with Embrace Pet Insurance. Wiley Online Library, 2025, Gene–Environment Interaction Affects Risk of Atopic Eczema: Population and In Vitro Studies .

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

How to Introduce Your Dog to Your Newborn Baby Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Babyproof Every Room in the House Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do if a Dog Bites Your Child Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Can Your Pet Sense You’re Pregnant? 85% of Moms Say Yes Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

You Don't Have to Move to a Bigger Home When You Have a Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Dogs, Cats and Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

Should You Go Back to Work After Baby? Here's What to Consider Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Not Sure If You’re Ready For a Baby? The Big Questions to Ask Before You Start Trying Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

How to Help Your Child Prepare for Your New Baby By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

Losing a Pet — How to Help Your Toddler Deal With Death

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window