Why the Fridababy NoseFrida Snotsucker Saves My Sanity Every Time My Baby Has a Cold

NoseFrida Review

What is it? Fridababy NoseFrida Snotsucker Aspirator

Why I love it: The easy-to-use aspirator helps clear baby's sinuses without a hassle (or mess)

How much is it? $21

Where to buy it: Amazon

When my son first started daycare, he must have brought home every single cold known to man within the first month. He was — quite literally — up to his ears in boogies.

Besides the fact that it was impossibly sad to watch a four-month-old wheeze and struggle to breathe through tiny nostrils stuffed with mucus he didn’t know how to expel, I wasn’t sleeping a wink because of said mucus.

We were all miserable.

I wasn’t getting anywhere with the bulb-shaped snot sucker they give you at the hospital, plus the device kind of grossed me out — how in the world are you supposed to clean those things?

So I broke out the one gift I didn’t register for, but got anyway, because all of the moms I knew said they swore by it: the Fridababy NoseFrida Snotsucker Aspirator ($21 on Amazon).

What is the NoseFrida?

The product is undoubtedly a little intimidating. A long mouthpiece connects to a mesh filter housed inside a blue tube that sits right at the base of baby’s nose. And when you suck on the red mouthpiece, the gentle force of your air draws the baby’s snot out of their nose and into the blue tube where it collects.

I can already hear your thoughts, because I had them too: I have to do what ?

How to use the NoseFrida

To use, the large tube is placed at the base of baby’s nose, creating a seal. Next, a parent or caregiver applies gentle suction through the mouthpiece and then — you guessed it — literally sucks the snot out of baby’s nostril.

Yes, you do have to hold that blue tube up to your baby’s tiny nostril and suck on the opposite end to draw the snot out. But I promise, you will not get a single ounce of mucus in your mouth. There’s a disposable filter in the tube that blocks snot and germs, so none of the gross stuff makes its way to you. (NoseFrida says the disposable filters are clinically proven to prevent the transfer of mucus or bacterial germs to the snot sucker.) The grossest part of the whole process is the sound it makes, so at the end of the day, it’s really nothing more than a mental hurdle to overcome.

You don’t have to worry about hurting your baby, either. While you’re bound to hear a few cries — ok, screams — it’s not because you’re using too much force. According to the company, it’s nearly impossible to suck too hard, and the device is safe to use up to four times a day. So, more than likely, it’s simply a new and uncomfortable sensation for baby.

There’s a little trick to make things a easier, though: saline solution. Before using the NoseFrida, put a couple drops of saline solution in each nostril. According to both the company and my pediatrician, this helps loosen thick mucus, making it easier to more effectively expel it.

Our review

The first time I used the NoseFrida, I had to really talk myself into it. (What can I say, I’m squeamish!) I sprayed a little saline in my son’s nostrils, then started sucking. What came out was truly horrifying and satisfying all at the same time — more than a full inch of thick green boogers.

My son, admittedly, hated every second of it. He cried and cried during our snot sucking adventure, but shortly after I finished and he realized he could breathe more adequately, his cries subsided and he dozed off to sleep.

Before I tucked myself in, I gave the NoseFrida a quick rinse. Pro tip: It’s much easier to clean when the mucus is fresh. I simply use the power of the faucet to let the boogers slide out and down into the drain, toss the filter, then place the product in the dishwasher following package instructions for a full clean.

Another thing to note: As baby gets older and more mobile, it’s harder to keep them still for such an invasive activity. I found that holding their arms down helped, but I definitely felt guilty for having to put them through it — even though I knew how much it was ultimately helping.

My baby is now 3.5 years old and way past the NoseFrida days (he hasn’t let me come anywhere near him with the thing since he was about a year old), but I have three more kids who have found relief from colds through the wonders of the product. And since a happy baby is a happy mom, I’ll happily reach for the NoseFrida to suck up snot whenever a cold strikes.

Pros

Relieves baby's stuffy nose

Mess-free

Easy to clean

Cons

Better for younger babies

Slightly intimidating at first

NoseFrida: The Snotsucker Baby Nasal Aspirator from Fridababy

Your Next Read

The 7 Best Baby Nasal Aspirators for Stuffy Little Noses Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Why the Windi the Gaspasser Has Become a Must-Have Baby Accessory for Me By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

Build A Cold and Flu Survival Kit To Get Your Baby Through Sick Season Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Our 10 Favorite Doctor-Approved Humidifiers to Help Your Baby During Sick Season Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

15 Products That Leave Moms Saying 'TikTok Made Me Buy It' Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Best Products for Pregnancy Congestion, According to an OB/GYN Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Haakaa Silicone Breast Pump Review By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

Stuffy Nose in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Why Does My Newborn Keep Sneezing? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

7 Pacifiers Small Enough to Soothe a Preemie Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Teach Toddlers to Blow Their Noses Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do When Your Toddler Gets Something Stuck in His Nose Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Toddlers Pick Their Nose — and How to Help Them Break the Habit Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window