How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One

mom and baby at berry first birthday party with a strawberry cake

This adorable first birthday theme will guarantee a berry good time for all.

Strawberries, blueberries and blackberries — oh my! Make your baby’s first birthday the sweetest celebration of all by leaning into a summery, berry-themed party that honors your 1-year-old's milestone day.

It's the perfect first birthday party idea for summer, says Carissa Kruse , a pro party planner who's hosted more than a hundred events. "A Berry First Birthday theme not only celebrates the sweet and playful nature of a child's first year, but the vibrant colors and delicious flavors associated with berries add a whimsical touch to the party, making it a hit with both kids and adults alike."

Kruse suggests leaning into this theme by "incorporating berry elements into every aspect of the party, from invitations accented with strawberries to berry-inspired food, games and activities."

As you start planning, there's one very important thing to remember. No matter how big you go with your Berry First Birthday theme, don’t lose sight of what this day is all about, says Adaobi Kanu, a party planner and owner of Events In A Crunch . "Let's be honest: First birthday parties are for the parents, more than the child," she says. "It's a way to celebrate finally getting a decent night’s sleep and making it to this stage."

There's no need to go overboard with party planning and decor to the point of stressing yourself out. After all, "This is just a chance to celebrate and finally hang out with all the family members and friends you haven't seen in a year," Kanu says.

This list of Berry First Birthday party ideas is ripe for the picking, so read on for inspiration and professional advice on how to plan a first birthday party for your babe.

Berry First Birthday invitations

berry first birthday invitations

Establish your theme with some berry-inspired invitations. They could feature a basket of strawberries or a strawberry-topped cupcake.

Find customizable designs that are perfect for a Berry First Birthday on Etsy, or design one yourself using Canva or BeFunky.

Berry First Birthday decorations

Berry-inspired color scheme

berry first birthday color scheme

To bring your Berry First Birthday party theme to life, "Use lots of vibrant colors like red, blue and purple to create a fun and playful atmosphere," Kruse says. Incorporate picnic vibes with red gingham tablecloths to further fuel the theme and add some pattern to your party’s aesthetic.

Hanging paper berries

berry first birthday hanging berry decorations

To take your theme to the next level, "Use berry-themed decorations, like hanging paper lanterns in the shape of strawberries," says Kruse. It’s a quick and easy way to elevate your Berry First Birthday party decor and make a major visual impact.

Berry patch photo op

"One creative idea is to make your own berry patch using green tissue paper and red balloon 'berries,'" suggests Kruse. Throw in a few "farmer props — think hats, bandanas, baskets," adds Kanu, and encourage guests to take cute photos of themselves with the Berry First Birthday guest of honor.

Fresh berry table decorations

berry first birthday table decorations

For totally on-theme decor, "Set out produce baskets filled with actual berries," suggests Kanu. "They'll double as snacking options or can be used as fruit garnishes for mixed drinks, making them a no-waste decor accent." To save money, fill your container two-thirds of the way with foam or cardboard, and sit a plate piled full of fresh strawberries, blueberries or blackberries on top of that.

DIY berry balloon cupcake toppers

berry first birthday cupcake decorations

Give birthday cupcakes an extra special touch by adorning them with strawberry balloon toppers. Cut a ring of "leaves" out of green construction paper, and punch a hole in the center. Blow up a small pink balloon, and carefully slip the balloon's untied end through the hole in the "leaves" before tying it off. Draw on seeds with a permanent marker before hot-gluing each balloon to a lollipop stick. (Get the full how-to here .)

Berry First Birthday food

Berry First Birthday smash cake

berry first smash cake

When it comes to first birthday smash cakes , rather than topping yours with real berries, decorate it with strawberry lollipop candies like this blogger did. It'll make things a little less messy … even if only slightly!

Just cut off the sticks, and press the gummies into your icing. Pink strawberry cake on the inside and white buttercream frosting on the outside is the perfect combination, since red or pink icing is more likely to stain clothes.

Picnic lunch

Take inspiration from your theme, and serve up a simple picnic-style lunch for guests in brown paper boxes or woven baskets. It'll give your event a laid-back feel that'll make family and friends feel more comfortable.

Berry-inspired bites

berry first birthday food ideas

From mini strawberry shortcake bites to strawberry caprese skewers, there's no end to the berry-infused nibbles you can whip up. Of course, a platter of chocolate-covered strawberries is a must for any Berry First Birthday party!

Berry-infused beverages

berry first birthday drinks

When it comes to your Berry First Birthday menu, choose drinks that are on theme. "For the alcohol drinkers, serve berry margaritas," Kanu advises. For those abstaining, offer up a batch of berry agua fresca or some berry smash mocktails .

Berry First Birthday games

"Berry picking" scavenger hunt

"Plan a 'berry picking' birthday party game, where children have to find hidden [paper] berries around the party venue and collect them in a basket," suggests Kruse. All you need is some red construction paper, scissors and a black marker to draw on a few seeds.

Pin the berry on the cupcake

Give this classic birthday party game a berry sweet spin: "Play a 'Pin the Berry on the Cupcake' game, where kids are blindfolded and have to pin a small berry cutout onto a larger cupcake poster," recommends Kruse.

Birthday time capsule

berry first birthday time capsule

For an ultra sweet first birthday party activity, invite guests to write well wishes for your baby to read on a later birthday. It's a sentimental way to get guests more involved in the celebration.

Berry First Birthday favors

Berry baskets

berry first birthday berry basket party favors

"I recommend giving out small baskets filled with fresh berries as party favors ," Kruse says. Another option: "Create a 'berry picking' station, where kids can pick their own berries to take home as favors."

Berry treats

berry first birthday berry food party favors

Thank guests for attending (and for the first birthday gifts ) by sending them home with a special treat. "I'm a big fan of food favors for a Berry First Birthday," says Kanu, who suggests sending party-goers home with mini berry pies or berry-shaped cookies. Talk about leaving a good taste in their mouths!

Carissa Kruse, Founder, Carissa Kruse Weddings . Adaobi Kanu, Owner and Lead Planner, Events In A Crunch . WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Birthday Party Dos and Don'ts , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a First Birthday Party , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes , January 2022.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Space Birthday Party Ideas That Are Out of This World Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Turn Baby's First Birthday Party Into a 'Winter Onederland' Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Host a 'Wild One' Birthday That's a Roaring Good Time Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Dog-Themed Ideas for a Pawfect Puppy Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Celebrate 'Mr. Onederful' With a Dapper First Birthday Bash Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Throw a T-Rex-iffic Dinosaur Birthday Party That'll Go Down in History Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw a Fall-Themed Baby Shower for Your Little Pumpkin Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window