How to Keep Your Relationship Strong During Pregnancy (and Beyond!)

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy and formatting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"We're not even parents yet, but all my partner and I talk about is the baby. This pregnancy has taken over our lives, and I'm afraid it'll hurt our relationship. How do we keep the romance alive and strengthen our relationship during pregnancy?"

Quick: What's the single most significant relationship you'll have in your new life as a parent? Surprise: It's not the one you'll share with that beautiful baby you'll be bringing home. It's the one you share — and will continue to share — with your partner, a fact baby-crazed pregnancy couples can be quick to forget.

After all, fetuses grow into babies, who grow up into older children, who grow up and move out of the house (and it happens a lot faster than you can even imagine … trust me!). But a partner is with you into old age, with a little luck and a lot of hard work. So it's extra important (and challenging) to keep the love alive and maintain a strong relationship during pregnancy.

That said, there are sure to be some changes in the dynamics of your twosome once baby makes three. These shifts and potential strains on a couple's relationship during a pregnancy are inevitable — because, in spite of how little they are, babies tend to make a big impact on their parents' lives! But if you play your cards right from the start, these changes can actually be for the better.

Track your baby's growth and find answers to all your pregnancy questions in the What to Expect app .

The first thing you guys will need to do is to start thinking of yourselves as a couple again — instead of just a couple of parents-to-be. Of course, you'll want to focus plenty of attention on your pregnancy and on your baby — and you should, as long as you remember to keep your relationship front-and-center rather than on the back burner. Your baby doesn't have to come between you (though your growing belly definitely will!).

Wondering just how to nurture your relationship? You probably have some pretty good romantic tricks you can pull out of storage, but here are a few ideas to get you started:

Key Takeaways

Don't put your partner on the back burner: Even as you both focus on your growing baby, make sure your relationship stays a priority — your connection now will set the tone for your life together as parents.

Talk openly and often. Share your feelings, expectations, and changes — not just logistics about the pregnancy or baby prep.

Make time for connection. Everything from regular date nights to small romantic surprises can help you stay close and keep your romance going strong.

Schedule in romance

Now's a good time to start a weekly date night — something you'd be smart to continue after baby's on board (though in the first few months, you may be having those dates at home .…).

Be spontaneous

As often as you can, for absolutely no reason at all, surprise your partner with an affectionate touch or kiss, a flirty compliment, or an impromptu jump into bed. Feel free to get frisky and adventurous. Just make sure you keep pregnancy sex safe and fun.

Mix baby business with relationship pleasure

Cap a trip to the baby store with dinner and a movie (don't forget to hold hands in the dark). Or follow that ultrasound appointment with lunch at your favorite spot. That's right, lunch counts — in fact, it's normal to not be in the mood for a long evening out when you're pregnant.

"My husband and I are having trouble planning and enjoying date nights," says What to Expect Community member Jmoore323. "He wants to go to a restaurant near the water, but all I'm thinking is meh."

If you relate, don't stress. As long as you two keep bonding in small, everyday ways, you'll stay connected.

Keep the sweet nothings going

As often as you can, put your relationship first. Don't just email your partner 20 times a day to ask them if they've remembered to pick up the dry cleaning or those paint samples for the nursery. Write to them sometimes just to tell them you love them and can't wait to see them.

Remember the other four-letter word: Talk

Communication is always important in a relationship, but it's especially essential for couples during pregnancy, since things between them can change pretty quickly. Be sure to talk through changes instead of just letting them happen. And keep the lines of communication open once baby's on the scene, when talking uninterrupted will be challenging for sure, but more crucial than ever.

Get away while you still can

Plan a romantic getaway before baby makes a trip for two a lot trickier, and if you plan to fly during your pregnancy just get the okay from your doctor before you hit the open skies.

Wishing you a lifetime of loving!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff.

Updates history

December 1, 2025

Editor: Lisa Lombardi/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

How do you split housework?

How old were you when your last baby was born?

Husband has 0 exp with babies

There are 10,545 active discussions happening now in our Relationships community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

How to Support Your Partner During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

What to Do When Your Partner Is Afraid of Sex During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

5 Things Every Partner Should Do for a Mom-to-Be Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

In a Baby-Making Rut? Here's How to Keep the Romance Alive Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Week-by-Week Pregnancy Guide for Dads and Partners Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

8 Pregnancy Sex Challenges — and How to Fix Them Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

7 Practical Ways First-Time Dads Can Support Their Partner and Baby Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Why Pregnancy Changes Your Friendships — and How to Stay Connected Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

A Partner’s Support During Postpartum Can Literally Be Lifesaving Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

Your Questions About Sex During Pregnancy, Answered Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Your Guide to a Calmer, Cozier Holiday Season During Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Pregnant and Single? Here’s How to Get the Support You Need Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Ways Dads and Partners Can Advocate for a Healthy Pregnancy, Birth and Postpartum Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Your Pre-Pregnancy Check List: How to Get Your Body, Budget, and Life Ready for Baby Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler Fact Checked by Jill Malter

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window