How to Prepare for a Rainy Day Walk With Baby

baby

There's no reason to stop venturing outdoors with your baby just because the rainy season has arrived. Here's how to boldly walk (or stroll) among the raindrops and not only survive, but thrive!

Are spring showers or summer storms keeping you indoors? Don’t let them. A walk in the rain certainly won’t harm your baby, and it might even delight her, expose her to new sights, sounds and sensations and give her a healthy dose of fresh air.

The key to enjoying a walk in the rain with baby is doing a little prep work. Check the weather report first to make sure it’s safe to venture outdoors. Thunder, lightning and strong winds forecasted? Better to stay put. Otherwise, choose gear that’s warm and waterproof and consider the following before heading out with your wee one:

How to keep baby warm in the rain

Your little one can get chilly in wet weather, so make sure to dress your baby with long pants, socks and long sleeves. Cotton is fine, as long as she’s covered in something waterproof (see below). For that inevitable gap that develops between the socks and pants, cover her in leg warmers or put her in a stroller sack to keep her cozy. Pack an extra set of clothes in case she gets soaked or the weather changes.

How to keep baby dry in a carrier or stroller

Most strollers come with rain guards that are great in inclement weather — just attach over the top of the stroller to keep baby dry. You can order ones specific to your stroller type or buy a generic one online.

Some moms prefer to carry their babies in a sling, front carrier or backpack so their hands are free to hold an umbrella. Just make sure the umbrella is big enough to cover both of you. Want to walk with both hands free? Cover yourself and your baby in waterproof jackets with hoods and carry your baby inside your coat for extra protection.

Rainy day activities

Once you step outside, let the fun begin. Talk to your baby about what you see and let the weather stimulate her senses. Listen closely to the pitter patter of raindrops, examine leaves and flower petals up close to see how the water drips off of them, gaze up at the clouds and let your baby feel the wet wind on her face and hands. Serenade her with songs like “Singin’ in the Rain” or really channel your inner Gene Kelly and dance in some puddles together.

If your child is walking (and you dressed her in rain boots ), let her explore on her own, splashing in puddles or catching rain on her tongue. Better yet, bring a bucket and let her collect rainwater. Spot a rainbow? Start a game of "I spy," and when it’s time to go home, let her drift off to sleep to the soothing sounds of falling rain.

When to head inside from the rain

If you hear the rumbles of thunder, go inside. The National Weather Service recommends staying inside for at least 30 minutes after the last thunderclap. If you cannot reach a safe building, avoid high ground, water, tall isolated trees and metal objects like bleachers or fences.

And whatever you do, don’t run and slip. Step carefully and once you’re back inside take off any wet clothes immediately, towel off and dress your baby in something dry.