How to Share Your Baby News With Grandparents-to-Be

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Pregnancy announcement for grandparents

These cute baby announcement ideas for grandparents will help you break your big news.

Once you and your partner have adjusted to the news of your pregnancy, sharing it with your parents and in-laws is the next exciting moment. But how to tell them can leave some Mamas-to-be (and future Dads!) a little stumped. Fortunately, there are loads of creative ways to announce your little one's arrival, from personalized gifts (think onesies, cookies, or Christmas ornaments) to sweet ultrasound prints.

Your pregnancy is a big life change — and not just for you. Your own parents may feel almost as excited as you are about your growing family. After all, they'll also be gaining a new family member and may even be becoming grandparents for the first time!

Key-Takeaways

Share the news your way. There are no rules for telling your folks there's a baby on board — you can call, write, make a t-shirt — anything you love!

Creativity = memories. The more involved your announcement is, the greater the reward. Go to town with cookies, photos, or even the dog as a helper.

Consider a keepsake. A personalized frame, Christmas ornament, or special letter not only tells your news but becomes a memento to save for years to come.

How should you tell your parents that you're pregnant?

You should tell your parents you're pregnant in a way that feels right to you. A simple phone call, printed sonogram photo, or in-person conversation always works well, though more imaginative baby announcements can help share your big news in surprising, touching and sometimes hilarious ways. Giving your parents something tangible — or snapping a photo of their reaction — will be particularly appreciated by Instagram- and Facebook-loving moms and dads, who can then reveal that they'll soon be grandparents with their friends on social media.

Of course, you should share this news however you prefer — you get to decide the best way to announce your pregnancy. The following examples from real-life moms and dads may help inspire the perfect pregnancy announcement that you (and your parents) will treasure.

Excited to share your baby news? Download the What to Expect app for announcement ideas, gender reveal tips, and other fun party ideas to herald your bun in the oven.

What are some cute pregnancy announcements for grandparents?

Cute pregnancy announcements for grandparents can be as simple as a photo collage or as grand as a singing group at the front door. Choose the method that fits your style and budget — and know there isn't a wrong way to share your exciting baby news.

1. Win grandparents over with a onesie

bodysuit pregnancy annoucement

For someone with a sense of humor, a fun way to tell parents you're pregnant is with a custom newborn outfit that asks them what they'd like their grandparent name to be.

2. Snap a sibling photo

photo of a little girl wearing a

Your parents love pictures of their grandkids. So announce your pregnancy to parents who are already grandparents by sending a photo of your firstborn with a photo of your sonogram. You could also get your kids “big sibling” shirts and place a “little sibling” onesie beside them.

What to Expect Community parent AmLiEh shared her baby announcement idea recently. “With our third we invited family over for bbq and in the backyard we decorated a fence with a backdrop and balloons and had the banner "Soon to Bee, Mommy of Three" and the theme was bumblebees.”

3. Gift baby essentials

baby essentials

Help your parents get ready to be grandparents by giving them a box with a baby bottle, pacifier, toy, or other small items that let them know the big news.

4. Say it with sweets

basket of pregnancy announcement cookies

If you don't consider yourself a baker, ask a local bakery if they can whip up a batch of cookies in the shape of rattles, strollers or other baby items . Be sure to include a few large cookies with the baby announcement for the grandparents.

5. Make them a winner

photo of a card that says

Who doesn't like lottery tickets? Custom cards with scratch-off sections recreate the fun — and everyone is a winner!

6. Let your baby-to-be help tell your parents you're pregnant

A wooden note that says: To My Nanny, I know I'm just a little bump that is yet to grow and grow, but I want you to know that I already love you so... Nanny are you ready, our adventures are about to start, My Mummy said that you're amazing and will love me with all my heart. Happy Mother's Day 2021, Love Baby Bump x

Tell your parents you're pregnant by writing them a letter "from" the baby. Expect happy tears all around as you watch their reaction.

7. Put a fork in it

two forks that have

Order up engraved utensils, then invite the grandparents over for dinner or out to a restaurant. When you sit down to dine, inform them you have new silverware and ask what they think.

8. Add to their photo collection

ultrasound photo gift

Find a grandparent-themed picture frame, insert an ultrasound photo and mail it so they can proudly display the very first image of their grandchild.

9. Replace their old coffee mugs

two mugs that say

You can't go wrong with a grandparent-themed mug.

10. Recruit the dog

If your pet is the first “grandchild” in the family, this is a fun way to tell your parents you're pregnant. Dress your dog or cat in a “big brother” or “big sister” bandana the next time the grandparents-to-be come over. If your parents live far away, sending them a sweet photo will work just as well.

11. Make them a countdown clock

Photo of a board that says

Your baby will make his appearance in how many days? Give the grandparents-to-be a countdown to your due date. You can opt to purchase a pre-made sign or create your own using a chalkboard, poster, or an online print-out.

12. Let them read between the lines

teddy bear next to a grandparent book

You're reading What to Expect When You're Expecting to prepare for every step of pregnancy. Help grandma and grandpa prepare for their duties by sending them books to read or memory journals to fill out once the baby arrives.

13. Write a personalized note

grandma and grandpa cards

If you're far away — or just want to watch your parents' reactions to the news — consider giving the future grandparents a card to read. Bonus: If you'd like to film their faces while reading your message, this baby announcement idea makes it easy to do so.

14. Seek a second opinion

photo of a baby cardigan and baby hat

Already clothing shopping or ordering outfits for baby? To tell your parents you're pregnant, video call them and say you need their help — do they approve of this cardigan set, onesie or sleeper sack for their future grandchild?

15. Show them what they're made of

grandparent definition board that says:

Plenty of poems and sayings about grandparents exist. Print one out in a pretty font and frame it, or write a heartfelt message about what your parents will each mean to your baby, and send that as your pregnancy announcement.

16. Create a sign

two grandparents holding a sign that says

Lots of expectant parents hold up a letterboard or special sign to announce their pregnancy on social media, but grandparents can join in on the fun, too! If you know your own parents will want to shout the news to everyone they know, make it easy for them: Create this Instagram-friendly sign that they can post on social media.

17. Say it with special artwork

photo of a painted sonogram with baby's name below

Some artists will turn ultrasounds into keepsake artwork such as prints or embroidery. Parents who live far away will cherish having this first look forever.

18. Make a toast

wine bottle preg annoucement

Expectant moms may not be able to partake, but you can still gift a bottle of wine with a personalized label to share your big news. This announcement can be particularly fun if the timing works to reveal your news around a holiday or family get-together.

19. Break out the message board

letterboard that says

You can use this trend in two ways as a pregnancy announcement for grandparents: Create the message and send them the entire board as a sweet keepsake, or, if you want to keep the board yourself, send them a photo. (Bonus: You can also share the photo on social media!)

20. Help decorate their Christmas tree

pregnancy announcement ornament

If your parents celebrate Christmas, the perfect gift is your coming baby — and ornaments to tell your parents you're pregnant. You can create DIY ornaments or order custom ones online.

Updates history

March 11, 2026

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Rebekah Wahlberg

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

11 Surprise Pregnancy Announcements to Drop Your Unexpected Baby News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

9 Creative DIY Pregnancy Announcements for Crafty Parents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Pregnancy Announcement Templates to Personalize Your Big News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Thanksgiving Pregnancy Announcements That All Parents-to-Be Will Fall For Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Twin Pregnancy Announcements for a Doubly Sweet Surprise Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

When to Tell People You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

10 Funny Pregnancy Announcements That Are Sure to Amuse Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Dog Pregnancy Announcements for Human Parents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

How to Tell a Partner About a Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

What to Write in a Baby Birth Announcement Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

11 Fall Pregnancy Announcements That Are Pure Autumnal Bliss Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Halloween Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your New Boo Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

30 Gender Reveal Ideas for Celebrating Your Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Help Your Child Prepare for Your New Baby By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window