How Will Pregnancy Change Your Vagina and Labia?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Anatomical Structure of the Vagina Made of Paper

From swelling and sensitivity to postpartum recovery, here’s what’s normal — and what to expect as your body changes.

Pregnancy can bring changes to your vagina and labia, and that's normal. Hormonal shifts and increased blood flow may lead to swelling, color changes, heightened sensitivity, and other temporary differences. While childbirth can also affect the area, most changes are mild and tend to resolve over time. Overall, every body is unique, and any lasting differences are usually minor.

If you're wondering what's "normal" and how having a baby may change things down there, you're not alone. Here's what to expect.

Key Takeaways

Changes during pregnancy are normal and common. Hormonal shifts and increased blood flow can cause swelling, darker coloration, increased sensitivity, more discharge, and even varicose veins in the labia and vagina.

Most changes are temporary and not drastic. While childbirth may lead to stretching, tearing, or soreness, the vagina and labia typically return close to their pre-pregnancy state, with any long-term differences usually minor.

Variation is normal. Labia size, shape, and appearance vary widely due to genetics, and most pregnancy-related changes aren’t cause for concern. If something feels off or uncomfortable, check with your healthcare practitioner.

Is it normal for your vagina and labia to change during pregnancy?

Yes. The hormonal and physical changes that happen during pregnancy and childbirth can affect your vagina and labia — sometimes temporarily and sometimes permanently.

For the most part, though, the size and shape of your labia (both inner and outer) are determined by your genetics, not hormone levels or sexual activity. Just like other body parts, labia and vaginas come in different shapes and sizes.

Here's what's typical:

The labia majora (outer lips) of the vagina can range from full to flat and may fluctuate a bit with weight changes.

The labia minora (inner lips) typically measure between about 0.7 and 5 centimeters in length. They may be completely hidden by the labia majora, or the bottom edge may extend beyond them.

The vagina is, on average, about 3 inches long from the cervix (the opening of the uterus) to the vulva. Every vagina varies in shape and color. Because it's highly elastic, the vagina is designed to stretch and accommodate your baby during birth.

The What to Expect app's daily updates can help you feel more in control when your body's doing unexpected things.

What vaginal and labia changes happen during pregnancy?

Your labia and vagina might experience a host of changes during pregnancy, including increased sensitivity. You can thank pregnancy hormones , which boost blood flow throughout your body, including to your labia and vagina.

Other changes you might notice include: Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsVulvovaginal HealthSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsVulvovaginal HealthSee All Sources

Swelling. The labia majora and minora may look puffy or slightly enlarged throughout pregnancy.

Discoloration. The color of your skin on both your inner and outer labia may temporarily darken to a bluish or purplish color due to increased blood flow.

Changes in labia appearance. The outer lips may slightly retract, making the inner lips more visible.

Varicose veins. Varicose veins are common during pregnancy, including on your vulva (external genitalia). Trusted SourceMayo ClinicWhat Causes Vulvar Varicosities During Pregnancy? How Can I Relieve the Discomfort?See All Sources [2] Increased blood flow throughout the body can cause blood to pool in the pelvic region, dilating blood vessels and leading to bluish, bumpy veins that are aggravated by long periods of standing, exercise or sex .

Infections. Hormonal changes can increase the risk of yeast infections during pregnancy , which may cause itching and discomfort.

Increased discharge. Vaginal discharge during pregnancy helps to maintain a healthy balance of bacteria in the vagina. Discharge should be thin, milky, and mild smelling. If it's lumpy, thick, or accompanied by other symptoms (like itchiness or a fishy odor), let your health care practitioner know.

Spotting. Light spotting during pregnancy can be normal, but always report heavier bleeding (that soaks through a pad, for example) to your practitioner.

Will I have vaginal or labia changes after childbirth?

While your vagina may not be exactly the same after delivery, it typically doesn't change drastically. You may not even notice a difference. Your vagina's size after birth will vary depending on many factors, including how you delivered, what number delivery this is for you, your genetics, and the size of your baby.

"I have 6 kids, going on 7," says What to Expect Community mom hloemomof7. "My vagina is not stretched out, nor do I have any lasting issues. It's built to stretch and then shrink."

Community mom mamaofthree31 agrees, "Two babies and I'm pretty sure it's exactly the same down there other than a scar from the episiotomy with the first."

If you have a vaginal birth or pushed before having a C-section , you might experience:

Stretches or tears. Vaginal tears can happen during delivery. Minor tears to your vagina and labia will usually heal within seven to 10 days, while more severe ones may take a few weeks. Try a cold compress to help with pain. "With my first, I had a fourth-degree tear, which is precisely why I didn't look down there for months!" says Community mom natalia3379. "Thankfully it wasn't as bad as I thought once I finally looked — nearly the same as before minus the scar tissue."

Soreness. The amount of postpartum perineal pain you'll experience depends on how you delivered and whether you had any tears. Vaginal and labial soreness is common postpartum and usually improves within a few weeks. "Definitely swollen, sore, and hard to get used to sex again afterwards, but after a couple months it feels the same on my end (it always has for my husband) and has continued to look the same," says Community member dollfxce.

Regularly doing Kegel exercises before and after birth can help support your pelvic floor and recovery.

Will my labia return to the way it was before pregnancy?

In most cases, yes, your labia will return to its pre-pregnancy appearance. Many of the changes that happen to your labia during and after pregnancy and childbirth are temporary. As blood flow returns to normal, color typically fades and swelling decreases.

Any longer-lasting changes to your labia are usually minor, and there's a good chance they'll go unnoticed by both you and your partner, if you have one.

"It took until maybe eight to 12 months postpartum for everything to be 100% back to normal, but I'd say it did go back," says Community mom EricaND.

What if I think there's something wrong with my labia?

If you're concerned about changes to your labia or vagina, talk to your OB/GYN, who can evaluate your symptoms and provide reassurance or treatment if needed.

In some cases, prominently protruding inner labia can cause discomfort, including:

Irritation from tight clothing

Friction during activities like bicycling

Discomfort during sex

Recurrent yeast infections or UTIs because of trapped moisture.

In rare cases, a doctor may recommend a surgical contouring procedure called a labiaplasty to address the size or shape of the inner lips. However, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) advises against having this procedure for purely cosmetic reasons.

As with any surgery, there are risks, including post-surgery complications like bleeding and infections, increased dryness in the genital area, and discomfort, so it's important to weigh the pros and cons with your practitioner.

Bottom line: Healthy labia and vaginas vary vastly in appearance. Most pregnancy-related changes are temporary, and any lasting differences are usually minor.

Sources

Vulvovaginal Health

Show in the article

What Causes Vulvar Varicosities During Pregnancy? How Can I Relieve the Discomfort?

Show in the article

What Really Happens to Your Vagina After Birth

Got Blotches, Patches, or Mottling? The Truth About Pregnancy Skin Darkening,

Your Guide to Pregnancy Hormones

Spotting or Bleeding During Pregnancy: Is it Normal?

Your Questions About Sex During Pregnancy, Answered

, Elective Female Genital Cosmetic Surgery,

Skin Conditions During Pregnancy

What is a Labiaplasty?

Female External Genital Organs