How and When to Transition From Crib to Toddler Bed

toddler bed safety, switching from crib to toddler bed, little girl in front of a toddler bed

Is your toddler ready for a big-kid bed? Here’s how to know — plus tips to make the transition from crib to toddler bed easier on both of you.

Moving from a crib into a toddler bed is a major milestone in the life of a 1-, 2- or 3-year-old. Saying goodbye to the crib is one of the most monumental signs that your baby is growing into a big kid, and it can be both exciting (for her) and a little bittersweet (for you).

The exact right time to make the transition from crib to toddler bed is different for every child and family. But no matter when it happens, you'll want to make sure that your toddler's new sleep space is safe and secure — and that you and your little dreamer have adequately prepared for the change.

When can your child sleep in a toddler bed?

While there's no hard-and-fast age for when to move your child to a bed, little ones generally make the switch from crib to toddler bed any time between 18 months and 3 1/2 years old, ideally as close to age 3 as possible, according to guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).

Moving your tot to a toddler bed or big-kid bed with rails may be on the horizon if she's hit 35 inches in height or her crib's side rail comes up to about mid-chest level when she’s standing in it. (Put another way, the rail should be less than three-quarters of your child's height.) And it’s probably time to ditch the crib if your tot makes a jailbreak on a regular basis or repeatedly asks for a big-kid bed. However, if she’s still happy in the crib and isn’t climbing out, she can stay put.

Toddler bed safety tips and guidelines

Figuring out your toddler's sleep setup probably won't feel as overwhelming as buying and setting up her crib did (phew!). But there are still a few important safety tips to keep in mind, whether you're buying a new toddler bed, converting her crib into a bed or moving her to a big-kid bed with rails.

Try a convertible crib

If the crib you painstakingly researched before your baby's arrival converts into a toddler bed, you can rest assured that your child's sleep space will continue to meet her needs for at least another year or two. Convertible cribs are subject to the same safety standards as toddler beds and are generally designed to accommodate children up to 50 pounds.

Plus, there’s not a lot of complicated assembly in transforming them to toddler beds, though you may need some tools to do the job right. In most cases, you remove one side of the crib, replacing it with the side rail that came with the original packaging and has a small opening your tot can use to climb into and out of bed.

Get the right size bed and mattress

If you're moving your toddler from a nonconvertible crib to a bed, you might be tempted to spring for a twin bed that will last your child for years to come. But a toddler-specific bed is a better choice. It’s lower to the ground and the mattress is smaller (no less than 51¼ inches long by 27¼ inches wide), both of which make it easier for very young children ages 15 months and up to climb in and hop out without getting hurt.

Toddler beds are also designed to be used with a full-sized crib mattress (so feel free to use the full-sized mattress from your child's crib, if it's still in good condition). The crib mattress should fit snugly — if you're not sure whether it's right, use the two-finger test. The mattress isn't a good fit if you're able to fit more than two fingers in between it and the bed.

Finally, remember that toddler beds are designed for children under 50 pounds. So once your child reaches that weight limit — whether it's a year from now or two or three — it'll be time to graduate to a twin bed.

Make sure the toddler bed comes equipped with safety rails

Safety rails serve the obvious — but still very important! — purpose of stopping your sweetie from rolling out of bed mid-snooze. Convertible cribs and toddler beds are required to have side rails at least 5 inches taller than the top of the mattress. If you're using a bed without a built-in rail, be sure to install separate guardrails that are at least that tall.

Avoid toddler bed bumpers

Bumpers no longer pose a SIDS risk after your child's first birthday. But they don’t really belong in your little one’s bed because they're still not a great idea from a safety perspective — even after your child turns 1. They can be tempting for curious climbers, who might take a tumble if they try to use the bumpers as stepping stones to get out of bed. So it’s best to avoid having bumpers in your toddler’s bed entirely.

Check that the hardware is firmly secured

Whether you're converting your crib or buying something new, a thorough safety inspection is always a good idea. Confirm that hardware like bolts and screws are firmly secured and that the sides and slats have tight, sturdy joints. Sharp edges, rough spots, or areas that could pinch your tot are also no-go’s.

Place the bed in a safe spot

Make sure your toddler's bed is positioned away from any potential hazards that could lead to injury. Place the bed at least 2 feet from any windows, heating vents, radiators, wall lamps or window blind cords. And speaking of blind cords, it's best to either avoid having them in your child’s bedroom completely if possible or tack them far up and out of reach.

Prepare the space for nighttime wandering

It's not uncommon for your toddler to want to explore her room (and beyond) now that she has free rein to get in and out of bed as she pleases.

So before her first night sans crib, review the babyproofing basics to make sure the space is safe: Anchor furniture in your toddler's room to the wall, cover exposed electrical sockets, install childproof latches on chests of drawers, and move any potentially hazardous objects (like cords or tall lamps) out of reach. Also lock windows and any doors that lead outside (or to the basement).

If your toddler doesn't already sleep with a night light, consider putting one in her room. The better she's able to see, the less likely she is to sustain a bump or tumble if she decides to get up in the wee hours.

Think about putting a baby gate outside your child's bedroom door too (at least at night) and one at the top of the stairs if she sleeps on a higher floor. While you can't stop her from roaming around her room, you'll rest a lot easier knowing she doesn't have the run of the entire house (especially areas where cleaning products, medications or other potentially hazardous materials are kept). This is particularly important if your tot is in the habit of wandering around at night or even sleepwalking .

How to transition from a crib to a toddler bed

The newfound freedom that comes with sleeping in a bed can feel like a big deal to your toddler. Here's how to help her warm up to the idea if she's wary, plus how you can set the stage for good nighttime behavior (that doesn't involve bouncing out of bed countless times).

Time it right. If your toddler's life is already chock-full of change — new baby brother or sister, new school, weaning, potty training — wait before introducing the big-kid bed. This should be an exciting transition for everyone, not one that's overwhelming or scary.

Consider a convertible. A convertible crib that turns into a toddler bed with the removal of the front panel can make the change seem less drastic to a toddler.

Read all about it. Find a few books about the big move, and share them with your toddler. Point out that the characters in the book are "just like you," and just as bravely moving on to their new bed.

Let your child get in on the action. To mark the occasion and help your child feel excited about the change, let her choose new sheets and kid-friendly bedding, and encourage her to personalize the new bed with a few favorite stuffed animals or a blanket with her name on it if you have one. If you decide on a toddler or twin bed, enlist your child's help in picking it out.

Ease into it if there’s a new baby coming. If your toddler is giving up a crib for a new baby , the switch calls for an extra dose of TLC. You don't want your child to feel like she's being displaced. If you can, try to get the new bed set up before the baby arrives. Let your tot "practice" napping in it to feel more comfortable with the new digs.

Don't change the bedtime routine. Put the bed in the same space where the crib was, if possible. And if the bath-books-bed formula for transitioning to sleep worked before, stick with it. Mixing up the bedtime routine will just mix your child up.

Keep exploration to a minimum. For most kids, the newfound freedom to roam will be irresistible. It's up to you to reinforce bedtime rules. Request last-calls for water, stuffed toys and trips to the potty before the final tuck-in, and make sure your little one understands it's final.

Practice patience. That said, be prepared for your child to constantly pop out of bed for a drink of water, a snuggle with Mom or some other escape-from-my-room excuse. Calmly and silently return your toddler to bed as many times as it takes. Keep it as boring as possible and she'll get the idea. For kids who don't, some parents put gates at the bedroom door. If your little one has already proven she can climb out of the crib , however, chances are a gate won't be much of an obstacle.

Praise your tot for practicing good bedtime habits . A helpful solution for controlling your child's roaming habits might be a sticker chart. Give one sticker for each night she stays in bed. By the end of the week, reward her with a special treat, like an extra story at bedtime or a favorite family outing. Remember, toddlers love pleasing you and doing things for themselves. Helping yours learn to love a big-kid bed should be a win-win situation.

Are bunk beds safe for toddlers?

Bunk beds might score points for convenience and space-saving. But they're not the safest choices for toddlers, say the AAP and the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC). The top bunk poses the biggest risk, since young sleepers are more likely to fall out and sustain cuts, bruises, scrapes or fractures , even with a guardrail.

The lower level isn't risk-free either, so if you're able to avoid a bunk bed altogether for your toddler, it's worth steering clear. Small children can still fall out of bed if there's no guardrail, and though it's scary to think about, anyone sleeping in the bottom bunk could be hurt if the top level were to collapse.

What age can children start sleeping in bunk beds?

Children younger than 6 years old should never sleep in a top bunk, according to the AAP and the CPSC. Should you opt to put your toddler in a lower bunk, take precautions to keep her as safe as possible, including installing guardrails on both sides of the bed, making sure the mattress fits properly, and placing the bunk bed in the corner of the room.

Transitioning from a crib to a toddler bed is a big step, but it's nothing you and your sweetie can't handle. As long as you set up a safe, toddler-friendly sleep space and stay consistent with your bedtime routine and rules, you should both be set for sweet, crib-free dreams.