How to Deal With the 18-Month Sleep Regression

Updates throughout to copy, sourcing and formatting, plus a new medical review for accuracy.

18-month sleep regression, mother with little toddler girl and dad with another girl in background

Toddler sleep is usually pretty solid, but a few setbacks aren’t uncommon. Learn about the 18-month sleep regression and how to handle it with your child.

You’d think your busy toddler would collapse every single night in his bed after a day of nonstop play. And for some tots, this is certainly the case. Still, there are other little ones who go through an 18-month sleep regression — just when they seem to need their Zzzs the most.

This sleep issue is a normal, though thankfully temporary, hitch in your toddler’s nighttime routine. Here’s more about the signs and causes of the 18-month sleep regression, plus some smart tips for easing your tot back to his cozy nest so you can all get a good night’s rest.

What is the 18-month sleep regression?

The 18-month sleep regression is a short-lived interruption in your toddler’s normal nighttime and napping routine. During this sleep setback, your tot may fuss more at bedtime, protest at naptime and wake up in the small hours of the night calling for water, a hug or songs to soothe him.

An 18-month sleep regression may spark memories of similar sleep woes you experienced in the past, including the 4-month and 6-month sleep regressions, one at 8 months, another at 12 months and most recently one at 15 months. These events are often closely tied to major milestone achievements related to language and gross motor skills. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicInfant Sleep Regression: What Parents Need To KnowSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicInfant Sleep Regression: What Parents Need To KnowSee All Sources

"I would say the 4-month and 18-month sleep regressions are the most common that I hear about from families," says Tina Feeley , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician practicing at Chestnut Hill Pediatrics in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "This is mostly due to so much rapid development and physical changes occurring at the same time. I definitely would not say all children have this regression, but it does seem to be common."

But when the 18-month sleep regression rolls around, it can be a bit harder to deal with, as your tot has even more advanced skills at this point. "The 18-months sleep regression hits hard," says What to Expect Community user annasy. "[My daughter] refuses naps, she fights bedtime. She was sleeping well for last two to three months, [but now] she wakes up at 1 a.m. screaming every night for the past a few days."

Your best bet is to be gentle but firm and to lean hard on your toddler’s nighttime routine, since this will remind him that bedtime is near. Trusted SourceChildren's HealthSleep Regression in Infants and ToddlersSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceChildren's HealthSleep Regression in Infants and ToddlersSee All Sources

How long does the 18-month sleep regression last?

Some toddlers won’t ever have a sleep regression, but for those who do, the 18-month sleep regression can last anywhere from a couple of weeks to several weeks. "We went through [the 18-month sleep regression] for about three weeks, and it was brutal!" says What to Expect Community user BendyGirl85.

Adds What to Expect parent christyyadams: "My LO is almost 20 months, and the 18-month sleep regression is kicking my butt. It’s been going on for four to five weeks and gradually getting worse with this past week."

Fortunately, like the other sleep regressions you may have experienced, this temporary episode in your little one's life will improve with time, so try to focus on steering your child back to bed, rather than the lost Zzzs. And who knows? Maybe your tot will get past this phase quickly.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

Like other regressions, the 18-month sleep regression is a temporary interruption in your toddler’s normal nighttime and napping routine. You may find that he fusses more at bedtime, protests his naps, and wakes up more frequently when going through this latest set-back.

Some toddlers won’t ever have an 18-month sleep regression, but for others, this one can last several weeks.

Around 18 months, your toddler is mastering a number of different developmental milestones, including learning how to walk and talk. He may also be struggling with teething pain, separation anxiety, or possibly a fear of the dark. Any of these can contribute to more nighttime wakings.

As with other sleep regressions, your best bet is to stay consistent with your tot's routine and remain as calm as you can. But if you’re still having trouble at night or naptime after a number of weeks, check in with the doctor about other strategies to try.

Signs of the 18-month sleep regression

Having tuck-in trouble? Watch for these 18-month sleep regression signs:

Fighting bedtime . Climbing out of bed and fussing when you leave aren’t uncommon.

Nap crying. Having trouble settling down for a nap or possibly transitioning from two naps a day to one can disrupt daytime snoozing.

Waking at night . Popping awake and crying in the wee hours is another regression sign.

Increased fussiness. Irritability and tears at times when your tot is usually in a good mood could mean he’s not getting the Zzzs he needs at night.

Causes of the 18-month sleep regression

A variety of new physical and cognitive achievements may be interfering with your child’s nighttime slumber. Here are some possible causes of the 18-month sleep regression:

Separation anxiety. Parental absence is a real fear at this age, and it actually peaks between 9 or 10 and 18 months, resulting in lost sleep for your toddler. Trusted SourceStanford Medicine Children's HealthSeparation AnxietySee All Sources [3]

Teething. Your tot could be cutting those first toddler molars or canines — and the pain can bring on redness, swelling, drooling, and disrupted sleep. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBaby%u2019s First Tooth: 7 Facts Parents Should KnowSee All Sources [4]

Bigger vocabulary. You’re probably hearing “no” (or even “no nap!”) a lot lately, which makes sense since your child’s language is developing rapidly.

Walking milestone. Toddlers are in the zone when it comes to walking and many are also pulling toys off the shelf and running . These gross motor skills are way more fun than napping! Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusToddler DevelopmentSee All Sources [5]

Fear of the dark. A more sophisticated imagination may mean scary thoughts that loom large at night for your toddler, leading to nightmares and being afraid of shadows and darkness in his room. Fear of the dark typically doesn't start until around age 2, but it can crop up earlier or later. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Family PhysiciansNightmares and Night TerrorsSee All Sources [6]

Illness. A fever, earache, or a case of the sniffles can push a sleep schedule off track.

Change in routine. A new sibling, a move, or a new babysitter or day care could all affect your child's ability to get a good night's sleep.

Setting clear routines and rules and being consistent with them will help with all of toddlerhood, but especially helps with sleep.

Dr. Tina Feeley, a pediatrician in Massachusetts and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

Tips for handling the 18-month sleep regression

While weeks of disrupted sleep can make the whole house feel on edge, try not to worry. After you’ve ruled out illness in your child, consider these strategic tips for sleep regression:

Practice your routine. "Keeping a consistent routine and consistent boundaries is key," says Dr. Feeley. Stay the course when it comes to your toddler’s bedtime routine. The same tuck-in steps (bath, story, song, kisses) signal it’s time to slow down and sleep. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsToddler Bedtime Trouble: 7 Tips for ParentsSee All Sources [7]

Limit the requests. "If your child keeps having 'curtain calls' and asking for one more book, or one more song, it is important to say 'This is the last book' and then not give in to the request for more," says Dr. Feeley.

Don’t overreact. Keep calm when faced with a tot who gets up way too early or won’t relax in his bed at night. Simply walk him back to his room with little talking or fuss every time he gets up until it’s time to wake up.

Add a friend. A stuffed toy or doll to hold may soothe a tot who’s nervous in the dark.

Revisit sleep training. If you sleep trained your baby, you may want to try it again on your toddler (or try sleep training for the first time). The chair method , bedtime fading , or Ferber method may be just the ticket back to dreamland. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicWhen and How To Sleep Train Your BabySee All Sources [8]

Let the nap go. Many kids tend to drop a nap between 12 and 18 months, but this isn’t a big worry if nighttime sleep is going well for your child.

Limit or avoid screen time. Cartoons happen — we get it — but watching TV or videos close to bedtime can mess with kids’ sleep. If you allow any TV at this age (and the recommendation is no screen time until age 2 or later except for video chatting), keep it to earlier in the day. Screens should be off at least two hours before bedtime. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBeyond Screen Time: Help Your Kids Build Healthy Media Use HabitsSee All Sources [9]

When to call the doctor

If you’ve tried everything you can think of and you’re still having trouble at night or naptime, check in with the doctor. Your pediatrician may have sleep training ideas or different bedtime strategies to try. And definitely call after a few days to a week if you notice loud breathing, snoring, nightmares or daytime sleepiness in your toddler due to a lack of shut-eye at night.

But luckily, most parents notice an improvement in this latest sleep regression after sticking with a consistent routine for a few weeks. "Setting clear routines and rules and being consistent with them will help with all of toddlerhood, but especially helps with sleep," Dr. Feeley says.