Car Seat Expiration Dates, Explained

How long are car seats good for

How long are car seats good for? Here's everything you need to know about car seat expiration dates (yes, they do expire!).

Just like that carton of milk or eggs, car seats eventually expire. (Though thankfully, not nearly as fast!) And once that date rolls around, it’s no longer safe for your child to use the seat.

Brand-new car seats are typically usable for at least a few years or longer, depending on the amount of time between when the seat was manufactured and when it was purchased. But if you’re pulling out an already-used car seat for a younger sibling or getting a hand-me-down from a family or friend, the seat could be near or past its expiration date — even if it looks like it’s in perfectly good condition.

Expired car seats may not adequately protect riders in the event of a crash. That’s why the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) urges parents to avoid using car seats that are past their use-by dates, or seats without expiration dates that are more than six years from date of manufacture.

Here’s how to tell whether yours is still safe to use, plus what to do if you can’t find a car seat’s expiration date.

Why do car seats have expiration dates?

An outdated car seat isn’t going to get smelly or grow mold (as long as you occasionally clean up those crumbs and spills , anyway). But different factors can make the seat less safe over time, putting a child at higher risk for serious injury or even death in the event of a crash. That’s because:

The plastic starts to break down. Exposure to very hot or cold temperatures (like a hot car on a summer day or a freezing car in winter) can cause a seat’s plastic shell to become brittle. As a result, the shell could become weak or less stable.

The seat is subject to wear and tear. Metal parts can eventually grow rusty and synthetic fabrics on the seat or straps could start to weaken, making a seat less safe.

The seat could be missing parts and you may not be able to find replacements. A seat that doesn’t have all of its original components won’t offer the same level of protection. But it could be difficult to impossible to track down replacement parts if your seat is old and no longer being produced by the manufacturer.

The seat might not meet the latest technology or safety standards. Car seat manufacturers are always working to make seats that offer even more protection. Outdated models might fail to meet current government safety standards, too.

How long are car seats good for?

Car seats generally expire within six to eight years after their date of manufacture (not the date the seat was purchased). Manufacturers base their expiration dates around how long they expect their seat to function safely as designed, so the dates can vary from one brand or model to the next.

Where to find your car seat’s expiration date

Expiration dates are usually listed on a sticker on the seat itself, but in some cases, they might be stamped directly into the plastic shell. You’ll usually find them next to the car seat’s model number.

Infant seats with detachable bases might have separate dates on the base and the seat itself, so be sure to check both.

In some cases, the date you find on the seat will be an actual expiration date. (It may say something like, “Do not use after DATE.”)

But other times the date might simply be when the car seat was manufactured. If that’s the case, you’ll need to calculate the expiration date yourself by counting forward six years — the AAP’s recommended number of years that car seats can be used for. For instance, if the date of manufacture says 08/10/2020, the expiration date would be 8/10/2026.

If you can’t tell how old a seat is because it doesn’t have an expiration date or a date of manufacture, don’t use it. It could be too old or outdated and might not protect your child in the event of a crash.

Once a seat has reached its expiration date, it’s no longer safe for use. You should get rid of it by bringing it to a car seat trade-in program (which may be available through big-box stores like Target or Walmart), recycling it or dismantling it before setting it out for trash collection.