How to Soothe a Sensitive Baby

baby behavior

Does your little one cry when she hears an ambulance siren or sees a bright light? Here's how to help your sensitive baby stay calm, cool and collected.

All parents-to-be dream of having an easy, content baby who coos and smiles on cue and cries only when she's hungry or needs her diaper changed. Reality usually does a number on that particular fantasy.

Most babies sob more (and sleep less) than they do in parental dreams. That's because infants cry to communicate their needs and express their feelings.

But while most babies cry — and startle — in response to stimuli in their environment, some highly sensitive babies seem to be more easily, and intensely, set off. You can chalk this up to a child's temperament; a sensitive baby is born that way. A wet diaper, a bright light, a rough label on the neckline, a whistling kettle and a scratchy blanket can all unduly upset a baby whose senses (one or all) are easily overloaded.

If you have an extra sensitive baby, your best bet is to avoid things that bother her and keep (as much as you can) the intensity of sensory stimulation around her down. Here are some of the most common culprits that can set a sensitive baby off and what you can do to stop crying before it starts.

If your baby is sensitive to noise

If noise seems to upset your sensitive baby, use a soft voice when you speak or sing to her, steer clear of loud toys and lower the volume of (or turn off) music, the TV and your phone's ringtone when she's awake.

If your baby is sensitive to light

Dim the lights (or use shades) in your baby's room and keep visual stimulation to a minimum. Avoid the TV and choose toys that are muted in color and design.

If your baby is sensitive to touch

Change your baby's diaper often and dress her in comfortable clothing. Cotton knits with smooth, nonirritating seams, snaps, labels and collars are ideal.

Cover crib sheets with blankets while your baby's not sleeping so the sheets aren't too chilled when she's ready for bed, and keep bathwater and room temperatures at levels she seems to like best.

If your your baby is sensitive to overstimulation

Handle your sensitive baby gently, avoid big crowds and reduce daily activities (read: one baby class, not three).

Limit the number of playthings you give her. Rotating between one or two toys at a time should help.

Talk to your baby's doctor if you have any concerns, but keep in mind that many babies outgrow this sensitive-to-everything phase once they've adjusted to the hectic pace of life on the outside. In fact, some mellow out once the colicky months are over, usually around 3 months old .