How to Throw a Winter Wonderland Baby Shower for Your Little Snow Angel

winter baby shower cake

Invite guests to cozy up with hot chocolate and snowflake decor for a winter-themed baby shower bash.

As the temperature gets colder outside, inside your belly, things are heating up as your baby grows more and more with each passing day. An approaching due date means it's time to start planning your baby shower . Instead of dreading the cold, lean into the magic of the winter season.

In fact, a winter wonderland is one of the best baby shower themes because there are tons of ways to make it feel extra special, says Christi Payumo, a party planning aficionado and the events manager of Irresistible Events in Las Vegas. "Winter is a magical season to celebrate new beginnings," she explains. "It brings in a sense of coziness that complements the joy of welcoming a new life."

For the winter wonderland baby shower of your dreams, read on for Payumo's expert advice, as well as tons of inspiring winter theme baby shower ideas you can snag and make your own.

Winter baby shower invitations

The holiday season is such a busy time of year, which is why Payumo says picking a date carefully is critical.

Choose a date that avoids holiday craziness

winter wonderland baby shower invitation

"To avoid peak holiday rush, schedule your winter wonderland baby shower in early to mid-December or in January," says Payumo. "These months offer a festive atmosphere without the holiday rush, ensuring that your guests can attend without the typical holiday-related commitments and stress." Depending on the climate where you live, February and early March can be prime months to lean into a winter-themed baby shower, as well.

Consider how timing affects the vibes and aesthetic

winter baby shower invitation

If you're on the fence about timing, there are pros to both months, Payumo says: "December allows that holiday cheer, while January, February and even early March provides a more relaxed and enjoyable celebration." (If you're hosting in November or earlier, opt for a fall baby shower instead.)

Lean into the timing with your baby shower invitations by choosing reindeer-themed accents for a December shower, snowflake-themed accents for a January one, white hearts for February or some snowy white baby's breath for March, for example.

Winter baby shower decorations

These striking winter baby shower decorations and centerpieces will make guests feel like they're walking in a winter wonderland.

Capture the sparkle of the season

winter baby shower decorations with metallic accents

Mimic winter's magical sparkle by adding touches of metallic silver or gold accents throughout your shower decor. Whether it's a few silver or foil balloons, metallic streamers or glitter-covered centerpieces, a few small touches here and there will quickly elevate your aesthetic.

Make a statement with a balloon garland

winter baby shower balloons

For the ultimate focal point, opt for a balloon garland. "Create a whimsical winter wonderland baby shower atmosphere with a cascading balloon garland that mirrors falling snowflakes, draping it elegantly across the room for a photo op," Payumo advises.

Add magic to your tablescape

winter baby shower flowers

"Transform your tablescape into a cozy winter retreat with faux fur table runners and silver or gold accents," says Payumo. You can also incorporate white florals, like roses and baby's breath, for a more feminine vibe.

Set up a hot chocolate bar

winter baby shower hot chocolate bar

Carafes full of piping hot cocoa complemented with an assortment of tasty toppings is a memorable idea that'll get party-goers talking. After all, who doesn't love hot chocolate?!

Hang snowflakes everywhere

winter baby shower snowflake decorations

For an instant wow-factor, hang pretty paper snowflakes from the ceiling with clear fishing line. You only need a few to make a major impact; try them above your baby shower food table.

Winter baby shower cakes

Make your baby shower cake the main event with these super sweet ideas perfect for any winter baby shower.

Consider certain colors

winter baby shower pink cake

"When selecting a winter baby shower cake, choose soft pastel colors that reflect the winter season," says Payumo. Pale pinks and baby blues, as well as sugar-dusted muted greens that mimic a snow-covered forest, can work beautifully for a winter-themed baby shower cake.

Load up on wintery accents

winter baby shower cake topper

Make your cake stand out from the crowd with a few finishing touches, such as snowflakes or an adorable cake topper, says Payumo.

Taste the flavors of the season

winter woodland baby shower cake

"Choose cake flavors that are associated with the season — like spiced pumpkin, gingerbread, dark chocolate orange or butter pecan — to enhance the winter baby shower theme," says Payumo.

Make it bite-sized

winter baby shower cupcakes

"Consider serving cupcakes or mini individual cakes in addition to — or instead of — a traditional large cake," suggests Payumo. Not only is it easier for guests to serve themselves, but also allows for easier portion control and adds variety to the dessert table, she explains.

Go monochrome

all white winter baby shower cake

Nothing says winter wonderland quite like an all-white, arctic-inspired cake. Fondant details — including mittens, snowflakes and polar bears — make this sweet confection anything but boring!

Winter baby shower ideas

Having a few baby shower games lined up is not only proper baby shower etiquette , but it's also a great way to entertain guests while encouraging them to mingle.

Choose games that invite conversation

"Interactive games add a layer of fun and entertainment," says Payumo. Try putting a winter-themed scratch-off game at each place setting. "You can also try games like 'Baby It's Cold Outside' bingo or host a 'Snowflake Scavenger Hunt' to break the ice amongst your guests who may not know each other well."

Play guess the delivery date

winter baby shower due date game

All you need is a cute calendar and a few pens to get guests playing this cute baby shower game. Set your calendar up on an easel in the corner of the room, and let guests wander over to it on their own time.

Set up a well wishes tree

A silver spray-painted branch is not only a stunning centerpiece, but it's also a way for guests to leave well wishes for your little snow angel, too. Leave a white gift tag at each table setting with a pen, and ask your friends and family to write a wish for the baby and hang it on the tree.

Show your appreciation with a sweet parting gift

winter baby shower holiday cooke favor

"Thank your guests with a winter-themed baby shower favors ," says Payumo. "Consider gifting them with a hot cocoa kit, a Christmas cookie or a pair of gloves with a personalized tag," which will end their experience on a high note.

Christi Payumo, Event Manager, Irresistible Events & Catering , Las Vegas, NV.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

How to Throw a Fall-Themed Baby Shower for Your Little Pumpkin Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Turn Baby's First Birthday Party Into a 'Winter Onederland' Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Coed Baby Shower? Why They’re the New Thing — Plus Party Themes Guests Will Love Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Baby Shower? Smart Etiquette Tips to Make The Day Run Smoother Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan the Ultimate Gender Reveal Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a Virtual Baby Shower Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Sprinkle Ideas: Low-Stress Ways to Celebrate Your Next Addition Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

When Is the Best Time to Have Your Baby Shower? Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

20 Winter Baby Names for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

11 Gorgeous Winter Maternity Photos Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window