How to Dress a Toddler for the Weather

toddler dressed for the weather

Not sure how to dress your toddler for the heat or cold? Try these savvy clothes-shopping tips to scout out the right kids' clothing — whether it's freezing or sweltering outside.

No matter the weather, toddlers have energy to burn. That means whether it’s below zero or scorching hot, your little one will likely want to be outside burning off steam.

While that’s a great thing for nap time, it also means you need to take extra care to protect her against the elements. This guide can ensure that your toddler is dressed properly no matter what the weather conditions are.

One rule of thumb to keep in mind: Once your baby becomes a toddler, her inner thermostat should be in working condition. That means if you’re comfy in a T-shirt, your little one should be too; if you’re chilly in a sweatshirt, it’s time to add an extra layer for both of you.

How to dress a toddler for the cold - toddler winter clothes

Toddler winter wear should both keep your little one cozy and allow for movement. A child who’s mobile (or soon to be) needs to be able to move easily, so she shouldn’t be so bundled up that she can’t climb the playground ladder or romp in the snow.

Plus any item that an independent toddler can pull on or take off herself will be most acceptable to a me-do-it mindset.

Even if your little one has no interest in dressing or undressing herself, if she’s still not fully potty-trained, you’ll want to go for easy-on/easy-off clothes for your own sanity. Some specific shopping tips to focus on:

Lay on light layers. The layers underneath your toddler’s outerwear trap in warmth. Opt for tops made from cotton, merino wool, or lightweight polypropylene, choosing ones that feel good on your child’s still-sensitive skin. Steer clear of bulky sweaters, which will make her too hot and prevent her from moving around easily. Make sure socks aren’t so thick that your toddler's snow boots don’t fit comfortably over them.

Find a snowsuit that suits your toddler to a T. Choose a wind- and water-resistant outer shell — nylon is ideal — and a chill-chasing material on the inside, such as down or Polartec. The zipper should run all the way down to the knee or ankle to make taking it off easier — especially when it’s time for a diaper change or potty break. And check that cuffs fit tightly around ankles and wrists to prevent the cold (or snow) from creeping in. Elastic works, but Velcro tabs that let you adjust for a not-too-loose, not-too-tight fit are even better.

Choose mittens. If you’ve ever tried to put a glove on a toddler’s hand so every finger's in the right place, you know it’s about as easy as putting a diaper on a goldfish. Stick with mittens, which are easier to slip on and are warmer because they keep fingers (and the heat they produce) close together. As with snowsuits , mittens should have a warm inner lining and a weather-resistant shell. And if the mitts don’t come with short strings attached, consider purchasing clips to attach them to the sleeves of your toddler’s snowsuit. (Tip: Slip on mittens before you put your child’s snowsuit on; that way the cuffs will help keep the mittens in place.)

A warm hat is tops. A huge percentage of body heat is lost through the head, so a hat is a vital item in a tot’s winter-weather wardrobe. (This is especially true if your sweetie has yet to sprout a full head of hair.) Even if her snowsuit has a hood, a close-fitting hat is a better head-heating bet (you can always pull the hood over the hat). A fleece-lined cotton or soft-wool knitted cap with ear flaps is best, and even better if it fastens under the chin.

Choose safe and easy clothing features. Snaps and zippers are really good choices for toddlers, who will likely need constant wardrobe adjustments. If your little one isn’t potty-trained, this also makes diaper changes easier. Also avoid ribbons and strings that might unravel or possibly be a choking hazard, especially on loose-fitting hoods.

Don’t forget car seat safety. Even if it’s freezing cold, take off your toddler's winter jacket in the car seat: It can compress in the event of an accident, creating a dangerous amount of space underneath the harness. Thin layers, mittens and hats are still fair game for keeping her comfy and cozy in the car. If your tot’s still chilly, you can also drape a lightweight blanket over her after she’s buckled in.

Cover up. Sun protection is one of the most important factors when it comes to protecting your little one from the elements when it’s cold or hot outside. Apply sunscreen 15 to 30 minutes before venturing out. It should be reapplied every few hours.

How to dress a toddler for hot weather - toddler summer clothes

Less is more when it comes to dressing toddlers for hot weather . According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), when the temperature is above 75 degrees F, your child should be comfortable in one layer.

Here are a few other tips to consider when the temperature rises:

Hats are crucial, no matter the temperature. When the sun is shining, your little one should always sport a sun hat with a wide brim to protect her sensitive skin from the sun.

Slather on sunscreen. Sun protection is key for little ones. Apply a broad-spectrum sunscreen with at least 30 SPF, 15 to 30 minutes before heading outside, and reapply every few hours. If the sun is strong, dress your child in light clothing for additional sun protection.

Don’t forget eye protection. While your toddler may be curious and hesitant about the idea of covering her peepers, sunglasses are really important for protecting her eyes from sun damage. Choose glasses that protect against at least 99 percent of the sun's UVA and UVB rays.

How to dress your toddler for warm or cool weather

When the weather's milder, dress your toddler in the amount of layers that makes you comfortable. Just make sure that your little one is never wet or damp, because hypothermia can happen in cool temperatures (above 40 degrees Fahrenheit) if your toddler becomes chilled.

As with cold and hot temperatures, ensure that your tot is properly protected from the sun with sunscreen, sunglasses, layering as needed and a hat (which also serves to keep her warm even on marginally cold days).

What's the right temperature for your toddler?

The easiest way to tell if your toddler is too hot or too cold is by feeling the temperature at the nape of her neck, as well as her fingers and toes to see if they’re cold.

If your child is perspiring heavily, that’s an indication that it’s time to start removing layers.

A normal rectal temperature for a toddler is between 97.9 and 100.4 degrees F; an abnormal reading could be a sign of illness.

Whether it’s summer or winter, your toddler’s bedroom should be between 68 and 72 degrees F. If your little one is burning up because of a fever, dress her in fewer layers and lighter fabrics.

Signs it's too hot or cold for your toddler

Regardless of the temperature outside, be vigilant against overheating. Once your toddler comes in from the cold, remove layers accordingly.

On a hot summer day, if your toddler looks flushed or sweaty, she may be overheated and need to go inside and cool off. Also look for signs of irritability or restlessness, thirst, muscle cramps, dizziness, nausea and refusing food.

Heatstroke, which is less common and more serious, usually happens immediately after overheating. Symptoms include very high temperature (sometimes as high as 106 degrees F), severe headache, lethargy, confusion, convulsions and loss of consciousness.

If you notice any of these symptoms, wrap your toddler in a large blanket soaked in cold tap water, call 911 or head to the ER immediately.

In the extreme cold, if your toddler seems clumsy or unresponsive and has a temperature that has dropped below normal levels, this may be a sign of hypothermia. In severe cases, shivering may stop and consciousness may decline. This is a medical emergency, so call 911 right away.

Young children are also very susceptible to frostbite on their fingers, toes, nose, ears and cheeks. The skin may turn white or pale grayish yellow and in more severe cases feel waxy or hard.

If you notice any of these signs, open your coat and immediately start warming your little one on your body. Breathe warm air on your child’s skin and as soon as possible get to the ER.

If for some reason you can’t immediately get to the ER, try to warm up the area by soaking it in lukewarm (not hot) water around 102 degrees F until color returns to the skin (about 20 to 30 minutes).

Your toddler might not notice that she’s too hot or too cold because she’s too busy having fun. Luckily, by layering your child up, keep her hydrated, taking breaks and knowing the signs that the elements are starting to catch up, you can protect her in any weather conditions.