Come One, Come All to a Fun-Filled, Carnival-Themed Birthday Party

carnival birthday party

Step right up and lean into this whimsical party theme.

From the rides and games to the iconic eats and treats, carnivals are a delight for fun-lovers of all ages, which is why a carnival-themed birthday party for your baby or toddler is a guaranteed good time for all.

"A carnival-themed birthday party is a fun, whimsical and playful way to celebrate your little one," says Kat Robson, an experienced party planner and owner of Coastline Events in Long Island, New York.

Read on for professional advice on how to plan a birthday party that'll leave everyone in smiles and how to make the most of this unique birthday theme .

Carnival birthday party invitations

Send big top-inspired invites

carnival birthday party invitations

Drum up some drama and get guests excited about your little one's upcoming birthday with circus tent-inspired invites. Incorporating red and white stripes — plus a few banners, balloons or circus animals — will help get your theme across. You could even include a few carnival tickets in the envelope to add to the fun!

Carnival birthday party decor

Establish the theme with the perfect color palette

carnival birthday party color scheme

"Keep the color palette simple and bright," Robson advises. "For a carnival-themed birthday party, go with primary colors like red, yellow and blue — all of which you can use in various shades, such as a more golden yellow and even a turquoise blue," she explains.

If you'd like a softer palette, "Try gold, white and different shades of pink, like baby pink or hot pink," says Carolina Reyes, a professional event planner and founder of HTX Urban Events in Houston, Texas.

Include stripes throughout your decor

carnival birthday party striped backdrops

"Circus tent-inspired stripes are a must for any carnival-themed birthday party," Robson says. "Recreate that look for a backdrop." For example, you could hang red and white striped tablecloths behind the buffet table.

Bring your carnival-themed birthday party to life with props

Help your theme come alive with larger-than-life decor. "A giant popcorn box overflowing with 'popcorn' made out of balloons or life-sized animal props to use for photo ops are guaranteed to bring your party to the next level," Reyes says.

Carnival birthday party food

Serve an array of carnival-themed eats

carnival birthday party food

"For the main meal, serve typical carnival foods, such as hot pretzels, corn dogs or hot dogs, fries and roasted corn," Robson suggests — things even the pickiest eaters will likely enjoy! "Sticking with the theme, you could even rent a popcorn or cotton candy machine where you can make fresh carnival snacks to serve guests."

Get your cake in on the theme

carnival birthday party cake

"Two-to-three-layer cakes work best for a carnival-theme birthday party, especially when one of the layers resembles a red-and-white-striped tent with banners or balloons adorning it," says Reyes. (If you're having a first birthday party, you can remove the top layer and use it as a smash cake for your little one.)

Serve donuts that double as decor

carnival birthday party donuts

"One of my favorite tips is to serve donuts instead of a cake!" says Robson. "Donut walls are a fun yet colorful way to have a sweet, tasty treat double as party decor." Add a sign that says "concessions" above to play up the circus theme.

Carnival birthday party games

Delight partygoers with an array of carnival games

carnival birthday party games

Entertain guests by setting up a few different carnival-themed activities around your event, suggests Robson: "You can have a ring or bean bag toss game, a 'pop the balloon' game, a face painting station or a crafty activity for kids." Provide adult supervision — especially for games that require popping balloons or throwing things — and follow these party safety tips for little ones.

Throw in some extra entertainment

Nothing says carnival quite like a bounce house! "There are big bounce houses that look like carnival tents you can rent, or you could hire a combination face painting and balloon artist to get two activities in one," suggests Reyes.

If you don't want to host your carnival-themed birthday party at home, "You could host it at a petting zoo and even include pony rides, which are a huge hit with kids," says Reyes.

Carnival birthday party favors

Let guests bring the entertainment home

"An interactive party favor that you can send your guests home with is a picture from a caricature artist," says Reyes. "This is a fun activity that both parents and children will enjoy — plus it's a keepsake they can keep for years to come!"

Send them off with a sweet thanks

carnival birthday party favors

Alternatively, send guests home with something sweet. "A candy table — stocked with items like cotton candy or animal crackers — is a great way to display bright, colorful treats," says Robson. "Let guests choose what they want from the assortment and bring them home in custom carnival-themed goodie bags ," she adds. "It's a great thank you everyone can enjoy!"

Carolina Reyes, Event Planner and Founder of HTX Urban Events , Houston, TX. Kat Robson, Party Planner and Owner of Coastline Events , Long Island, NY. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a First Birthday Party , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes , January 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Birthday Party Dos and Don'ts , November 2022.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Host a 'Wild One' Birthday That's a Roaring Good Time Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Space Birthday Party Ideas That Are Out of This World Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Throw a T-Rex-iffic Dinosaur Birthday Party That'll Go Down in History Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Dog-Themed Ideas for a Pawfect Puppy Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Turn Baby's First Birthday Party Into a 'Winter Onederland' Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Celebrate 'Mr. Onederful' With a Dapper First Birthday Bash Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

15 of Your Biggest Toddler Birthday Party Questions — Answered Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window