14 Ways to Save Money on Diapers

newborn baby in diaper on changing table

Follow these budget-friendly tips to find the best deals on one of the most expensive — yet necessary — baby items on your list.

There’s no getting around it: Your baby is in constant need of a diaper change (and will be for a while), but diapers and wipes are expensive — somewhere between $70 to $80 per month per baby, according to the National Diaper Bank Network. It can feel unreasonable to continually shell out so much money for things your baby goes through so quickly that eventually end up in the trash — particularly if you’re on a budget.

Here are 14 tips to help keep the cost of diapers low.

1. Calculate the price per diaper

First things first: If you're intent on saving money on diapers, you should get into the habit of calculating the unit price — meaning the price per diaper. It’s simple: Open the calculator app on your phone and divide the cost of the diaper package by the number of diapers inside.

As you know, package sizes vary widely, but once you work out the unit price, you can easily compare one product to another before you buy. Knowing the unit price is also critical when determining whether that jumbo box of diapers that’s supposedly “on sale” really is a good bargain — if it is, stock up! — or if you should pass.

For example, if a package of 29 diapers costs $11.59, that means the unit price is about 40 cents per diaper. But if you buy 84 diapers at $29.49, they’re 35 cents each; and if you buy 148 diapers at $42.99, they're only 29 cents each.

2. Try different diaper brands

Having a favorite go-to diaper brand works well for many parents, but if you’re budget-conscious, it might not be the most frugal strategy. Being willing to vary brands allows you to watch the sales and buy the brand that costs the least amount of money, including generic and store-brand diapers.

A word of caution, however: Not every diaper works for every baby. A diaper that leaks or doesn’t fit properly can be uncomfortable for your little one and lead to painful diaper rash .

Be extra vigilant when switching from brand to brand, and if you notice that your baby is sensitive or allergic to a particular kind of diaper, avoid it — even if it is a bit cheaper than the others. Your baby’s health is your number one priority.

3. Watch for sales

The easiest way to keep track of the best deals is to download mobile apps for the stores where you shop — and get into the habit of checking each week. It’s also a good idea to sign up for store or brand newsletters, since most will alert you to sales.

Online moms' groups may also call out sales, which you can combine with online coupons for even bigger savings. Just be careful to buy a small package and test it out on your baby first if it’s a brand you haven’t used before. You don’t want to stockpile a bunch of diapers that your little one ultimately can’t use.

4. Buy diapers in bulk

If tracking sales and clipping coupons feels too time-consuming, consider buying in bulk. Places like Amazon, Walmart, Costco and Sam’s Club sell diapers at reasonable prices.

Just be sure to calculate that unit price to make sure you’re getting the best deal. And avoid buying baby items at the grocery store, where they can be a lot more expensive. Instead, head to a big box discount store or look into diaper subscription services .

When buying large quantities of diapers, keep in mind that your baby is constantly growing, so try not to over-buy a particular size.

5. Join rewards programs

If you’re dependent on a specific brand of diaper, check if it has a rewards program, newsletter or membership you can join.

Many of the well-known ones — including Huggies and Pampers — have apps in which loyal customers receive coupons and earn points redeemable for gift cards and other items when they buy diapers and wipes. Every little bit counts!

And don’t forget to look into store rewards programs. Target , Walmart , and Stop and Shop all have programs that award you points for shopping, which you can then use towards future purchases.

6. Host a diaper shower

Don’t forget to register for diapers and wipes — along with other baby items — if you’re worried about what they might cost you down the road.

Moms having a second child (or third, fourth or more) could also consider having a diaper shower or a sprinkle : It’s like a baby shower, but instead of presents, guests pitch in and give the guest of honor a huge basket of diapers or a diaper cake . After all, you can never have too many diapers!

7. Ask for leftover unused diapers

Don’t be afraid to ask friends or family members with little ones who have outgrown the diaper phase if they’re willing to share any leftovers. You’d be surprised how many people have over-bought a particular size of diaper and have some extra, unneeded packages taking up precious room in a closet somewhere.

Your doctor’s office may also have free diapers or samples to distribute. Check with the pediatrician at your next appointment.

8. Consider cloth diapers

Think about using cloth diapers . Although they cost more up-front and require a bit more work, this option can actually save you hundreds of dollars overall. (The exact amount depends on which brands you choose, how long your child wears diapers and how you clean them.)

9. Take advantage of registry welcome boxes

Some retailers, including Amazon , Target and Walmart , send essentials for both mom and baby after you’ve built a baby registry . Though you won’t find an abundance of diapers in these boxes, most include one or two, as well as coupons for additional diaper purchases.

10. Switch diaper sizes based on fit

As diaper sizes get bigger, there tend to be fewer diapers per package, which, in turn, makes them more expensive. For example, all sizes of Honest diapers cost $12.99 for a standard pack, but the size one variety comes with 35 diapers, while the size two pack contains 32. It may be beneficial to stay in lower sizes for as long as possible, relying on fit rather than weight recommendations.

That said, keeping your baby in a smaller diaper size for too long can cause chafing and rashes. Your child’s diaper is too small if they have constant leaks or "blow outs,” you have difficulty connecting and securing the tabs, the diaper doesn’t fully cover their butt, or there are red marks on your baby’s thigh and stomach.

11. Watch for Target diaper deals

Target has a dedicated deals section on its website where they feature discounts or purchasing rewards for select items, including diapers. Recently, the retailer offered shoppers a $30 store gift card for diaper, wipes and training pants purchases that exceeded $100. Although that may be a relatively large lump sum, the payoff is well worth it.

12. Look for diapers in your local buy-nothing group

The Buy Nothing Project is an organization in which members can swap goods and services — including diapers — with others in their hyper-local community. When members outgrow sizes or no longer need diapers for one reason or another, they may offer them up for free on their local Buy Nothing group. You can also post an “ISO” — or “in search of” — if you have a particular need.

Most of these groups exist on Facebook, so make sure you have an account to participate, and are invaluable resources for all kinds of new or used items , including leftover diapers.

13. Look into diaper banks

Nearly half of families (47%) struggle to afford diapers, according to a 2023 report from the National Diaper Bank Network. If you’re struggling, despite implementing other cost-saving strategies, organizations like the National Diaper Bank have established community-based diaper banks that collect, store and distribute free diapers to struggling families. The National Diaper Bank alone has more than 225 locations that serve more than 280,000 infants and toddlers. You can find them here .

14. Utilize “cash back” apps

There are plenty of apps that give you “cash” for purchases. Fetch , for example, gives you at least 25 points every time you scan a receipt from any retailer. Once you reach 10,000 points, you can redeem them for $10 gift cards to retailers like Amazon. Often, diaper brands like Huggies offer bonuses. For example, a recent promotion gave users 2,000 bonus points for any purchase of Huggies Little Movers or Little Snugglers diapers.

Remember, not all apps operate the same way, and some may have policies that allow them to sell your information. Make sure to do your due diligence by reading the terms and conditions, as well as online reviews

Yes, saving money on diapers requires vigilance and planning, but for many families, the positives outweigh the effort. Just think about all the extra cash you’ll have to buy other things for your kids.