How Much Protein You Really Need During Pregnancy

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

protein during pregnancy

Protein is always important, but the nutrient is essential during pregnancy. Here’s how much protein expecting moms need daily.

It’s no secret that our bodies require an adequate amount of protein to fulfill basic functions like muscle growth, wound healing, and cell signaling — and protein is especially important when you're expecting.

This macronutrient is an essential source of energy that repairs parts of the body like Mom’s brain, muscle and the blood, all of which undergo normal changes during pregnancy. Getting the right amount of protein in your diet also gives your little one the fuel she needs to grow.

Read on to learn how much protein expecting moms need, whether protein powder is safe during pregnancy, and the best protein-rich foods to prioritize when you're pregnant.

Key Takeaways

Protein is a powerful pregnancy nutrient: It supports your baby’s growth and your body’s changes, helping build muscles, hormones, and cells while reducing risks like growth restriction or preterm labor.

Most moms-to-be should aim for a minimum of 60 grams of protein daily, met through a balanced diet and prenatal vitamins — but avoid low-carb, high-protein diets, which may not be safe.

Ideally, you should get your protein from whole foods such as lean meats, eggs, yogurt, fish, legumes, nuts, and seeds over protein powders, which can be unregulated and sometimes unsafe during pregnancy.

Why is protein so important during pregnancy?

Protein is an essential nutrient during pregnancy. The building blocks of protein, called amino acids, play countless roles in the body, from maintaining the structure of our muscles, skin, and bones to producing critical hormones for growth. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicPregnancy diet: Focus on these essential nutrientsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicPregnancy diet: Focus on these essential nutrientsSee All Sources

Eating enough protein during pregnancy also supports your baby's development, since amino acids are required for normal cell growth and function. Meeting your daily protein needs may also lower the risk of complications like fetal growth restriction and preterm labor.

How much protein do pregnant women need?

Most moms-to-be meet their protein needs without even realizing it. The amount of protein you should eat while pregnant depends on a few different factors, such as how far along you are, your physical activity and your weight, but aiming for at least 60 grams per day is a good goal. Trusted SourceUniversity of California San Francisco HealthEating Right Before and During PregnancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceUniversity of California San Francisco HealthEating Right Before and During PregnancySee All Sources

To estimate your daily needs, divide your pre-pregnancy weight by two, and always confirm with your practitioner (for example, a pregnant woman who weighs 150 pounds might need around 75 grams of protein a day).

While eating a well-balanced diet can provide enough protein for many moms-to-be, you should also take a prenatal vitamin throughout pregnancy. Prenatals act like an insurance policy so your baby gets all the nutrients she needs for healthy development. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsNutrition During PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsNutrition During PregnancySee All Sources

Keep in mind that while it's important to get enough protein when you're expecting, you should avoid low-carb, Keto or Paleo diets . Consuming too-few carbs during pregnancy can leave you short on vital vitamins and minerals that are found in grains, fruits, and vegetables, and pack more protein than your body needs.

Is protein powder safe during pregnancy?

If you’re looking for easy ways to bump up your protein intake during pregnancy, supplements like protein powders might sound like a simple fix. But if you’re adding these supplements to your diet on top of a variety of protein-rich foods as well as your prenatal, you may actually get too much. Trusted SourceHarvard Health PublishingThe scoop on protein powderSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceHarvard Health PublishingThe scoop on protein powderSee All Sources

Protein powders and other supplements often contain a whopping amount of protein in a concentrated form, and since research shows that excessive protein intake during pregnancy can be detrimental, it’s all about finding a happy medium.

And remember: Supplements aren’t regulated by the Food & Drug Administration (FDA), so it’s difficult to know exactly what’s inside that protein powder, and even the ingredients that are listed on the label may not be 100% safe during pregnancy. Trusted SourceU.S. Food & Drug AdministrationDietary SupplementsSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceU.S. Food & Drug AdministrationDietary SupplementsSee All Sources

Unlike whole food sources of protein like fresh chicken or eggs, protein powders can contain trace amounts of heavy metals, caffeine, or herbs like gingko that may render the supplement unsafe for expecting moms.

That can be true of all forms of protein powder (such as whey, pea, and chickpea) as well as protein bars, energy bars, and shakes (which can also contribute to gastrointestinal discomfort during pregnancy ).

Bottom line? It's better to get your protein fix through real foods, and as with all vitamins and supplements in pregnancy, you should never take anything without first discussing it with your practitioner.

Best high-protein foods for pregnancy

Good news: It’s easy to hit your daily protein needs during pregnancy by filling your plate with healthy, whole foods. What's more, protein-rich foods also tend to be stellar sources of key pregnancy nutrients like vitamins A and D, as well as iron .

Here are some of the best protein-rich foods for moms-to-be:

Chicken breast (26 grams of protein per 3 ounces, cooked): It doesn’t take a huge portion of poultry to provide an impressive amount of protein. Just one 3-ounce chicken breast can deliver about 1/2 of your needs for the whole day. If you're having an aversion to meat, you might "sneak some shredded chicken into a salad or noodles so it doesn’t feel like you’re eating straight-up meat," says What to Expect Community user mommygirl867.

Eggs (12 grams per 2 eggs): Eggs offer up protein, plus important nutrients for pregnancy like bone-building vitamin D and the nutrient choline that supports fetal brain development. "I've been eating eggs practically every morning," says What to Expect Community user justmeababymomma.

Plain Greek yogurt (17 grams of protein per 6 ounces): One single-serving cup of Greek yogurt can provide 17 grams of protein, along with calcium and vitamin B12.

Lean ground beef (22 grams of protein per 3 ounces, cooked): Beef isn’t just an excellent source of protein — it’s also packed with iron, a nutrient that helps deliver oxygen throughout the body for both Mom and baby. Bonus points if it’s made of grass-fed meat so it’s much higher in anti-inflammatory omega-3 fats .

Salmon (22 grams of protein per 3 ounces, cooked): Salmon is another great source of omega-3 fatty acids for healthy development of your baby’s brain, eyes, and immune system. Protein-packed fatty fish like salmon are among the best sources of these nourishing fats.

Legumes (15 to 30 grams per cup, cooked): White, black, kidney, pinto, cranberry or navy beans and lentils, split peas, or other legumes provide between 15 and 18 grams per cooked cup. Edamame (that yummy soy bean snack), is a whopping 31 grams per cup. Foods made from soybeans are also excellent sources of protein: 1 cup (6 ounces) of tempeh (made from fermented soybeans) supplies 34 grams; 1 cup (8 1/2 ounces) of tofu supplies about 20 grams. "Beans work well, especially for rice and beans, enchiladas, and quesadillas," says What to Expect Community user mamaof3dogs.

Nuts (4 to 9 grams per 1 ounce): Peanuts, walnuts, cashews, pistachios, and almonds are all good sources of protein, with numbers ranging from 4 to 7 grams per serving (1 ounce, which is about a handful). Pumpkin seeds, sunflower seeds, and even chia, flax, and sesame seeds are packed with protein, contributing 5 to 9 grams per serving. And don't forget nut butters: A serving (or two tablespoons) of peanut butter supplies 7 grams of protein.

Protein is important during pregnancy and hitting a happy medium brings the best health outcomes for both you and your baby. And the good news is that hitting your protein goals is simple as long as you regularly include nourishing foods like meat, poultry, eggs, yogurt, beans, nuts, and seeds.

For a more personalized protein plan, work with your physician or a registered dietitian to find the best level of intake for you during your pregnancy. And for even more tips and advice on the nutrients you need to fuel you and your growing baby, the What to Expect app has you covered.