How to Wash Cloth Diapers

mom doing laundry

Not sure of the best method when it comes to washing cloth diapers? Here's how to get the job done with minimal mess.

New parents might question committing to cloth diapers for fear of excessive dirty work. But washing cloth diapers can be easier (and less messy) than you might think.

While there are several ways to launder cloth diapers, the dry-pail system described below is fairly foolproof (even for the most sleep-deprived new parent) — and most people find that it beats the wet-pail system (in which you soak the diapers in a pail of water before you toss them in the washer) since it really cuts down on smells.

How to clean cloth diapers with the dry-pail system

Fill the pail. Plop any solid poop into the toilet and put the dirty diapers, along with any wet (pee-pee) ones, into a dry pail with a waterproof cloth liner (you can find them anywhere cloth diapers are sold). To keep stink to a minimum, sprinkle a little baking soda on the diapers, or place a deodorant disc at the bottom of the pail. Make sure to take time to wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water whenever you come in contact with baby’s waste.

Empty the liner into the washer. When you’ve collected enough dirty diapers to fill the washing machine about 1/2 to 2/3 full (which will likely happen every two to three days), remove the liner from the pail and empty it into the washer. Throw the liner into the wash, too.

Rinse the dirty diapers. Run the diapers in a normal or quick cycle using warm or cold water and enough detergent for a small to medium load. This cycle removes surface dirt and stains, allowing a second cycle to attack deeper dirt.

Wash the dirty diapers. Now that they’ve been through the first cycle, wash the cloth diapers in hot water on the heaviest setting (for a large or heavily soiled load). Add enough detergent for a full-sized load. If you think the diapers need it, you can also run one rinse cycle after this second wash.

Hang ’em up. Not only is line drying great for green families looking to save on energy bills, but it can also extend diaper life. If you don’t have the space to line dry, tumble dry the diapers according to the diaper brand’s instructions.

How to wash cloth diaper covers

Diaper covers need less washing than diapers do — but definitely wash them when they start to smell or when your little one’s had a blowout. Follow the washing instructions on each cover’s label. Depending on the fabric and brand, you may be able to wash and dry your covers together with your diapers.

If you’ve got wool diaper covers, hand-wash them in lukewarm water with a wool wash containing lanolin. Lanolin is a natural substance in wool that wicks away water, so if you strip it away, you’ll end up with leaky diapers. After you’ve washed the covers, wring out the excess water and hang them up to dry.

What type of detergent should you use when washing cloth diapers?

Washing cloth diapers with different detergents can help you figure out which brand works best with your machine and if you need a special detergent for your baby's skin . Here’s how to narrow the options while you experiment:

Use a clean-rinsing detergent. Steer clear of detergents with fabric softeners and, if possible optical brighteners. Both shorten the life of your diapers and make it harder for them to get squeaky clean, since ammonia from urine as well as bacteria can bind to them and work their way deeper into the diaper fabric. Plus, they could irritate your sweetie’s sensitive baby skin.

Do go fragrance-free. The fewer fragrances and dyes, the gentler on baby and the smaller the risk of detergent-induced diaper rash .

Do read labels. Even if a detergent says “natural” on the box, always check the ingredient list to make sure it’s free of whitening enzymes, phosphates, dyes, fabric softeners, fragrances and bleach.

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd Edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Cloth Versus Disposable Baby Diapers , October 2021. American Cleaning Institute, Laundry Basics Sorting It Out . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Safe & Healthy Diapering in the Home , October 2018. Real Diaper Association, Laundry Science . April Duffy, author of The Cloth Diapers for Beginners Cloth Diaper Wash & Care Handbook and owner of Cloth Diapers for Beginners , Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Liz Turrigiano, CEO and co-founder of organic and cloth diapering system Esembly, New York, NY.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Cloth Diapers vs. Disposable Diapers: Which Should I Use? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Clean Baby Clothes By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

14 Ways to Save Money on Diapers Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

How to Change a Baby’s Diaper Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Potty Train Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Manage a Squirmy Baby During Diaper Changes Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 Best Swim Diapers to Keep Your Baby’s Poop Out of the Pool Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

Diaper Size Chart: Your Weight-Based Diapering Guide Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Clean a Car Seat Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

When It Comes to Diapers, What's on The Inside Matters By Elizabeth Buxton, Director of Commerce Content Strategy

The Best Potty Training Methods to Finally Get Your Toddler Out of Diapers Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Clean Baby Toys By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Clean Your Breast Pump Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Bye-Bye, Diapers — How and When to Potty Train Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window