How a Bicornuate Uterus Can Impact Fertility and Pregnancy

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

bicornuate uterus, six paper hearts on a blue background

Learn more about how this rare heart-shaped uterus can affect pregnancy.

Sometimes your ticker isn’t the only heart-shaped organ in your body. A very small but significant group of women also have heart-shaped wombs. This rare condition is known as a bicornuate uterus, and it can sometimes affect your fertility and pregnancy.

Here’s what you need to know about having a bicornuate uterus.

Key Takeaways:

A bicornuate uterus is something you’re born with, and many women don’t even know they have it. Some only find out if they’re having trouble getting pregnant or have very painful periods.

Most women with a heart-shaped (bicornuate) uterus can still get pregnant and have healthy babies. You may just get a little extra monitoring during pregnancy to watch for things like preterm labor or a breech baby.

If a bicornuate uterus is making it hard to get or stay pregnant, surgery can sometimes help. A procedure to create one larger uterine space has been shown to improve the chances of a healthy birth, though you’ll likely need a C-section later on.

What is a bicornuate uterus?

A bicornuate uterus is another name for a heart-shaped uterus. This special type of uterus has two cavities or spaces instead of the one large cavity that’s more typical.

It’s a congenital condition, which means you're born with it, and it’s very rare. Only about 4 in 1,000 women have this particular kind of uterus, according to the National Library of Medicine .

Can you get pregnant with a bicornuate uterus?

Yes, you can still get pregnant with a bicornuate uterus, but it can make conceiving more difficult. About 1% of women with infertility, 2% of those who have a miscarriage, and almost 5% of women who experience both have a bicornuate uterus.

Women with this condition also have a greater risk of certain pregnancy complications, a large review found . They’re more likely to experience things like preterm delivery, low birth weight babies , and breech babies right before delivery, but plenty of women with bicornuate uteruses don’t experience any problems at all.

“I have this exact thing, but I have two healthy babies and a third on the way. Stressing will definitely hurt though, so just try to put it out of your mind. I know it’s hard, but I like to remind myself 'I am pregnant today,'” says What to Expect Community mom oliverandcharlie.

What causes a bicornuate uterus?

A bicornuate uterus is formed while you’re a fetus developing in your own mother’s uterus. Your future womb develops from two ducts known as the müllerian ducts.

Normally, these ducts join together to create a uterus with one open cavity and two fallopian tubes. But rarely, they don’t completely fuse together, creating a bicornuate uterus. It’s not clear why some women develop this way. There’s no evidence that it’s genetic, although research is ongoing.

What are symptoms of a bicornuate uterus?

Some women with bicornuate uteruses don’t experience any symptoms at all. They may only learn they have one if they have trouble getting pregnant, or they may go through their whole lives unaware. But a bicornuate uterus can sometimes cause certain symptoms, including:

Painful periods. When you have a bicornuate uterus, it can be hard for blood to flow through your cervix, which may cause more pain.

Bleeding through tampons. About a quarter of women with a bicornuate uterus also have something called a longitudinal vaginal septum, or double vagina. That means they have two vaginal cavities separated by a wall of tissue. If that’s the case, you can still bleed from the other cavity even if you have a tampon in.

Fertility problems. Having trouble getting or staying pregnant may indicate an anatomical issue like a bicornuate uterus.

How is a bicornuate uterus diagnosed?

If you have any of the above symptoms, it’s important to see a gynecologist and get checked out. They can run tests to look for any uterine abnormalities. Some typical diagnostic tools include:

Hysterosalpingogram (HSG test)

An HSG test involves taking X-rays of your uterus after a practitioner injects a special dye. This dye can make the shape of your uterus more apparent on the X-ray image. Even with this aid, a bicornuate uterus can look similar to a septate uterus, which is when a band of tissue divides your uterus in two. They require different treatments, so your doctor may need to conduct more tests for a definitive diagnosis.

Ultrasound

This test uses high-frequency sound waves to create an image of your uterus. Many doctors will do this even if an HSG test definitely shows a bicornuate uterus since an ultrasound can also look for kidney problems, which can occur among women with uterine abnormalities.

3D ultrasonography done transvaginally (i.e., with a probe inserted in the vagina) can provide the clearest results along with MRIs.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

This test uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to get a detailed picture of your uterus. If you do have a bicornuate uterus and abnormal bleeding, your doctor will likely do an MRI to rule out endometrial cancer.

While women with these conditions aren’t more likely to develop endometrial cancer, they are more likely to get a false-negative from a uterine biopsy if tissue is taken from a healthy uterine cavity instead of an unhealthy one.

Have questions about getting pregnant? Get answers in the What to Expect app , where you'll find expert advice and can connect with other parents.

Can a bicornuate uterus be corrected?

Most of the time, there’s no need to “fix” a bicornuate uterus. Many women with this condition don’t have trouble getting pregnant and have healthy babies just like women without it.

In these cases, you’ll just get some extra monitoring during your pregnancy to address any possible complications early.

If, however, you’re in that group of women struggling with infertility, recurrent miscarriage, or both, then you may want to consider surgical options. The most common one is something called the Strassman metroplasty, where the two smaller uterine cavities are combined into a more spacious single cavity.

Research suggests that women who have this procedure to fix a bicornuate uterus go on to have successful births. After surgery, however, you’ll need to wait for at least three months before trying to conceive.

When you do get pregnant, you’ll also need a C-section to deliver your baby . This is because women who’ve had uterine surgery are at an increased risk for uterine rupture during vaginal labor.

Bicornuate uteruses are extremely rare, and even when they do occur, many women go through life unaware that they even have them. They can occasionally cause some problems, however, so your doctor will want to check for one you’re having difficulty getting and staying pregnant. The good news is for most of these cases, surgery can correct the problem — and put you on the path to a healthy pregnancy.