How to Safely Support a Newborn's Head and Neck

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

If you're feeling terrified to care for your fragile newborn, you're not alone. Follow these tips for safe baby-handling and you'll feel like a pro before you know it.

"My newborn seems so fragile — that wobbly head and neck, those tiny little arms and legs — I'm afraid I'm going to break something every time I dress him or pick him up. How do I make sure I won't hurt him?"

All new parents worry that they’re going to somehow break baby when they first bring home that tiny, floppy and oh-so-fragile-looking newborn from the hospital — and anyone who says differently is putting on a very good show of confidence. So you’re really not alone in your worries.

But here’s a truth that’ll keep you from quaking in your slippers every time you get ready to pick up your newborn: You can’t break a baby. That young, helpless newborn is actually an incredibly resilient, elastic little being. And you’re not going to end up yanking his arms out of their sockets or breaking those itty-bitty toes and fingers just by doing such routine baby care as changing an outfit, rocking him to sleep or giving him a bath (wet babies are super slippery, and you’ll need to get a good grip) — no matter how clumsy you feel when you’re handling him.

And here’s even better news: This phase will pass before you know it. By the time your newborn turns 3 months old, he’ll be past this quivering jelly stage and will have gained some good control over his wobbly head and floppy limbs and will seem more like a sturdy baby — and less like a rag doll. And you’ll be past the tentative, afraid-I’ll-break-baby stage and toting him around like a natural.

Until then, these tips can speed up the comfort factor around your not-so-fragile baby, even on the days you feel most fragile yourself.

You know you’re supposed to support your baby’s head and neck whenever you lift him up, hold him and carry him. But it’s easier to do this if you scoop him up with one hand supporting his head, neck and spine, and your other hand tucked under his bottom for ample support. Don’t worry if you touch those soft spots (called fontanelles) on his head — they’re well protected by a sturdy membrane. And don’t fret if your newborn’s noggin flops back and forth a little bit while you’re trying to perfect your move — it won’t hurt him. (Of course, never shake your baby because that can cause serious harm.)

Stick with side-snap shirts (and, once the umbilical stump falls out, with wide-necked onesies), sleep sacks and outfits that snap or zipper all the way down until you feel comfortable getting clothes on and off over your baby’s head. Steer clear of adorable but impractical clothes — anything that buttons up the back or tiny turtlenecks sans snaps. Plus, all those blow-out diaper changes and gushing spit-ups will give you ample opportunity to change your new baby’s clothes again…and again…and again (What! Spit up again! I just changed that shirt!). The upside: You’ll soon feel like an old pro at this changing game.

Have fun getting comfortable with your newborn!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. Mayo Clinic, Shaken Baby Syndrome , October 2017. American Academy of Pediatrics, Developmental Milestones: 7 Months , June 2009.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When and How Babies Lift Their Heads Up Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Did You Give Birth to a Conehead Baby? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Buckle Your Newborn Into a Car Seat Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

All About Your Baby's Head Shape Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Care for Newborn Skin Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

How to Swaddle Your Baby Safely — A Step-by-Step Guide Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Flat Head Syndrome (Plagiocephaly) in Babies Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Dress a Newborn Baby for the Weather Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Bathing With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here’s How to Shift Your Side-Sleeping Baby to His Back and Deliver Him Safely to Dreamland Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Should You Stop Swaddling a Newborn Baby? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Care for Your Premature Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window