How Does Having a Short Cervix Affect Your Pregnancy?

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

short cervix during pregnancy, conceptual ladders of different lengths and colors

Did an ultrasound just reveal that your cervix is short? Here's what having a short cervix means, how it might affect your pregnancy, and the ways it can be treated.

How much thought do you really give to your cervix, the cylinder-shaped piece of tissue that connects the vagina with the uterus? When you're pregnant, your cervix takes center stage, opening up and thinning out to allow your baby to pass through the birth canal. So if you find out you have a short cervix, you may wonder how it will affect your labor and delivery and, of course, your baby.

Try not to worry and know that while a short cervix could potentially cause some complications, there are effective treatments available to address this condition so women can go on to have healthy pregnancies. Here's what you need to know about having a short cervix when you're pregnant.

Key Takeaways

A short cervix doesn't affect getting pregnant — but it can increase the risk of complications. It may raise the chance of cervical insufficiency and preterm labor, which is why providers keep a close eye on it.

There are treatments that can help you go the full nine months. Depending on how short your cervix is, your doctor may suggest closer monitoring, progesterone, or other treatments.

You didn't cause this — and you aren't powerless. Early monitoring and the right treatment approach can help many women with a short cervix carry healthy pregnancies to term.

What does it mean to have a short cervix?

Having a short cervix means exactly what it sounds like: Your cervix happens to be shorter in length than it is for other women. Before and during pregnancy, the cervix is typically between 30 and 50 millimeters long, but occasionally a mom-to-be will have a cervix that's a bit shorter, even under 25 millimeters long (and no, your cervix can't be coaxed to grow).

A short cervix can mean you're more likely to have cervical insufficiency (also called an incompetent cervix ), which is when your cervix dilates or opens up too soon. This condition is called premature cervical effacement (thinning) and dilation and it can raise your risk of premature labor, early delivery, and even pregnancy loss.

"I’ve had a short cervix in both my previous pregnancies," says What to Expect Community mom mhunny. "It’s scary! I had two full-term babies. I am being monitored closely this pregnancy in case it happens again."

Does a short cervix affect my ability to get pregnant?

While your ability to become pregnant shouldn't be impacted by a short cervix, having any kind of structural abnormality of this body part can affect your ability to carry a baby the full nine months of pregnancy. Your doctor might perform an ultrasound to check your cervical length or a pelvic exam, especially if you show signs of preterm labor (contractions, backache).

What causes a short cervix?

It's not clear why some women have a shorter cervix than others or why the condition can lead to cervical insufficiency, which may be congenital in some women. Still, there are several factors that may come into play, including the following:

An enlarged or split uterus. A stretched uterus or one that's malformed may affect the length of your cervix. A split uterus, which is called a septate uterus, occurs when a wall of tissue grows through the middle of the womb, dividing it in two.

Cervical injury. A difficult birth that causes a cervical tear can damage the cervix.

Cervical surgery. Certain procedures used to address an abnormal Pap smear or a prior D&C may be linked to cervical insufficiency.

Infection. Inflammation or irritation of the uterus caused by bleeding or infection may also be factors in cervical length.

Race. Black women have a higher risk of this condition, but the reasons aren't clear.

Drug exposure. If your own mother was exposed to a synthetic form of estrogen known as diethylstilbestrol or DES, your cervix may also be at risk.

Track your symptoms and get answers to all your pregnancy questions in the What to Expect app .

Short cervix diagnosis

If you're experiencing any signs of preterm labor, such as contractions, vaginal discharge , pelvic pressure, or backache, your practitioner might order a transvaginal ultrasound to measure your cervical length.

This type of ultrasound is internal and uses a transducer to get a good look at your cervix. A pelvic exam could also be performed to see if your cervix has started to open.

Short cervix treatment

Short cervix treatment options usually depend on the measurements your doctor has taken, how far along you are in your pregnancy, and whether you're carrying one baby or multiples. Here's more about treating a short cervix with ultrasound, hormone therapy, and surgery.

Monitoring. If your cervix measures less than 29 millimeters but more than 25 millimeters long, your doctor may recommend regular monitoring with more ultrasounds to continue checking your cervical length as your pregnancy progresses.

Progesterone. For a cervix that's under 25 millimeters long, progesterone hormone therapy can help prevent premature birth and reduce complications if you have a short cervix and are carrying just one baby. A vaginal suppository starting at the time of diagnosis and stopping by 37 weeks could be prescribed. If you have a history of preterm delivery, your doctor may prescribe a weekly progesterone injection instead.

Cervical cerclage. If you're less than 24 weeks along with a single baby on board, cervical cerclage may be considered (it may not be recommended if you're having multiples). This surgical procedure uses stitches or synthetic tape to shore up the cervix and keep it closed. Sorry — sex is a no-no with this in place.

Arabin pessary. This alternative to surgery and hormone therapy is a small, conical piece that is designed to surround and support the cervix to keep it closed.

A short cervix is out of your control, so there's nothing you could have done to prevent it. If you do end up with this condition, know that effective treatments are available to help extend your pregnancy as long as possible so you can bring a healthy baby into the world.