Weaning Baby Off Daytime Breastfeeding

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

breastfeed

"I'm going back to work soon and I’m not planning on pumping. Can I wean my baby off the breast in the daytime but continue to nurse in the morning and at night?"

Here’s great news for working moms : breastfeeding is not an all-or-nothing proposition. In fact, many moms who spend their days away from their babies only breastfeed in the mornings and evenings. You’re smart to think about it in advance, since the transition will go more smoothly for you and your baby with a little planning. Here’s how:

Give yourself time

The key to weaning your baby off his daytime breastfeeding sessions is to start slowly, at least two or three weeks before you need to be back at work. Gradually cutting down on the number of times you nurse during the day gives your baby — and your body — a chance to adjust.

Stopping abruptly not only distresses your child but can lead to engorgement of your breasts (and sometimes even a painful inflammation of the breasts called mastitis ).

Bring in the bottle

Start by switching over to a bottle feed midday. If your partner, a grandparent or your baby’s future caregiver is around to offer the bottle, that’s ideal. Some breastfed babies resist taking bottles from mom — possibly because they’re confused — but quickly accept it from somebody else.

If you’re the one to do it, though, that’s fine — just try to minimize any cues your baby is likely to associate with your breast. For example, don’t wear your usual nursing top or sit in the glider where you always nurse him. If he plays with your long hair while he nurses, put it up.

A change of scenery can help too. So if you normally breastfeed him indoors, try getting outside. Go to the park or even just your backyard deck, where the clouds, the birds and a nice warm breeze will help distract him.

Once you’ve successfully swapped in a bottle in the middle of the day, move on to either the mid-morning or mid-afternoon feed. Keep cutting back until you’re breastfeeding your baby just between the hours you’ll be nursing once you’re at work.

Feed right before — and after — work

Your first week back on the job is likely to be at least a bit emotional, no matter how well you’ve prepped. Make it a bit easier on both you and your cutie by setting your alarm early so you have time to nurse before you get out of bed, and then again right before you leave for work. You’ll feel more relaxed walking into your workplace.

Also ask your caregiver not to feed your baby within an hour of when you usually arrive in the evening. If you’re going to be late, call so your sitter knows to give him just enough to hold him over until you’re back.

Just remember: Countless new moms have done what you’re trying to do, and they succeeded. So will you!

Good luck!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year, 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, ??Going Back to Work After Having a Baby, September 2021. WhatToExpect.com, ??Formula-Feeding Your Baby? Here’s What You Need to Know, May 2021. WhatToExpect.com, ??Breastfeeding: Basics and Tips for Nursing Your Baby, February 2020. WhatToExpect.com, ??Mastitis While Breastfeeding, July 2020. WhatToExpect.com, ??How to Wean Your Baby From Breastfeeding, August 2020. American Academy of Pediatrics, Weaning Your Baby, February 2012. American Family Physician, Management of Mastitis in Breastfeeding Women, September 2008. UptoDate, Patient Education: Weaning From Breastfeeding (Beyond the Basics), September 2021.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

When and How to Night Wean Your Baby — Without Losing Too Much Sleep in the Process Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

How to Wean Your Baby Off the Bottle Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Stop Pumping Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

How and When to Wean Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfed Baby Won't Take a Bottle By Heidi Murkoff

How to Supplement With Formula Without Compromising Your Milk Supply Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Switching Between Breast and Bottle? Here’s How to Avoid Nipple Confusion Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Should You Stop Breastfeeding? Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfeeding Toddler Doesn't Want to Wean By Heidi Murkoff

Tips for Breastfeeding a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Is It Okay to Wake My Baby Up for Feedings? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Help Me, Heidi! How Do I Get Baby to Latch After Bottle-Feeding? By Heidi Murkoff

Breastfeeding a Baby With a Toddler in the House Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Is Your Baby Dropping a Nap? Here’s a Guide to Losing the Morning Snooze Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window