How to Clean Baby Clothes

How to Clean Baby Clothes

Everything you need to do (and buy) to safely clean baby's essentials.

You already knew that having a baby meant round-the-clock feedings and diaper changes — but round-the-clock loads of laundry? Welcome to parenthood!

In fact, if you’re like many of the parents in our What to Expect community , you may be doing nearly one load of laundry a day — everything from soiled diapers, to spit-up soaked onsies, to baby food-stained shirts and bibs.

The good news: Cleaning baby clothing isn’t necessarily difficult (just time-consuming). “Baby clothes tend to be made out of material that is very easily washable, like 100 percent cotton,” says Jessica Ek, a spokesperson for the American Cleaning Institute. Follow these steps.

What you'll need

Ready for your umpteenth load of laundry? Here’s what you’ll need.

Award-winning detergent

Laundry detergent: While you don’t need to buy a baby-specific brand , it’s a good idea to opt for fragrance-free detergents , since fragrances can irritate some babies’ sensitive skin. Dreft Liquid Baby Detergent ($16 for a two-pack on Amazon ) is a good hypoallergenic option, and a perennial favorite among What to Expect community members.

Drying rack (optional): Baby clothes are often made of cotton, which is especially prone to shrinking. To prevent your 3-month onesies from dwindling to a newborn size, consider lying the baby clothes to dry on a rack like this one . (Short on time and prefer the dryer? See below.)

Laundry mesh bag: The laundry tool you never knew you needed, a garment bag keeps tiny socks, hats and mittens from going missing in the dryer.

Dish soap: Many parents in the What to Expect community rave about dish soap (particularly this classic option from Dawn ) for any and all stains — baby poop included.

How often should you wash baby clothes?

It’s a good idea to wash anything with poop or spit-up on it right away. “You want to make sure you clean up bodily fluids regularly because they might grow germs on them,” says Ek. “Especially because [newborns] don’t have fully developed immune systems yet.”

Babies aren’t outside playing in the mud all day, but they can still make quite a mess. Here are step-by-step instructions for cleaning baby clothing.

Step 1: Check for residue

If there’s a build-up of residue (spit-up, breastmilk, formula, poop) on the clothing, wipe it up with a paper towel. This can absorb the excess gunk.

stains on baby clothing

Step 2: Set your rinse cycle to a cool water temperature

Cool water should take out most of the stains on your baby’s clothes, many of which are made of 100 percent cotton, but it won’t shrink the fabric like a hotter temperature will.

But there are a few exceptions, says Ek: You may need to use a hot rinse setting — which is harsher than cool rinse, but more effective at removing stains — on waxy stains like greasy baby oil or chocolate. In this case, the hot water can help “melt” stains.

Step 3: Toss the baby clothing into the machine with other dirty laundry

adding clothes to washer

Unless your child requires a different detergent (like Seventh Generation's Free & Clear Laundry Detergent for extra-sensitive skin), you don’t need to wash baby clothes separately from those of the rest of the family. Just be sure to separate the colors from the whites; while most modern clothing is made with pretty color-fast dyes, it’s possible that the colors can bleed together, staining your white clothing.

Step 4: Add about 2 tablespoons of detergent (or use the measuring cup on the lid)

pouring detergent

It’s important not to use too much detergent. If you go overboard, the wash cycle might not rinse all the detergent off, leaving a sticky residue that could be irritating to your baby’s skin.

Step 5: Check for stains before drying clothes

After the load is done, check the clothing to see if the stain came out in the wash. Between the mix of the water, laundry detergent and agitation from the washer (all that churning and tumbling the machine does), most stains will have come out, says Ek. If not, throw it back for another wash — do not put it in the dryer. The heat from the dryer can “set” the stain, making it harder to come out.

Step 6: Hang the clothes up to dry

It’s a good idea to hang dry clothing — especially 100 percent cotton clothing, which is prone to shrinking — instead of putting it in the dryer. If you prefer to use the dryer, switch it to a lower temperature setting and try to take out the clothing right after its done.

One time when it’s actually good to throw your baby clothes in the dryer, says Ek: When there’s a stomach bug going around the house. The high heat can help get rid of the germs.

How to clean poop from baby clothes

If a diaper blow-out happens, follow the steps above. If you’re on-the-go or won’t be able to wash the clothing for quite a few hours, try running the stain under cold water or putting some dish soap (or even hand soap) on it in the meantime. This might help the stain come off easier once you can put it in the washing machine. Or if you're in a pinch, having a stain stick is another great option, says Ek. Parents in the What to Expect community and beyond rave about the Babyganics Stain Eraser Marker ($9 for a three-pack on Amazon ).

How to clean baby cloth diapers

Because cloth diapers can get very soiled, you’ll want to wash them separately from your other clothes, ideally every day or other day, says Ek. Scrape off the solid waste and, if you’re not throwing it in the wash right away, soak the diapers in cold water. Then, toss the cloth diapers in the washing machine and set the temperature to cool or cold water (check the care instructions on the diaper to be sure).

After the load is done, you may want to rinse the diapers again in cold water to make sure all the detergent is gone (again, a good reason not to use too much detergent). Don’t use fabric softeners, though — these products can make the diapers less absorbent (and you definitely don’t want that ). Then, set them on a rack to dry. Putting baby clothes in the dryer subjects the fabrics to high temperatures, causing them to break down faster.

One note: Most cloth diaper companies provide pretty comprehensive cleaning instructions, so it’s important to follow them whenever you can, says Ek.

How to clean heirloom baby clothes

If the clothes are highly valuable or particularly sentimental, consider taking them to a professional laundry service, says Ek. If you want to DIY, try hand-washing the garment first to see how it goes.

First, apply a little detergent on an inconspicuous spot on the clothing to make sure it doesn’t damage the fabric. (You might also try a detergent that’s formulated for delicate clothes, like Woolite .) Then, hand-wash the garment in cold or warm water — not hot. “The threads are going to be more delicate,” says Ek.

Next, lay the garment out on a drying rack to dry. You might also consider patting the clothing — particularly any areas that have lace or embroidery on them — with a clean towel, in case any of the color dye runs, she says.

American Academy of Pediatrics, Cleaning Baby Clothes , November 2009. Cleveland Clinic, Is Your Newborn Baby’s Immune System Strong Enough? , August 2021. Jessica Ek , Senior Director, Digital Communications at the American Cleaning Institute, Washington, DC.

Your Next Read

How to Clean Baby Toys By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Wash Cloth Diapers Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

The Best Home Cleaning Products to Use During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

How to Change a Baby’s Diaper Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

How to Care for Newborn Skin Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

Dressing Toddlers By Maressa Brown, Contributing Writer/Editor

Cloth Diapers vs. Disposable Diapers: Which Should I Use? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Clean a Car Seat Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Clothes Sizes Chart and Guide Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Clean Your Breast Pump Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Soothe a Sensitive Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Dress a Newborn Baby for the Weather Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When and How Should I Sterilize Baby Bottles? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window