How to Travel Safely by Car When You're Pregnant

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

safe car travel during pregnancy

Wondering about the best way to wear your seatbelt? Whether to use an airbag? Here's how to minimize discomfort and keep both you and your baby safe in the car during pregnancy.

It's probably second nature to click your seatbelt in place when you hop into a car. Yet once you're expecting, you may second-guess yourself as your bump grows and that belt keeps stretching farther ... and farther.

While you might experience some minor seatbelt discomfort late in pregnancy, make no mistake: The safest way for you and your baby to travel in a car is buckled up.

Consistent expert advice confirms that you should always fasten your seatbelt for the entire nine months. In fact, research indicates that car crashes can increase the risk of preterm labor and other complications.

So once you've pulled that belt out as far as it goes, the next step is figuring out the best way to wear it properly and adjust the seat so you can drive and breathe at the same time. For help, here's more about riding safely by car in pregnancy with a burgeoning belly. Happy travels!

Key Takeaways

Buckle up every time — it protects you and your baby. Wear the lap belt low across your hips and upper thighs, position the shoulder strap between your breasts and to the side of your belly, sit as far back from the steering wheel or dashboard as you can, and leave your air bags turned on for extra protection.

Don't overdo it. Skip long drives if you're high-risk or close to your due date; otherwise, take walking and stretching breaks every 90 minutes, stay hydrated, and pull over if you don't feel well.

Install your baby's car seat a few weeks before your due date. It's not always top of mind when you're stocking up on diapers and onesies, but make sure you've prepared your car for your baby ahead of time so it's ready when you are.

Is it safe to travel by car during pregnancy?

It is safe to drive or ride in a car when you're pregnant. That said, if you're thinking of taking a longer trip, consider your due date. Women who are experiencing pregnancy complications or are at risk for delivering early may want to stick close to home and skip traveling long distances by car.

Is it safe to drive a car during pregnancy?

Yes, it's safe to drive a car during pregnancy as long as you always wear a seatbelt every time you slide (um, wedge yourself) behind the wheel. The next most important task? Never, ever engage in distracted driving. That includes driving your car while talking on the phone or texting, tuning radio stations, staring at the GPS for too long, and putting on makeup.

Texting while driving is especially problematic. Reading or sending a text can cause you to look away from the road and surrounding cars for several seconds, which can make you and your passengers, along with your unborn baby, at risk of getting into an accident.

What's the safest way to wear a seatbelt when you're pregnant?

The safest way to wear a seatbelt is across your pelvis and upper thighs, below your bump. Always wear the shoulder harness over your shoulder, diagonally between your breasts and to the side of your belly (never under your arm or behind your back) and then pull the belt snugly to remove any slack. A bulky coat can prevent the belt from buckling, so remove outerwear before you get in to ensure a proper fit.

Don't worry that an abrupt stop will harm your baby: Even if you're bruised, your baby will be safe, cushioned by amniotic fluid and uterine muscle.

"My midwife told me the baby is very protected in all of the fluids inside the womb. The amniotic sac is like a very small water balloon inside of a larger water balloon, which is your body," says What to Expect Community member theomar. "The main risk of car travel is getting into a car accident, which is a risk we all take whenever we drive in a car."

If you are in an accident — even a minor fender bender that doesn't seem to have caused pain or injury — head to the doctor or ER for evaluation.

Air bags will still keep you safe in a crash, so don't have them disabled or removed. Instead, ride in the back seat to add further protection; if you're in the passenger seat, move it as far back as possible. If you're driving, tilt the steering wheel upward (toward your breastbone, away from your belly or head) and try to keep at least 10 inches between your body and the wheel.

For overall comfort while traveling in a car throughout your pregnancy, adjust your seat position frequently. The headrest should fall directly behind your head for maximum spinal support; the lumbar cushion can be adjusted in some cars to support the changing shape of your spine. If it's not comfortable, consider buying or borrowing a back cushion (available at auto or specialty stores).

Get personalized pregnancy advice, safety tips, and car seat guidance before baby arrives by downloading the What to Expect app .

When should you stop traveling by car during pregnancy?

There's no hard-and-fast rule that forbids car travel at a certain point during pregnancy so if you're feeling fine, you can continue to cruise to work, the store, and elsewhere.

But if your belly becomes too big to sit or turn with ease, you have trouble reaching the pedals, or you feel you just can't drive safely at any point in your pregnancy, it's fine to hand the keys to someone else.

Safety tips for pregnancy car travel

A safe car trip is a comfortable one. Keep the following tips in mind the next time you drive:

Limit car time. If you're planning a longer road trip, be sure to limit your drives to six hours per day max or spread your trip over a few days so you can drive for shorter stretches.

Take frequent pit stops. Go for a quick walk and stretch every 90 minutes or so — it will get your blood flowing and help avoid leg cramps and further swelling in your feet and ankles. Stretching your legs frequently can also help decrease the risk of blood clots.

Pack drinks and snacks. Drink plenty of water (don't worry about having to go; you'll be stopping frequently anyway!). And pack lots of healthy, filling snacks for when hunger strikes.

Dress right. Skip tight clothing in favor of looser tops so you're comfy behind the wheel. And ask your doctor if support hose would be a good idea to lower your risk of deep vein thrombosis .

Pull over anytime. Driving can be tiring and pregnancy is sometimes exhausting. If you're wiped out, nauseous, or feel dizzy, stop driving and rest for a while until you're refreshed.

And speaking of cars and driving: Make sure to install your baby's car seat at least three weeks before your due date, so it's ready to go when you need it. You can avoid common car seat mistakes by getting (usually free-of-charge) help from a qualified technician in your area .