How to Introduce Your Dog to Your Newborn Baby

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to headline and minor sourcing/copy updates.

baby

"My dog was my baby and got all my attention before I gave birth. Since I've brought my daughter home, Scooter's been acting out — eating her pacifiers, chewing up bottles and diapers, and basically behaving like a jealous sib. What can I do?"

It’s not unusual for a calm, cuddly canine to act a bit beastly when a two-legged sibling takes over his turf. And who can blame him? Your dog used to be the big cheese!

But trying to find time to shower your pup with love can be tough when you’ve barely got time to shower yourself.

Try not to be mad at your mutt. His misbehavior is his misguided way of getting your attention — in his eyes even a scolding is better than a cold shoulder. Rather than banishing him to the doghouse, now’s the time to send him some clear signals about how you expect him to act — before the rivalry turns serious.

Here are some tactics to try:

Help your pup accept your baby. Your pet may not only be feeling displaced but also overwhelmed by all the new noises and smells in the house. To help your dog and baby coexist, give him a treat when the baby cries, squeals or coos so he’ll associate those baby sounds with something positive. And instead of making all things baby off-limits, let your furry companion take a whiff of your little one’s feet, clothes and diapers as you hold each one to his nose. Dogs learn a lot about their world through smell, so getting your pooch familiar with your baby’s scent (the sweet and the stinky) — and even giving him a treat as he sniffs calmly — may make him less likely to rummage through (and rip up) your baby’s gear.

Work off that energy. No doubt, taking care of your baby’s needs has risen to the top of your to-do list while the needs of your previously pampered pet have practically fallen off altogether. But you can tend to both at the same time through exercise, which is a great way to burn off steam for both two-legged and four-legged family members. Plus, a walk will likely channel your woofer’s pent-up energy into something more constructive. So bring your dog along when you head out with the baby. If that’s not possible, enlist your partner, a friend or a dog walker to take him out for a stroll or some backyard playtime. Remember, a tired-out dog is a usually a better-behaved one.

Catch your dog being good. Positive reinforcement goes a long way toward getting the behavior you want (a good thing to remember when your sweet baby turns into a sassy tot), so reward your dog for being obedient and calm when he’s around your daughter. For instance, if he's relaxing on the floor, toss him a treat so he learns which behaviors get him the attention and praise he craves.

Simultaneously bond with your dog and baby. You want your pup to realize that good things can happen when the baby is around. Put those new-mama multitasking skills to the test by petting your dog while you feed your little one or tossing a ball while you cuddle with your two-legged cutie. If your baby needs your full-on attention, give the dog a new chew toy to play with while you’re busy. Or put the dog bed near your baby’s changing table or bouncer with a treat or toy. If baby time equals fun-time (or you-time) for your dog, chances are he’ll be less hyper.

Practice pet-safety rules. No matter how well these strategies might work or how famously your little one and family pet seem to be getting on, never leave your baby (and, later, your toddler) alone in a room with your dog (or any animal). And if your dog continues to act out, sign him up for an obedience class or get help from a trainer. The more you help your dog and baby interact, the safer and calmer your home will be.

Here’s to a paw-sitively happy hound and baby!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, The Benefits of Pets for Kids , August 2019. American Humane Society, Pet Meets Baby . The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, Dogs and Babies . Certification Council for Professional Dog Trainers, How to Choose a Professional Dog Trainer or Behavior Consultant .

Updates history

December 18, 2025

Editor: Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to headline and minor sourcing/copy updates.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

How to Tell If You Need to Rehome Your Pet When You Have a Baby Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Soothe a Crying Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do if a Dog Bites Your Child Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Breastfeeding a Baby With a Toddler in the House Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

10 Dog-Themed Ideas for a Pawfect Puppy Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The Parent-Baby Bond: What If It Doesn’t Happen Right Away? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

12 Dog Pregnancy Announcements for Human Parents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

How to Avoid Getting Completely Burned Out When You Have a Toddler and a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

11 Reasons Your Baby Won't Sleep and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Promote a Baby’s Social and Emotional Development Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Help Your Child Prepare for Your New Baby By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

Dogs, Cats and Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window