How to Breastfeed Using the Football Hold (Especially if You’re Struggling)

breastfeeding position football hold, mom feeding baby using the football hold

Learn more about how to breastfeed your baby using the football hold position and why you might want to try it.

If you're having a tough time finding the right breastfeeding position, especially in the early days or after a C-section , the football hold might be your winning move.

"It can be a great option, and it's one I recommend often, especially in those early days when getting a perfect latch can make a big difference," says What to Expect Medical Review Board member Suzanne Chan , D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T., a pediatric nurse practitioner and certified lactation counselor at the Infant Cardiac NICU at NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital in New York City.

Don't worry — no tackling or helmets required (phew). Just grab a comfy seat and a pillow or nursing cushion. Here's the play-by-play.

Key Takeaways

The football hold tucks your baby at your side. Unlike some other positions, your baby isn't draped across your stomach.

It can be more comfortable post C-section. Keeping your baby at your side takes the pressure off of your incision area.

It can make latching easier. The position gives you a clear view of your baby's latch, so you can check that it's right.

What is the "football hold" in breastfeeding?

The football hold is a breastfeeding position where your baby is tucked at your side, facing you, similar to how a football player cradles a football, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBreastfeeding Your Baby: Breastfeeding PositionsSee All Sources [1] It's sometimes called the clutch hold.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBreastfeeding Your Baby: Breastfeeding PositionsSee All Sources

What sets the football hold apart from many other common positions? Unlike ones like the cradle and cross cradle, your baby isn't putting pressure on your abdomen. That can make it more comfortable for moms who have recently had a C-section, since it keeps your baby off your incision area, says La Leche League International. Trusted SourceLa Leche LeagueThe First Week: Positioning and LatchSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceLa Leche LeagueThe First Week: Positioning and LatchSee All Sources

That said, anyone can use the football hold.

"It's all about what works for your body and your baby's latch," Chan says. It's also often a go-to for moms with bigger breasts, babies who don't have much head control, or twins (with one baby on each side).

How to breastfeed using the football hold position

If you'd like to give the football hold a try, here's how to do it:

Sitting in a comfortable spot, tuck your baby in closely at your side with your elbow bent. Your baby's back should rest along your forearm while your open palm supports her head.

Tuck a pillow or nursing cushion under your baby to raise her up , so her head is level with your breast and her nose is in line with your nipple.

Check your baby's legs and feet. Your little one’s hips should be flexed with her legs resting along your back and her feet pointing up towards the ceiling. (That'll help prevent your baby from pushing off the back of your chair.)

Guide your baby's mouth toward your breast, using your free hand to cup your breast for support. Check that your baby's chin isn't resting directly on her chest. She should be able to tilt her head back slightly to swallow effectively. If your little one's chin is resting on her chest, adjust your arm or the pillow so her chin is lifted off her chest.

Trying to find a breastfeeding position that actually works — especially after a C-section or during those tricky early days? The football hold might be your game-changer. Learn how to try it out, track your baby's feedings, and get expert-backed tips and real-mom support in the What to Expect app .

Why moms love the football hold breastfeeding position

If you're thinking about trying a different position, here are some of the reasons why moms tend to gravitate toward the football hold.

It's gentler for C-sections. The football hold keeps your baby at your side, so she’s not pressing on your incision. "We have been doing football hold since Day 1, due to C-section, [and] it works perfectly. He gets a deep/good latch and it's very comfortable for both," says What to Expect Community mom aIVFmama.

It makes latching easier. The football hold gives you a clear view of your baby's nose and latch, so it's easier to see if she’s positioned right. "Cross cradle destroyed my nips lol; she gets a much better latch doing football hold," What to Expect Community mom Diamond-Lucy says.

It’s easier for moms with larger breasts . If you're bigger on top, it might be harder for your baby to latch in a position like the cradle hold or cross cradle hold. "It's the only BF position I am comfortable feeding my bub in due to my breast size. We struggled with other positions and found football was the one that worked," reports What to Expect Community mom best.12JaneCharlie.

Tips for success with breastfeeding your baby in the football hold position

Ready to give the football hold a try? Here are a few more things to keep in mind that'll help you make it work:

Reach for more pillows if you need them. Your baby should be high enough so that her nose is in line with your nipple, which makes latching easier. It also helps you avoid straining your wrist or tensing your shoulder while you support her. "Comfort and alignment are everything," Chan says.

Keep your baby close to your side. You know how football players tuck the ball right in at their side? That's how your baby should be, so she can easily reach your breast, says Chan.

Go easy on yourself. Just like with other breastfeeding positions, it might take a few tries to feel comfortable using the football hold. It'll feel more intuitive with practice.

Ask for help if you need it. Reach out to a lactation consultant if you have questions or need more support. They can help you troubleshoot.

The football hold position keeps your baby at your side, which can make nursing easier post- C-section or if you're struggling to get your baby to latch. So if you're looking for an alternative to the cradle or cross cradle hold, give it a try.