How to Manage Overeager In-Laws When Raising a Baby

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

In laws and grandmother holding baby

“My partner and I live with his parents and two sisters. It'll be great to have all the extra help with the baby, but on the other hand, I feel like I won’t be able to enjoy time alone with my son and learn things on my own. One sister-in-law, who can’t have kids, keeps saying that this is her baby and that she’s going to wake up with him at night and stay home with him while I go back to work. I try not to take her too seriously, but it's really bothering me. How do I tell my in-laws to back off without hurting their feelings?”

It’s great that you’ll have so much family support around you after the baby is born. (It’s how childrearing was done back in the good ole days!) And it really does take a village to raise a child. But what happens when the villagers want to take over the house?

Key Takeaways:

Boundaries are a good thing. Yup, it’s more than okay to be direct with your in-laws and let them know you need time alone to bond with your baby and gel as a family.

Aim for firm, but kind. Thank your family for their help and support as you explain that you’ll be taking the lead when it comes to primary care and decision-making.

But don’t go solo. In order to best care for your wee one, getting enough rest is key — and accepting some family help will allow you to recover and recharge.

Setting boundaries with your in-laws now, before your baby is born, is not a bad idea. You’ll definitely want and need some private time to test your wings as a new mother (after all, it's a learn-by-doing process) and bond with your newborn.

You’ll also want time alone with your partner and the chance to experience all the ups (baby’s first smile!) and downs (another midnight feeding!?) that come with being a brand-new family as a threesome (rather than a foursome or fivesome — or more!).

Download the What to Expect app for more tips, judgement-free advice, and community support — your village (the right-size one!) is waiting.

There are gentle ways to handle this, without (ideally) hurting your in-laws’ feelings. Start by expressing your gratitude while also laying down some ground rules. Take your sister-in-law aside, for example, and say: “I am so happy you are going to be such a big part of our child’s life. And having your support is so important. But I’m going to need to find my own way, and you can help me do that by giving me some space and time alone with the baby.”

Then explain how you’ll want to handle the midnight feedings and child-care decisions on your own. It will also be helpful to have your partner on board with your decisions, so have a frank talk with him or her, too, about your feelings and how to best manage the situation so you come across as a unified front.

What to Expect Community parents have posted plenty on this topic, with one asking whether she can refuse offers to hold her newborn.

“If you don’t feel comfortable, it’s okay to say no!" says What to Expect Community mom jjennniferr. "The in-laws may get bothered, but at the end of the day it’s your baby."

Be careful not to wander too far into the “I’ll do it all myself” direction, however. New moms need a lot of support and TLC, and you’ll find that some “me” time away from the baby can and will be a sanity saver.

As your body recovers from the brunt of labor, you’ll be amazed what wonders a nap and hot shower can do — and that’s when your in-laws’ help will become invaluable.

Here's to one big, happy family,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff.

Updates history

November 11, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

How do you split housework?

How old were you when your last baby was born?

Husband has 0 exp with babies

There are 10,524 active discussions happening now in our Relationships community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

7 Practical Ways First-Time Dads Can Support Their Partner and Baby Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Keep Your Relationship Strong During Pregnancy (and Beyond!) Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Support Your Partner During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler Fact Checked by Jill Malter

Labor Is Coming — But Who's Watching Big Sis? Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

When Grandparents Spoil Your Little One By Heidi Murkoff

How to Avoid Getting Completely Burned Out When You Have a Toddler and a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnant and Single? Here’s How to Get the Support You Need Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Help Your Child Prepare for Your New Baby By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

Motherhood Almost Broke My Marriage — Here's What Actually Helped Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Breastfeeding a Baby With a Toddler in the House Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Managing Mom Guilt Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

How Partners Can Help Support Breastfeeding Moms Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window