How to Prevent Painful Sex in the Postpartum Period — and What to Do if It Happens

painful sex postpartum, pink and green cactus on a blue background

Just like during pregnancy, you'll need to take a little extra care in bed after giving birth. Here's how to worry less about pain and focus more on pleasure.

You've reached the other side of pregnancy and are starting to feel like yourself again. But as your body continues to heal, there's still a potentially long way to go before you feel completely comfortable. This includes how you feel during and after sex in those postpartum months.

If you experience pain or discomfort during intercourse after childbirth, you're not alone — approximately a quarter of women report experiencing painful sex after giving birth , according to a recent survey conducted by Everyday Health Group, What to Expect's parent company.

While it might be common, uncomfortable sex doesn't necessarily mean something is wrong, and it doesn't have to be like this forever. Here's why you might experience painful sex in the postpartum period and what you can do to make it feel much better.

What causes pain during sex after birth?

Uncomfortable sex is pretty common after birth for a number of reasons: Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSex After Pregnancy: Set Your Own TimelineSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSex After Pregnancy: Set Your Own TimelineSee All Sources

Labor and delivery

Vaginal or perineal tears, episiotomies, cesarean section incisions and placenta wounds (the spot where the placenta detached from the uterus) all need time to recover. In general, you'll want to wait at least six weeks before having intercourse to avoid painful sex postpartum. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicDyspareunia (Painful Intercourse)See All Sources [2] Your OB/GYN can give you an update on how you're healing at your postpartum checkup.

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicDyspareunia (Painful Intercourse)See All Sources

Pelvic floor recovery

Sex may also feel different after your baby arrives since pregnancy and birth can stretch and possibly injure your pelvic floor muscles . Pelvic floor exercises and therapy can help repair these important tissues.

Breastfeeding

Breastfeeding can impact the way sex feels, too. "Breastfeeding is a low-estrogen state, so for those who exclusively breastfeed, symptoms like vaginal dryness may be more severe or last longer," explains Katie Propst, M.D. , a urogynecologist and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . The good news: These symptoms will typically improve with time and can easily be treated.

How to make sex less painful after birth

As with painful sex during pregnancy, there are some smart ways to ease any soreness or dryness you feel during the act after birth. Here's how to manage the discomfort:

Take your time. Your body has been through a lot, so definitely stick with your doctor's advice and ease back into sex after the six-week mark (or later, if you'd like).

Use lube. Estrogen levels will drop after childbirth and while breastfeeding, so don't put away the lubricants or moisturizer you may have used during pregnancy. Both can ease the vaginal dryness and irritation that can make sex painful after birth.

Consider hormonal treatment. If vaginal dryness and discomfort persist after trying lube, talk to your doctor about using vaginal estrogen cream. This may especially help if you're breastfeeding.

Prepare ahead. Set up your body for success by using the bathroom to empty your bladder ahead of time. You can also take an over-the-counter pain reliever to ease discomfort.

Strengthen your pelvic floor. Speak with your doctor about doing pelvic floor exercises like Kegels , which can strengthen this region and make sex more pleasurable. "Kegels really can make a difference, and you can do them right away after delivery," Dr. Propst says.

As with many physical changes during and after pregnancy, the discomfort you feel is often temporary. Ask your doctor any questions you have about painful sex after your baby arrives so you can find a fix and enjoy intimacy again.