Hydrotherapy During Pregnancy and Labor: How Warm Water Can Help Ease the Aches

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnancy and hydrotherapy

Hydrotherapy — or any massage treatment that uses water — may alleviate some pregnancy pains. Learn about how it can help, including during labor.

There's nothing more relaxing than a warm bath, especially if you're experiencing the sometimes aggravating aches of pregnancy or the often strong pains of labor.

A rush of warm water can do wonders when it comes to soothing those uncomfortable aches and pains that come with the territory of pregnancy and labor. Thinking about taking a dip? Here's what the experts say about hydrotherapy for you and your baby.

Key Takeaways

Water = less pain. If you're looking for less tension and more comfort early in labor, hydrotherapy is a soothing, drug-free option.

Mind the temp. If the H2O is warm, around 100 degrees Fahrenheit, laboring in water is safe for most moms-to-be. Hot tubs and very hot baths may raise your body temp too high.

Give birth on dry land. Laboring in water isn't a water birth — and experts urge women to avoid this and deliver out of the tub instead.

What is hydrotherapy?

Hydrotherapy is a form of warm-water submersion that alleviates the discomfort that can go along with pregnancy as well as the contractions of labor. Like hypnobirthing and prenatal massage , it's a drug-free approach that promotes relaxation and stress relief.

"I’m so excited that my hospital where I’m delivering offers hydrotherapy for early labor!" says What to Expect Community mom Panflu.

Some research has shown that using hydrotherapy during the first stage of labor can decrease the use of anesthesia as well as the duration of that phase with no adverse effect on birth outcomes.

Hydrotherapy is different from a water birth because delivery doesn't take place in the water. Like the name implies, a water birth is when a baby is actually born in water.

While laboring in water can be safe, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) strongly advises moms to give birth outside the tub because of the serious complications that can occur when a baby is born underwater.

The concern is that a newborn will take a breath while underwater, which could lead to drowning or meconium aspiration (when the baby breathes in a mixture of amniotic fluid and meconium, which is a newborn's first bowel movement.)

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also warns against water births because of the risk of contracting infections such as Legionnaires' disease, a very serious form of bacterial pneumonia. Still, some moms choose to go ahead with water birth despite the warnings.

Want to add hydrotherapy to your birth plan? Download the What to Expect app for tips and support from a like-minded Community of moms who've tried it.

What happens during hydrotherapy?

There are different ways to use hydrotherapy, but the three general types used during pregnancy and labor are:

A warm bath or shower. Soaking in a warm bath or shower can help soothe tired muscles, especially as they expand and contract during labor.

Water spray during labor. A water spray on your face can help keep you cooler and calmer when you're in the thick of contractions. A cold compress can steady your breath and give you an energy boost while a warm compress can relieve muscular tension between contractions, especially when placed on your lower back or pelvis.

Full-body immersion. Some women are so drawn to hydrotherapy that they labor in a warm tub. It's thought that floating eases pressure on the spine and helps the pelvis open up when you need it the most, softening contractions and soothing the pains of labor.

Can you do hydrotherapy while pregnant?

Hydrotherapy is usually okay when you're pregnant, but you'll need to avoid hot tubs and super-hot bath water.

Most experts advise keeping the water temperature around 100 degrees Fahrenheit to avoid raising your body temperature to unsafe levels. Your internal temperature should stay below 102.2 degrees F.

We all have different reactions to heat, so if you feel your body overheating, get out of the water immediately. Also, avoid aiming the jets of a Jacuzzi directly toward your vagina because you don't want to force water in that direction.

Another key to safe hydrotherapy during pregnancy (and labor for that matter) is cleanliness, experts say. If you're lounging in your tub, make sure it's been cleaned recently. If you're taking a dip at the hospital or birthing center, the same should be true. Some places will even use a disposable plastic cover for each patient.

Hydrotherapy is off-limits if you're experiencing active bleeding or have any ruptured membranes, but it's usually fine for most pregnant women.

If laboring in water appeals to you, talk to your practitioner to make sure there are no medical objections. It's not a good idea if you have a high-risk pregnancy because fetal monitoring is nearly impossible in water. But as long as you're healthy and have no complications (like gestational diabetes, hypertension, or preeclampsia), you may get the okay.

If you do get the green light, do some research on where and how you can labor in water. You may find that water can help wash some of your pregnancy and labor pains away.