Hypotonia (Floppy Baby Syndrome) in Babies and Toddlers

hypotonia in babies

Sometimes called “floppy baby syndrome,” hypotonia refers to low muscle tone in babies and toddlers that’s usually the result of an underlying condition.

It can feel scary and overwhelming if your doctor tells you that your baby has hypotonia. But hypotonia is simply a medical term for low muscle tone.

Though there isn’t good data on how many babies have low muscle tone, hypotonia is one of the most common conditions that impacts a baby’s motor development.

It’s usually due to an underlying genetic or metabolic condition, or the result of a problem with your infant’s brain or spinal cord. With proper care and treatment, hypotonia symptoms can often improve with time.

Here’s what you need to know if your doctor says your little one has this condition.

What is hypotonia?

Hypotonia, or low muscle tone, is not the same thing as muscle weakness, although both can occur at the same time. The body’s muscle tone is controlled by signals that travel from the brain to the nerves, and this causes muscles to have a small amount of contraction, even when they’re relaxed. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineHypotoniaSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineHypotoniaSee All Sources

That may be confusing to imagine, so here’s an example: If someone took your arm and quickly straightened out your elbow, your biceps muscle would automatically contract in response to prevent injury. But if a person has low muscle tone, their biceps wouldn’t offer much resistance.

Muscle tone is what allows babies and toddlers to sit upright, as well as move their arms and legs. If a child has poor muscle tone, her arms and legs may droop like a rag doll’s, and she will likely have trouble meeting basic motor milestones. For that reason, the condition is also sometimes referred to as “floppy baby syndrome.” Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicHypotonia in BabiesSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicHypotonia in BabiesSee All Sources

When does low muscle tone typically appear in children?

Hypotonia is usually diagnosed by medical providers within a baby’s first six months, though signs of low muscle tone can appear as early as birth. However, if your child’s hypotonia is very mild, it might not be picked up until late infancy or even toddlerhood.

Signs of hypotonia in babies and toddlers

Hypotonia is sometimes referred to as “floppy baby syndrome” because infants with this condition often have a “rag doll” appearance: Their arms and legs hang by their sides, and they have poor head control.

Other signs of hypotonia in babies and toddlers can include:

Trouble feeding (little ones with this condition may find it hard to suck or swallow)

Trouble lifting her head or controlling her neck muscles

Feeling limp when you hold her

An inability to bear weight on her legs .

Arms and legs hang straight at baby’s side, like a rag doll

A weak cry

Muscle weakness

As your child grows older, you may notice developmental delays in her motor skills. It may take your little one longer to:

What causes low muscle tone in babies and toddlers?

More than half of all cases of low muscle tone in babies and toddlers are due to genetic conditions or metabolic diseases.

The main form of hypotonia is called central hypotonia, which stems from problems with your baby’s central nervous system (i.e., the brain and spinal cord).

Some of the most common causes of central hypotonia include: Trusted SourceChild Neurology FoundationHypotoniaSee All Sources [3]

Hypotonia

Cerebral palsy (CP) , is a group of disorders caused by damage to the brain, most often before birth or during the birthing process. Cerebral palsy affects the brain’s ability to control movement and maintain muscle tone. Trusted SourceChild Neurology FoundationCerebral PalsySee All Sources [4]

Chromosomal disorders such as Down syndrome , Prader-Willi syndrome, or Lowe syndrome.

Brain injuries during birth or infancy. Sometimes, blood vessels in a fetus or newborn can become blocked, causing a stroke.

Spinal cord disorders that crop up during birth.

The second, less common form of hypotonia is peripheral hypotonia. This type of low muscle tone affects your baby’s peripheral nervous system, which consists of the nerves that travel to the muscles.

Your doctor might suspect peripheral hypotonia if your baby has very slow reflexes or experiences muscle twitches.

Common causes of peripheral hypotonia can include:

Muscular diseases, such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a genetic disorder that causes muscles to weaken and become damaged.

Metabolic disorders . These are very rare conditions that affect the way your baby’s body converts nutrients into energy and can affect your infant’s health and development.

Neuromuscular junction disorders, such as congenital myasthenia and infantile botulism. These cause problems at the point where nerves connect with muscles, which can impact your baby’s muscle tone.

Disorders of the spinal cord and skeleton have also been linked to peripheral hypotonia.

How to treat hypotonia

Once your baby is diagnosed with hypotonia, your doctor will work on finding the underlying condition that’s causing your little one’s low muscle tone in order to treat it properly. Your practitioner will also usually recommend the following:

Physical therapy to improve your baby’s motor control and overall body strength. This may include exercises such as encouraging your little one to crawl across different surfaces and pull up to a standing position from sitting on your legs.

Occupational therapy to help teach your child ways to address daily living activities, such as drinking independently from a cup , feeding herself, and learning to dress herself .

Speech-language therapy to help with breathing, speech, and swallowing difficulties. Sometimes, if your child has a lot of trouble feeding, your doctor may recommend a feeding tube.

Sensory stimulation therapy to improve sensory function.

How is low muscle tone diagnosed in babies and toddlers?

Hypotonia itself is usually diagnosed during a physical exam. Your child’s doctor will use instruments such as lights and reflex hammers to check the following:

Motor skills like grasping , rolling , and sitting up

Sensory skills such as vision, hearing, and touch. Your doctor may stroke your baby with a small brush to see if she withdraws from the sensation.

Balance and coordination

Your child’s mental status, such as how aware she seems and if she can interact with the environment around her

Reflexes

Eye movements

If your baby or toddler is diagnosed with hypotonia, your doctor may run some or all of the following tests to help determine if an underlying disorder is causing the condition:

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) , an imaging test to help rule out any spinal cord or nerve abnormalities.

CT scan , another imaging procedure that uses a combination of X-rays and computer technology to look for physical problems in the brain.

Blood tests to help your doctor rule out metabolic disorders and chromosomal abnormalities such as Down syndrome.

EMG (electromyogram) to evaluate nerve and muscle function.

EEG (electroencephalogram) to measure your child’s brain waves, or the electrical activity in her brain.

Spinal tap , a procedure that measures the amount of pressure in your child’s spinal canal and removes a small amount of cerebrospinal fluid, the liquid that bathes your child’s brain and spinal cord.

Muscle biopsy , which involves removing a small amount of your child’s muscle tissue to be examined under a microscope.

Can you prevent having a child with hypotonia?

You can’t prevent having a child with hypotonia, as it’s usually the result of a genetic or metabolic condition, or due to a brain injury at birth.

If you’re concerned about having a baby with a genetic condition, talk to your doctor about genetic testing .

There’s no cure for hypotonia, which is often a lifelong condition. But with physical, occupational, and speech therapy, as well as treatment for any underlying disorder, there’s a very good chance that your baby or toddler’s muscle tone will improve over time.