I Chose to Have One Child For My Mental Health

Sara and Max Wiles

For Sara Wiles and her husband, a family of three (plus fur pups, of course) is what’s best — regardless of what anyone else has to say.

There wasn't a specific time when my husband and I decided we were happy with one child and done having kids, but I think it was when my son Max was about 3 years old.

I had a really hard birth (I was in labor for 50 hours, had a forceps delivery and terrible postpartum depression ) and that whole experience left a deep scar on me. A few years into parenthood, we definitely got to a point where we said we were done expanding our family, and truthfully, it has been such an amazing decision for us. I absolutely love being a mother and I love my son more than anything in the world – and I made the decision to have just one because of that.

If I were to have another child, I don't know where I would turn for more support. Sara Wiles

For me, one child is best for my mental health

I was diagnosed with postpartum depression 16 months after Max was born. He didn't sleep through the night for 18 months so I didn't either, and I felt like every part of my identity changed when I became a mother. It was of course beautiful, but also traumatic, horrifying and terrifying, too. The idea of going back to those early days of motherhood and the toll it would take on my mental health in terms of depression is just not something I want to do again. It took me a long time to claw myself out of the mental health hole I was in postpartum — and I'm just not sure I would make it out again.

Now, I have the capacity to take care of myself, too. When I prioritize self-care , I can show up for Max and my husband, Ben. I am able to afford an out-of-network, cash-only, therapist for my mental health and I have the ability to exercise consistently, which also helps my anxiety-prone brain. I practice yoga, and meditation and even go on retreats that allow me to take a beat and reset.

I cannot imagine how I would be able to continue any of this if I had another child. It’s never easy to access mental health care, but it is especially complicated in those first few months postpartum when you feel like you are in a fog and completely alone. We are one of the only first-world countries that doesn't have universal maternal mental healthcare or paid parental leave . Systems are just not set up to support mothers, especially working mothers. If I were to have another child, I don’t know where I would turn for more support. Not to mention, it wouldn't be good for my mental health and if it's not good for my mental health, it would not be good for Max.

Sara and Max Wiles

Creating a loving, safe childhood for my son is my top priority

Becoming a mother really stirred up a lot of the trauma I endured in my own childhood. My mother had borderline personality disorder and had substance abuse issues. I carry a lot of trauma even as an adult because of the emotional and mental abuse I experienced on a daily basis as a child. I know firsthand just how important the early years are and how much we as parents play such a pivotal, foundational role in molding our kids into happy, healthy humans. My job as a mother is to keep Max safe and give him everything that I didn't have from my own mother as a child.

Max is now 9 years old and our finances go much further in supporting our family's essentials and extracurriculars since we only have one kid. We are able to fund Max's college savings and enroll him in a private school that can best support his ADHD diagnosis. We also take family trips a few times a year (including a last-minute flight to NYC to see our Florida Panthers in the Stanley Cup playoffs earlier this year) and even squeeze in some solo vacations, just me and Ben, because it's easier to set up childcare for just one child.

There are little things too that we are more confidently able to do, like attend multiple kids' birthdays (and buy multiple gifts ), allow Max to play sports and generally participate in more things as a family because there is one kid to handle and not more.

I'm really happy I get to show Max a world that I never saw when I was his age.

Sara, Ben and Max Wiles

I whole-heartedly believe that we have done the right thing

Truthfully, I think society can pressure families into having more children. We're told our kids will be lonely without siblings , or that the house will be quiet when our child is off to college. But there are so many reasons why families choose to have one child. I also know of course that many women don't have an option because of the current state of reproductive freedom and healthcare, and that's a huge factor.

But anytime I post something about our decision on my social media accounts, women with one child always come out of the woodwork and say thank you. I encourage parents in the same boat as us to find other people in your circle who have one child — all it takes is one person to validate your fears and desires.

I truly have the inner knowing that I did the right thing. I love my career, I love my business, I love my personal life and I love my identity outside of motherhood. I know that, for us, it is so much easier to do these things with one child and I'm a better mother to Max because of it.

Your Next Read

Why I Stayed on My Antidepressants While Pregnant, Despite the Risks Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

I Didn’t Vaccinate Any of My 6 Children — Then I Changed My Mind Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

I Was Worried About Having Another Kid — But I Didn't Need to Be By Nicole Fabian-Weber, Contributing Writer

Moms Reveal Exactly How They Decided Whether to Have Another Baby — or Not Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

My Husband and I Have 2 Kids and Live on 1 Income — Here's How We Make It Work Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How Could You Possibly Decide if You Should Have Another Baby Right Now? Fact Checked by Lauren LaCross, Senior Research Analyst

From One Child to Two: 23 Secrets of Second-Time Parents Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

The 10 Questions Experts Say Matter Most Before Deciding to Have Another Baby Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

The One Rule That Saved My Sanity During the Holidays With Kids: No Extended Family By Monica Bailey, Mom

Stroller Walks Saved Me Postpartum. Now I’m Helping Other Moms Find Their Stride Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

You Don't Have to Move to a Bigger Home When You Have a Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Motherhood Almost Broke My Marriage — Here's What Actually Helped Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

I Began Anxiety Medication the Day My Son Was Born By Irina Gonzalez

On the Outside, I Looked Like a Happy New Mom. But I Was Breaking on the Inside — And My Camera Caught the Truth By Mariah Maddox

Trying to Get Pregnant Made Me Anxious — These 3 Steps Helped Me Feel in Control Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window