I Donated a Record-Breaking 700 Gallons of Breastmilk — and Helped Thousands of Babies in the Process

alyse ogletree milk donor

After four births, Alyse Ogletree shared enough breastmilk to earn a spot in the Guinness Book of World Records — twice.

For What to Expect's "Mom Heroes" series, parents who have gone to great lengths to help others share their inspirational stories.

By Alyse Ogletree, as told to Sarah Bruning

One of the toughest periods of my life also led to an unexpected gift. In November 2010, my oldest son, Kyle, was just 8.5 months old when he suffered a stroke.

The two months he was hospitalized were incredibly stressful because it felt like so much was out of our control. At home, Kyle had been drinking pumped breastmilk because he couldn't latch to nurse. In the hospital, his medical team recommended switching to formula so they could directly monitor exactly how many calories he was getting. This change to his feeding plan made me feel like I couldn’t do anything to help him.

Then his doctors pointed out that there was something I could do — continue to pump and freeze my breastmilk. That way, we could switch back to pumped milk if his care team made that recommendation.

Key takeaways

Alyse Ogletree donated close to 90,000 ounces, or 700 gallons, of breastmilk to the Milk Bank of North Texas, breaking a Guiness World Record in the process.

For those who can and want to donate milk, the Human Milk Banking Association of North America is a good place to start.

If you can't donate milk, try volunteering at a bank or giving a monetary donation to provide valuable nutrition for babies in need.

I stuck to the pumping schedule I'd been on since Kyle was a week old, which was every three hours religiously. I didn't know anything about standard pumping practices, so I'd let sessions go on for an hour at a time since that’s how long I had spent trying to get Kyle to breastfeed. This kept my supply way up, and I would get between 20 to 25 ounces per session. When Kyle was around 3 or 4 months old, I learned from a fellow mom I should pump for only 20 to 30 minutes at a time. But even after my supply adjusted, I was still making more breastmilk than we’d reasonably need.

alyse ogletree pumping

It turns out that I was an overproducer by nature. Before Kyle's doctors told me I could freeze my milk, I would just throw the excess away. In total, I was probably tossing something like 100 to 200 ounces a day — all because I hadn't known there were other options for preserving this milk. Once I began pumping at the hospital, I filled up the nurses' freezer. One of them eventually noticed and suggested something I'd never considered: donating whatever amount I didn't need.

I had no idea donating breastmilk was an option

Once the nurse started explaining the concept of donating breastmilk and how it could help vulnerable babies like preemies and fosters, I immediately knew I wanted to get involved. He suggested reaching out to the Mother's Milk Bank of North Texas , a nonprofit located about 45 minutes from my home near Dallas–Fort Worth.

When I connected with them over the phone, they guided me through the process of becoming a registered donor. First, I had a 15-minute screening interview. They asked about my general health, including any medications or supplements since those can transfer into breastmilk. Then came a non-fasting blood test, which they cover the cost of and do at your home or a lab. This screens the blood for diseases like HIV, syphilis, and hepatitis B and C. Once I got approved, I had the option to drop off my frozen milk at a donation hub — usually in local clinics and hospitals — or schedule a pick-up, which is what I typically did. They made everything incredibly easy.

After throwing so much milk away for so long, it felt like an amazing gift to do this.

Looking back, the milk bank staff was just so encouraging the entire time. My mom and I toured their facility, where they showed us the process. I was surprised to hear the milk bank tests every donation for calories and protein. When Kyle was hospitalized, we didn’t question when his doctors told us that formula was the best option to ensure he got the calories he needed. If I'd understood more about breast milk testing and donations at the time, I might have advocated to check my milk or use donor milk. But you don’t know what you don’t know.

Pumping was a ton of effort, but I figured out what worked for me — and I had support

With Kyle, I donated a total of 1,881 ounces of milk over the course of six months. After throwing so much milk away for so long and realizing how uncommon this kind of overproduction was, it felt like an amazing gift to be able to do this. The milk bank told me that every ounce can feed three babies in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) . It was exciting to fill up the bottles mid-way through a pumping session and switch them out.

alyse ogletree milk donations

Still, I don't want to minimize the commitment. If I pumped at 7 p.m., I'd fall asleep by 8 p.m. so I could wake up throughout the night to pump. I was only 10 days into a new job when Kyle had his stroke. But my boss and HR department were supportive. While Kyle was hospitalized, they gave me the flexibility to adjust my hours to avoid commuting at the busiest times and, at times, work remotely. It really helped me support Kyle, but it also made it easier to stick to my pumping schedule.

It reminded me how powerful small acts of kindness can be.

Another mom also shared with me some then-new legislation that mandated big businesses create a dedicated pumping space that wasn't a restroom. Over time, I partnered with a team of other moms who worked with HR to expand the room and equip it with everything pumping moms might need. But I also pumped on airplanes, in a four-wheeler and in hotels during work trips abroad.

My husband was my biggest supporter. He's the night owl to my morning person, so if my alarm went off, he'd push me to go pump because he knew it was important to me.

Every ounce can make a difference

The experience of donating breastmilk left such an impression on me that I knew I wanted to donate again when I had my other children — Kage, 12, and Kory, 7. I also donated milk one final time after I served as a surrogate .

The biggest question was if my body would produce similar amounts of breastmilk and I was lucky that it did. Now that I knew how the process worked, I started pumping and donating what we didn't need from the get-go.

alyse ogletree and family

With Kage, I ended up donating 51,201 ounces over the course of about 17 months. With Kory, it was 32,438 ounces over 21 months. And with the surrogacy, it was 3,938 ounces over about two years. All together, that was close to 90,000 ounces, or 700 gallons, of milk just to the Milk Bank of North Texas. I also donated some to a group called Tiny Treasures, as well as directly to a few friends in need.

I want more women to know about donating milk, but I also want uncles to know. I want brothers to know. I want dads to know.

In 2014, I was included in the Guinness Book of World Records for the first time for Most Breastmilk Donated. (Someone else took the title for a while, but I reclaimed it in 2023 — this time, under the title of Most Breastmilk Donated by an Individual .) The records are exciting, but the biggest reward of donating has been the sense of connection. I loved being able to help other families going through their own struggles, and it reminded me how powerful small acts of kindness can be. Every body is different, and I was in a unique situation with how much I was overproducing. Once I knew what a difference the extra milk could make to babies and families who needed it, it felt like such a blessing.

Some people might not be comfortable using donor milk, and that’s okay. You have to do what you feel is best for you and your baby. Or some people might feel guilty and wonder if there’s a family that needs it more. But most milk banks are pretty forthcoming, and I feel like they prioritize their milk towards the hospitals and the preemies. In the years that I've donated, I've never heard of the milk bank I was donating to running out. So it’s there for those who want it.

Everyone can get involved, and it's so worthwhile

There are more ways to help families and babies than just donating breastmilk. For those who can and want to donate milk, the Human Milk Banking Association of North America is a good place to start, but your OB/GYN or pediatrician might also have a recommendation. Every bank's process and requirements are a little different, but they'll talk you through what you need to know. Some banks might have a minimum number of ounces, but every bit makes a difference. You're a rockstar no matter what.

alyse ogletree donated milk in bags

I also don't want anyone who can't donate breastmilk to feel bad or that they're lacking in some way. There is absolutely no shame. Many banks offer volunteer opportunities, and they can always use monetary donations if that's something you're able to swing.

Non-birthing people can get involved, too. I want more women to know about donating milk, but I also want uncles to know. I want brothers to know. I want dads to know. They can cheer the pumping parent on and help get bottles or tend to other tasks. Or they can just spread the word. The more people who know this is an option, the better.

WhatToExpect.com, Donating and Receiving Milk from a Breast Milk Bank , July 2021. Mother's Milk Bank of North Texas, Donate Milk . Guinness World Records, Largest Donation of Breastmilk by an Individual , July 2023.

What Our Community Is Talking About

How to get fattier milk?

Night lights?

Best pacifiers for breastfed baby?

There are 34,068 active discussions happening now in our Breastfeeding community group.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Pumping Breast Milk Guide and Tips for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Breastfeeding Trick That Saved My Sanity With a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

11 Times Celebrities Got Real About Their Breastfeeding Struggles By Kaitlin Stanford, Contributing Writer

Moms Who Exclusively Pump Reveal How They Make It Work Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Exclusive Pumping Guide Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

I Breastfed 4 Kids (But the Truth Is, I Hated It) By Charlotte Hilton Andersen, Contributing Writer

Tips for Breastfeeding a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Freeze-Dried Breast Milk Is Gaining Traction — But Is It Safe? Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Your Ultimate Guide to Traveling While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

How to Properly Store Breast Milk Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Stop Pumping Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

What Is Relactation? How to Start Breastfeeding Again or Induce Lactation Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Benefits of Breastfeeding for Mom and Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

15 Moms Share What Breastfeeding Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Pumping Breast Milk for Twins Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window