I Lost My Mucus Plug — Is Labor About to Start?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

pregnant woman cradling belly

Labor may be imminent when you lose your mucus plug, but it may also still be weeks away — unless it's accompanied by bloody show, in which case, get ready!

If you lost your mucus plug, you're right to think your body's getting ready for labor. But labor may or may not be imminent. Losing your mucus plug when you're pregnant doesn’t happen in the same way for all women — and it's different from bloody show. If your mucus is tinged with blood, labor likely isn't far off.

Here’s what you need to know about these common signs that labor is on the way.

Key Takeaways

Losing your mucus plug is a sign your body is preparing for labor. However, it doesn’t necessarily mean labor has started or will happen right away — for some women, it can still be days or even weeks away.

The mucus plug and bloody show aren't the same thing. A mucus plug is typically thick, sticky, and jelly-like, while bloody show contains more blood and is often a stronger indication that labor is approaching.

Certain symptoms should prompt a call to your healthcare provider. Bleeding, bright red blood, leaking fluid, or losing a large mucus plug before 37 weeks could be signs of preterm labor or another issue that needs medical attention.

What is a mucus plug?

The mucus plug is a barrier that seals your cervix — the opening to your uterus — during pregnancy. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicMucus PlugSee All Sources [1]

Mucus Plug

“The cervix is lined by mucus-producing glands and normally produces a lot of clear mucus during the ovulatory phase, to help convey sperm to the awaiting egg,” explains Christina Adberg, M.D., an OB/GYN at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. “During pregnancy, the ovulatory function is on hold, and progesterone levels are high, so the mucus thickens and forms a barrier between the vagina and the amniotic sac.”

The mucus plug helps protect your baby from the outside world until you’re ready to deliver. “It serves as a barrier, so that the bacteria that naturally live in the vagina don’t cause infections in the uterus during pregnancy,” adds Rebecca Amaru, M.D. , a board-certified OB/GYN in private practice in New York City and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

mucus plug medical illustration

What does it mean to lose your mucus plug?

Losing your mucus plug means it's becoming dislodged, which is one sign your cervix is softening and opening up to prepare your body for childbirth. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, What Does It Mean to Lose Your Mucus Plug?See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, What Does It Mean to Lose Your Mucus Plug?See All Sources

“Once the cervix dilates, or opens, the mucus can loosen from the cervical canal and be released,” Dr. Adberg says.

You should never try to pull out your mucus plug, since doing so could increase your risk of infection. Instead, let nature take its course.

What does a mucus plug look like?

The mucus plug is just what it sounds like: a sticky, gelatinous glob of mucus. It can be clear, pink, or slightly bloody, according to the American College of Obstetricians (ACOG). It may also be yellow or brown. It should not be bright or dark red, however, so if you think it is, give your healthcare practitioner a call.

Your mucus plug always discharges before delivery. However, while some women notice the plug passing, others miss it entirely. “There is a big variation between women in the quantity and quality of the mucus,” Dr Adberg says. “For some women, it is huge, like a jellyfish, and for others, it is unnoticeable amongst the other naturally occurring discharge.”

Know that whatever happens, passing your mucus plug doesn't predict anything about how your labor or delivery experience will unfold.

Does losing my mucus plug mean I'm in labor?

No, losing your mucus plug is not a sign that you’re actively in labor . Some women lose their mucus plug weeks before labor begins, and others lose it right as labor starts.

"I lost some of my mucus plug at 32 weeks and more at 35 weeks and even a little yesterday after sex at 37 weeks," says Community member spookeybaby. "Still no baby!"

"Last pregnancy I lost my mucus plug and within 30 minutes my water broke," says Community mom jellybeansmommmy. "I had my baby within 8 hours."

“There is nothing written in stone about the timing of the mucus plug passing and how soon spontaneous labor will ensue,” Dr. Adberg says.

There's no need for concern if your mucus plug dislodges long before your due date — your baby is still safe even after you’re "unplugged."

In fact, your body continues to make cervical mucus to help prevent infection, which means your baby is still snugly sealed off. So you can still have sex , take a bath , and otherwise go about your normal activities.

That said, anything you’re concerned about warrants a call to your practitioner. “While passage of some mucus in the preterm period, especially in scant quantities, is not unusual, the passage of a large mucus plug is quite unusual and should warrant a call to your doctor,” says Dr. Amaru, who is affiliated with Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City. “Also, all preterm bleeding warrants evaluation. Both can be signs of preterm labor .”

Your mucus plug will usually come out before your water breaks , though you can leak amniotic fluid through a tear — which doesn't necessarily mean you've lost your mucus plug yet, since the plug prevents bacteria from traveling up to baby, not water from leaking out.

Because the mucus plug can come out in bits and pieces over time and many women don't even notice when they lose it, it's more important to contact your practitioner as soon as possible when your water breaks or you leak fluid.

"I started losing my mucus plug at 34 weeks with my first and I panicked because I thought that meant baby was on his way, but he didn't come out until 39 weeks," says Community mom stickybean86.

What is bloody show?

Bloody show isn’t a technical term, but it’s a sign that blood vessels in the cervix are rupturing as it begins to efface and dilate. “Bloody show is used to describe streaks of blood, which are often darker and not particularly heavy, that sometimes accompany the passage of the mucus plug before or during labor,” Dr. Amaru says.

Bloody show is a normal sign of pre-labor and sometimes occurs along with the loss of the mucus plug. “It can happen with or without the mucus plug passing, but they are often together, so the mucus can appear bloody,” Dr. Adberg says.

If, however, you notice any significant change in your vaginal discharge before 37 weeks, if it suddenly becomes bright red blood (instead of blood-streaked discharge), or if you notice heavier bleeding, call your practitioner right away to rule out conditions requiring immediate medical attention.

Passing bloody show is different from passing the mucus plug. While both involve mucus, bloody show is a blood-tinged discharge that means it's almost showtime. The mucus plug is more of a jelly-like glob that sometimes means you'll have your first contraction fairly soon, but labor isn't necessarily right around the corner.

How long after bloody show will I go into labor?

If you've had bloody show, you can usually expect to go into labor within the next day or two — unless you're a fast starter, in which case you could have your first contraction within the next several hours. So get ready, but don't head out the door just yet.

"From the time I have had my bloody show with five labors I have had my baby in my arms within 24 hours," says Community mom ElisabethHouston.

What should I do if I think I might be in labor?

If you’re having bloody show and/or labor contractions, pack your hospital bag (if you haven't already!) and contact your practitioner — labor is probably only a few days away at most.

Ready to meet your little one soon? The What to Expect app has hospital bag checklists, labor guides, and support for every contraction and celebration to come.

Otherwise, if you’ve just lost your mucus plug, sit tight. Baby's not here just yet but will be soon. If your practitioner tells you to come in, a quick vaginal exam will determine how dilated you are and how close you are to active labor.

Either way, it's not long now before you'll meet your precious new baby!