I Thought My Baby Had a Simple Daycare Cold — Turns Out, It Was More Serious Than I Could’ve Imagined

baby in hospital bed

RSV wasn't even on my radar until it landed my baby in the hospital.

The scariest moment I’ve experienced in my 3 years as a parent? Without a doubt, when my son had respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) at the age of 8 months.

In a matter of days, it went from what I thought was a standard daycare cold to my son struggling to breathe. My pediatrician’s on-call nurse could literally hear my son’s labored breathing over the phone — she cut me off and said I needed to take him to the ER or call 911 immediately.

When we got to the ER, my son’s condition was so serious that he was brought back to a triage room immediately. His oxygen saturation was in the 70s — and it was supposed to be at least 90 (ideally above 94).

I had actually never heard of RSV before my son caught it, even though nearly every child gets it before they turn 2 . It’s also the leading cause of infant hospitalization in the United States, with an estimated 58,000 to 80,000 children younger than 5 hospitalized each year due to RSV.

Just five days before our frantic ER trip, my son had started to cough

When he first got sick, I thought this was just going to be another daycare virus – snotty and miserable, but short-lived and harmless. But a couple of days into this particular illness, he was lethargic and not like himself at all, so we went to the pediatrician.

Our doctor immediately suspected RSV when he heard the cough. We opted for a nose swab to be sure, and 15 minutes later, it came back positive. We were told that RSV symptoms peak on days three through five , and that the virus itself can last for two to four weeks. But our pediatrician was reassuring: Our son had no major risk factors for severe symptoms — he was older than 6 months and otherwise healthy. The pediatrician told us we could care for him at home and to call or come back if we had any concerns at all.

For the next few days, my baby struggled to eat and sleep. It was the sickest he’d ever been, and throughout the entire illness, his breathing was slightly labored. I didn’t think it was an emergency yet, but I did bring him back to the pediatrician twice in three days.

The morning of the ER trip, five days after his symptoms began, he had begun grunting with every breath. Even though we’d seen the pediatrician just one day earlier and everything had been okay then, my gut told me that the grunting was a sign that he was getting worse. I called the doctor’s office to get advice from the nurse on call. I’m forever grateful to the woman who answered the phone for recognizing that it was an emergency.

“Just a cough” landed us a three-day hospital stay

At the ER, a security guard took one look at my baby and told me “go.” The waiting room was packed, but we only stayed there a couple of minutes. The triage nurse called the charge nurse to get us a room immediately. Everyone complains about waiting in the ER, but that day I learned that having to wait is a weird sort of blessing. It probably means that you aren’t the sickest person there.

When my son’s oxygen saturation read in the 70s, the room flooded with nurses and doctors. They hooked him up to high-flow oxygen through tubes to get his oxygenation up. We were told that he would be admitted, but we had to wait for a room on the pediatric floor because this RSV wave was overwhelming the hospital.

Being at the hospital for three days was overwhelming and exhausting. My husband and I listened to the alarm on my son’s oxygen monitor go off around the clock, and we tried to hold it together for him. Luckily, he started to turn a corner after a couple days. His oxygen level was staying where it needed to be. He began sitting up and playing, and he was finally hungry. We felt a sense of relief for the first time in more than a week.

After those three days in the hospital — eight days since my son had first gotten sick — we were discharged to go home. Once I finally put him to sleep in his own bed, I cried on and off for hours. All of the built-up stress of the prior week came crashing down. Then we all slept for 13 hours straight.

As a first-time mom, I hadn’t even considered what it would be like to have my child hospitalized. He was a healthy, full-term baby. I guess I thought he was invincible, that he would just fight off any illness he came down with.

My experience was a jarring reminder that even if only 2-3% of young children are hospitalized from RSV, anyone could be in that 2-3%. I would have done anything to prevent how much my baby suffered from this virus.

When I got pregnant with my second, my biggest fear was RSV

About six months after my son’s RSV experience, I found myself staring at another positive pregnancy test. I was so excited to be pregnant with my second, but also incredibly scared that this baby would catch RSV and that we would have to go through hospitalization again. My fear of RSV was far greater than any other anxiety about pregnancy, birth, or postpartum.

When I was still in my first trimester, I learned that two preventative treatments for RSV had recently been approved — and I literally cried, probably from a mix of relief and pregnancy hormones.

One of the treatments was nirsevimab (Beyfortus) , an antibody shot given to young babies entering their first RSV season to prevent severe infection. The other was Abrysvo , a vaccine given during pregnancy to prevent severe RSV in infants. It could be administered to women between weeks 32 and 36 of pregnancy during sick season (September to January).

Rewriting my family’s RSV story

At my 36-week appointment with my OB, I got the RSV vaccine (Abrsyvo) to protect my second baby. The only side effects I experienced were some flu-like symptoms for a few hours the following day. Deciding to get this vaccine was a no-brainer for me — it helped protect my daughter for the first few months of her life, which was especially important to me since she was born at the beginning of March, the tail end of RSV season.

The following year, when my daughter was 7 months old and entering her first full RSV season, she qualified for Beyfortus. [Editor’s note: If you got Abrysvo during pregnancy, your baby may not be eligible for Beyfortus. Your pediatrician will make recommendations based on your baby’s health and family history.] I called the pediatrician several times, asking if they had it available yet; I was so eager to get her protected. When she finally got the shot, she seemed to have no reaction at all, not even a fever or fussiness like she’d experienced with her other milestone vaccinations.

[Editor’s note: If you got Abrysvo during pregnancy, your baby may not be eligible for Beyfortus. Your pediatrician will make recommendations based on your baby’s health and family history.]

That season, I waited anxiously for my daughter to come down with RSV. Every time she brought home a daycare illness, I held my breath and monitored hers. She caught the flu and too many colds to count, but never RSV. Our daycare director told us that the virus went through all rooms at the center just after the holidays, so she was definitely exposed. Yet she either never had RSV or had symptoms so mild that I didn’t even need to take her to the pediatrician. I am still amazed that one of my children could be hospitalized with this illness, while the other avoided symptoms.

What I want parents to know about RSV vaccinations

I didn’t have strong opinions about vaccines prior to my son’s RSV experience. I have always followed the recommended schedule because I trust our pediatrician and the science behind vaccines, but they’re not something I gave too much thought to. But seeing how my children had two very different reactions to a virus because a vaccine was available let me witness firsthand how powerful vaccines can be.

It can feel scary to give a perfectly healthy child a vaccine — and it’s absolutely hard to watch them cry after the shots. I, too, wish I could avoid any potential post-vaccine fevers, fussiness, or other side effects. It’s perfectly reasonable to be concerned, and I have had my own hesitations as a parent.

But frankly, it is a luxury to be more concerned about the potential risks of these vaccines than about the risks of the illnesses that the vaccines are designed to prevent. Many dangerous childhood illnesses, like the measles and whooping cough, are currently preventable, thanks to vaccines. My son landed in the hospital because this same level of prevention didn’t exist for RSV until recently. Now that it does, I hope no other babies have to experience what he did.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

RSV (Respiratory Syncytial Virus) in Babies Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Colds in Babies: Causes, Symptoms, Tips and Remedies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Croup in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Caring for a Baby Who Tests Positive for COVID-19 Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Is Your Child Too Sick for Day Care? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Baby Actually Can Get Vaccines if She Has a Cold: Debunking 13 Vaccine Myths You Shouldn't Believe Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's What Getting the RSV Vaccine During Pregnancy Means for Your Baby’s Health Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Flu (Influenza Virus) in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Stuffy Nose in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why the Rotavirus Vaccine Matters for Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Florencia Segura, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Which Vaccines Should New Parents Get? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Treat the Common Cold in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Take Care of Your Toddler's Cough Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Rotavirus and Stomach Flu in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Colds During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window