paid leave package

I Used GoFundMe to Pay for My Maternity Leave

Minor copy and formatting changes.

hand holding a heart reaching out of a mailbox

As a self-employed person in Mississippi, I had no paid leave. Then my husband lost his job two weeks before our baby arrived.

As a young girl I loved doing hair, and I knew I wanted to be a cosmetologist. In 2018, my dream came true when I obtained my license and started my own business. I've also always wanted to start a family — and when that dream came true, a hard reality hit. As a self-employed person in Mississippi, I wouldn't have a paid maternity leave.

My husband and I had suffered through multiple miscarriages — twins and a son — before having our rainbow baby, Shiloh. When we found out we were pregnant with her, we immediately started saving money; I wanted to be able to spend at least six weeks at home with our miracle baby. But in my field, you don't make money when you're not working. So, we put as much as we could to the side during my pregnancy to prepare.

I kept my client books filled, taking as many appointments as possible to save extra cash. Eventually, though, I had to cut my days and take care of my body and growing baby. Moving cautiously was important to me because of the fear I had about carrying her to term. I ended up working up until two weeks before Shiloh was born. But then, on my last day in the shop, my husband was let go from his job as a contracted truck driver. It was devastating for our financial plans.

TK

My husband and I had suffered through multiple miscarriages — twins and a son — before having our rainbow baby, Shiloh.

Any assistance from the state would have been helpful, but Mississippi doesn't have a paid parental leave program. We didn't even qualify for food stamps through WIC .

As a successful business owner, I've never had to ask for help from anyone. But physically, I couldn't go back to work. And looking at our savings versus our bills, we couldn't cover the necessities.

Every day, it felt like we were being squeezed more and more, and I eventually vented to my best friend, "Girl, this is getting tight!" All of our funds were going out (groceries, rent, utilities) and nothing was coming in.

Two weeks after Shiloh was born, I woke up with the idea to start a GoFundMe . I thought, If it works — good. If it doesn't — fine. I wasn't used to being in this position, and admittedly I felt a little ashamed. Looking at my newborn baby in my arms gave me the push I needed. Knowing who I was doing it for mattered far more than any pride I had, so I did something vulnerable and shared my story.

bianca jackson maternity leave gofundme page

I opened up about our struggles on my GoFundMe page.

On the page, I openly laid out my life for anyone who wanted to support our little family. I wrote about my infertility and pregnancy losses. I shared the pregnancy complication I had experienced ( incompetent cervix ) and that I had to have a C-section . Lastly, I wrote that we had zero income coming in and that I needed insurance for my baby. Then I made the page public. I shared it on my Facebook page and texted the link to family members who didn't have social media.

At first, only my friends and family responded and contributed. Then, as they shared it, too, their friends began to contribute, and we even received some anonymous donations. I ended up receiving around $700 from GoFundMe. In the caption of my Facebook post, I also added my CashApp and received $1,000 that way. The money helped us pay for insurance, get groceries , buy specialized formula and probiotics for my daughter's digestive issues, and cover a couple of bills. All the support lifted an enormous weight from our shoulders.

You will never know how many people are willing to help you unless you ask.

Ultimately, I had six weeks exactly at home with Shiloh, and my husband started working another job a week before me. I was only able to have this time because of the financial help I got from other people.

Having to leave my baby when she was so small was still really difficult. Thankfully, family members stepped in to help. I take her to my mom's house a few minutes away in the morning and come back in the afternoon to nurse.

For moms in a similar situation who wouldn't receive maternity leave from an employer or are self-employed, here's what I'd suggest:

Request cash instead of gifts

Whether you're having a baby shower or are simply asked, "What do you need for the baby?" ask for cash or prepaid debit cards to assist with maternity leave. Friends and family may consider this easier than scavenging stores to determine what baby gear to buy.

If your loved ones insist on giving you a physical gift, make a wish list of what you know you'll need, like formula, diapers and bibs. That way, if funds get low, your essentials are covered, and your baby isn't lacking food or necessary items. As a first-time mom, I searched TikTok for suggestions on a baby's needs, and there are many other resources on newborn essentials .

Don't forget your own needs, too. For example, I knew I was going to have a C-section in advance, so I included care items for my incision and comfortable gowns on my list.

Have a couple of different ways to give

Some baby registry platforms offer the option to add a cash fund to your list . People can either purchase the necessary items you've registered for or give money, helping you spend those first precious weeks at home.

You can also share links to your Venmo, PayPal or CashApp. My GoFundMe was a great way for people I don't know to support me, but people who knew me personally mostly donated through my CashApp.

Start early

When I got the idea to create my GoFundMe, I was already caring for a newborn and watching bills pile up. If you already know you won't have paid maternity leave and want to try this route, ask for help a month or two before your due date instead of waiting for things to get hard like I did.

Don't let pride keep you from asking for help

You will never know how many people are willing to help you if you don't ask. It requires courage and humility, but remembering your why (or better yet, your who) can give you the resolve to shed the pride.

I'd never thought I'd need to create a GoFundMe to support my dream of becoming a parent, but I am so glad I did. I'm also grateful for all of the loved ones and strangers who stepped in to help. If you have the need like I did, I say try it. It just may work out.

Updates history

September 16, 2024

Editor: Caroline Picard

Minor copy and formatting changes.

September 10, 2024

Editor: Caroline Picard

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Your Next Read

I Was Laid Off on Maternity Leave — Twice By

What You Need to Know About Parental Leave if You're Self-Employed Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Moms Lose an Average of $9,500 When They Take Maternity Leave Fact Checked by Dominique De Lope, Senior Manager, Trade Insights

Everything Non-Birthing Parents Need to Know About Parental Leave Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Hiring Parental Leave Consultant Was the Best $300 I Ever Spent By

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

6 Reasons Paid Leave Is So Essential to New Moms' Health Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Pregnant and Single? Here’s How to Get the Support You Need Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

What Every Mom Needs to Know About Maternity Leave By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

Navigating Paid Parental Leave as an LGBTQ+ Parent Fact Checked by Jill Malter

The New-Parent Guide to Paternity and Family Leave in the U.S. Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Motherhood Almost Broke My Marriage — Here's What Actually Helped Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Labor and Delivery Is Pushing Moms Into Debt — This Advice Can Help Slash the Bill Fact Checked by Dominique De Lope, Senior Manager, Trade Insights

Should You Go Back to Work After Baby? Here's What to Consider Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window