I Wish Someone Had Told Me to Pack This $14 Item in My Hospital Bag

Frida Mom Upside Down Peri Bottle

The first postpartum pee would have been a lot easier with this tool.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

When it came to preparing for my son’s arrival two years ago, I didn’t go overboard with purchases. I made a spreadsheet of minimal gear I’d add to my registry, secondhand scores from Facebook Marketplace, and new items my husband and I would purchase. I truly went the “we’ll figure out the rest as we go” route rather than the “buy multiple types of everything and test them out” route.

I was so focussed on setting up for baby, attending my midwife appointments, and satisfying my endless cereal craving that I overlooked items meant for, well, me. I hadn’t thought about packing my hospital bag or prepping a postpartum care station. As I panic-read through forums, I decided to splurge on the Frida Labor and Delivery + Postpartum Recovery Kit . Every review said it was a treasure trove of self-care goodies: a nursing gown and no-slip socks for labor comfort, ice pads and perineal foam for postpartum healing, even disposable underwear to lighten the laundry load. It seemed well worth the $100 for a shortcut to stock items I’d use, right?

Well, while I used a few things from the kit, the contents didn’t live up to the hype. The disposable underwear, while comfortable, didn’t have built-in absorption. The icy pads were equally unabsorbent, and not as cooling as expected. The nurse put the hospital-provided socks on me before I could grab the ones from my kit. The witch hazel liners went unused, given how many the hospital provided.

But there was one item that outperformed its hospital counterpart, providing instant relief and easing those postpartum bathroom visits: the Frida Mom Upside Down Peri Bottle .

No one prepared me for the first post-delivery pee. I couldn’t feel my legs (thanks, epidural!), and was practically hanging on to the nurse to avoid falling. When I was done, I was handed a little squirt bottle to clean down there since toilet paper was a no-go. But it hardly did the job. The spray was minimal, and I couldn’t exactly bend my body to get a full washing.

Frida Mom Upside Down Peri Bottle

That’s where the Frida Mom peri bottle stood out. It’s marketed as, “a bidet for your vajay,” and that’s not too far from the truth. Rather than a straight design, the Frida Mom’s bottle has a bent neck (i.e. upside down), which lets you point the stream right where you need it instead of letting it dribble down. The long neck gives you more control of your aim without contouring your sore body. It was also easier to squeeze, giving me more control of the flow. I noticed that the stream was much more forceful, but still gentle on the swollen, tender area. It wasn’t a shower-like washing, but it was enough to clear out the discharge and left me feeling relatively clean when I was finally home.

Frida Mom Upside Down Peri Bottle

Even though the hospital provides a peri bottle, I’d rather pay $14 to upgrade to the Frida Mom Upside Down Peri Bottle . To be honest, I’d probably pay double. The Frida Labor and Delivery + Postpartum Recovery Kit may not have been $100 well spent, but it brought me to my postpartum MVP, so it wasn’t a total waste.

Frida Mom Upside Down Peri Bottle

Your Postpartum Bathroom Bestie

Your Next Read

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

Your No-Nonsense Hospital Bag Checklist: What to Pack and What to Skip Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

15 Products That Leave Moms Saying 'TikTok Made Me Buy It' Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

What to Expect After a C-Section: Real-Mom Tips for Healing and Newborn Care By Heidi Murkoff

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

70 Baby Items You Didn't Know You Could Buy With FSA Money Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

I Survived 3 Weddings Newly Postpartum. Here Are My Hacks to Actually Enjoy the Night By Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

5 Things I Wish Other Moms Told Me About Postpartum Body Image Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

8 Things Your Labor and Delivery Nurses Want You to Know About Childbirth Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Your Ultimate Guide to Traveling While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

A Mom's Guide to a Hospital Birth Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window