If You Suddenly Feel Like You’re Waddling (And Constantly Peeing), Your Baby Might Have Dropped

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting.

Pregnant Woman looking at her Belly in the Bathroom

Here's how you can tell when your baby has dropped and you're going through lightening. Labor is probably around the corner — but not all babies drop in preparation for birth.

Lightening means that your baby has dropped lower into your pelvis — getting into position for labor and delivery. But it's not the most reliable sign that labor is around the corner. Some babies don't drop until after labor has begun, while others settle lower weeks before their due date.

Here's what to know about when your baby might drop and what it feels like.

Key Takeaways

Lightening happens when your baby drops lower into your pelvis in preparation for birth. Also known as your baby "dropping," it often occurs a few weeks before delivery in first pregnancies, but it can happen during labor or not at all before labor begins.

Your baby dropping can bring both relief and new discomforts. You may breathe and eat more easily as pressure on your diaphragm and stomach decreases, but you might also experience more pelvic pressure, frequent urination, back pain, and waddling.

There's no guaranteed way to make your baby drop. While walking, squatting, and pelvic tilts may help encourage optimal positioning and improve comfort, lightening is a natural process that varies from pregnancy to pregnancy.

What does "lightening" or baby "dropping" mean?

When your baby descends lower into the pelvis in preparation for birth, it's called "lightening" or baby "dropping." Lightening is a sign that your baby is gearing up for labor and is usually in a head-down position, though sometimes the feet or bottom can drop into the pelvis first (a breech position) or, more rarely, another body part. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHow to Tell When Labor BeginsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHow to Tell When Labor BeginsSee All Sources

When will my baby drop?

Every pregnancy is different, but babies will usually drop around two to four weeks before delivery in a first pregnancy. That said, it doesn't necessarily mean labor is about to begin.

In subsequent pregnancies, babies often don't drop until after labor starts. One theory is that because your body has gone through labor before, your pelvis needs less prep time.

Does the baby always drop before labor?

Your baby won’t necessarily drop before labor begins — whether it's your first pregnancy or a later one. If yours doesn’t, don’t worry. Whether or not your baby drops before labor has no impact on your labor. Plenty of moms sail through childbirth even if their babies didn’t drop before labor began.

“My son didn’t drop until the day I went into labor, and I could just physically feel that I had to stand with wider legs to allow room for his head,” says What to Expect Community Opens a new window mom BellyP93.

What does lightening feel like?

It isn't always noticeable when your baby drops. That’s because lightening is usually a gradual process rather than a sudden event.

What’s more, a lot depends on how you're carrying. For instance, if you've been carrying low throughout your pregnancy, you might not be able to tell the difference after baby drops.

“I never felt any of my five babies drop,” says Community mom gracet. “I’m longer-waisted and always carried low from the very beginning.”

If you've been carrying high, however, you're more likely to notice that lightening sensation — both because of how you look (a lower baby bump) and how you feel (more room in your lungs, more pressure on your bladder).

“I’m just excited that we’re getting into that final stretch!” says Community mom vron222. “Not complaining because I suddenly feel WAY more comfortable.”

Does it feel like your baby has "dropped"? Record your symptoms and what you're feeling in the What to Expect app Opens a new window and get expert-backed tips to help you prep for labor — whenever it decides to start.

What are some signs that my baby has dropped?

Here’s what to look for:

A lower belly position. You might notice that your baby bump seems lower and tilted farther forward than it did before.

Easier breathing. Once your baby drops, there’s less upward pressure from the uterus on your diaphragm, making it easier to take deep breaths. "I now feel a space between my ribs and the bump, and breathing is a ton easier," says Community mom Banarnie. "On the flip side, I have a ton of pelvic pressure now."

Easier eating. Less pressure on your stomach from your uterus may make it more comfortable to eat a full meal. You may notice less heartburn and indigestion, too.

More frequent urination. Pressure on the bladder thanks (or no thanks!) to a baby who has dropped lower into the pelvis may send you to the bathroom more often .

Pelvic pain or pressure. With your baby sitting lower, you may feel more pressure and pain down below. This could come in the form of sharp shooting pelvic pain (similar to lightning crotch ) or pressure in the perineal area.

Changes in your gait. Extra pressure on your pelvic joints may make walking more difficult or cause you to waddle more than usual. Your sense of balance may also feel off — likely due to the fact that your center of gravity has shifted yet again.

Back pain. When baby drops, that cute (now lower down) noggin may put more pressure on the joints and muscles in your lower back, resulting in more back pain. "I for sure have felt more pressure and lower back pain since baby has dropped," says Community member sarahbos.

Hemorrhoids. Increased pressure on the veins of the rectum when baby drops may worsen hemorrhoids or cause them to develop for the first time.

Are there ways to get my baby to drop?

There's no scientific data that points to a proven way to get your baby to drop before labor begins. Still, there's plenty of anecdotal advice that may help you feel more comfortable. Here’s what you can try:

Walking. Walking can help relax the pelvic muscles and open the hips. That, plus an assist from gravity, may help the lightening process along.

Squatting. If walking opens up the hips, imagine how much more so squatting will. Try using a birthing ball to help you maintain the squatting position, or try gently rocking while seated on it.

Pelvic tilts. Pelvic tilts can create a gentle rocking motion that may encourage lightening. A great way to do them late in pregnancy is on your hands and knees. Gently tilt your pelvis forward while relaxing your lower back. Repeat a few times.

Your baby dropping down in the pelvic cavity is just one more sign that delivery day is getting closer. Exciting times are ahead!