Inclined Sleepers Are Dangerous For Babies — Here's Why

inclined sleepers

The once-popular inclined sleepers like the Fisher-Price Rock ‘n Play have been linked to hundreds of infant deaths, yet they are still popping up on the second-hand market.

It’s easy to swear up and down that you’ll follow safe sleep practices before your baby makes his big debut. But when your little one is here and they’re suddenly sleepless in the swaddle, you can feel desperate enough to try anything.

That was the case for HalloweenBabyFRM, a member of the November 2023 Babies group in the What to Expect Community. “I always thought I’d never let my baby sleep anywhere but the bassinet/crib since that’s what’s safe,” she writes in January in a post titled “Baby only sleeps in Rock ’n Play….” She goes on to say that her baby has never slept more than 20 minutes at a time in her bassinet. “We’ve gotten into a sort of decent nighttime routine now where we both get 6-ish hours of sleep…. But she only sleeps in the rock and play.”

HalloweenBabyFRM is referring to the Fisher-Price recalled Rock 'n Play , which used to be wildly popular among moms but was recalled in April 2019 in response to what were at the time more than 30 reported deaths associated with these products. Since 2019, the number has climbed to about 100 — and at least eight infant fatalities have happened after the initial recall announcement.

While the Rock ‘n Play was the most popular product of its kind, it’s part of a category of baby gear called inclined sleepers, and none of them are safe. That’s why President Biden signed the Safe Sleep for Babies Act into law in 2021. Under the Act, any inclined sleepers with a slope of more than 10 degrees are banned from being sold in the U.S.

While these inclined sleepers are no longer allowed to be sold new, they are still being handed down among parents. “A friend gave [the Rock ’n Play] to me and warned me it had been recalled, but said she loved it with all four of her babies lol,” writes HalloweenBabyFRM .

In fact, 25% of moms say they either store recalled products or give them to a friend or family member, according to a recent What to Expect survey.* Another 8% say they donate or sell recalled products. Even if these actions happen unknowingly, it means that this dangerous gear is still circulating among new families.

What makes inclined sleepers so dangerous?

The major concern with inclined sleepers is the position in which the baby sits or reclines in these products. "Inclined sleepers like loungers, baby rockers, swings and bouncy seats, are unsafe sleeping surfaces due to their incline, which poses a risk to an infant's airways,” says Florencia Segura, M.D. , pediatrician and What To Expect Review Board Member. This is because infants have heavy heads and underdeveloped neck muscles. As they drift off to sleep, their heads naturally tilt forward in a chin-to-chest position, potentially obstructing their airways, she adds. "The incline makes it harder for infants to lift their heads, increasing the likelihood of suffocation."

One mom of three in the What to Expect Community shared her own scary experience: “I still had the rock n play after it got recalled because my first two boys loved it,” she writes. “This time around my baby choked and stopped breathing while laying in it when she was about a week old. She almost died and it was terrifying, I instantly threw it away. I feel responsible to say that because I personally experienced the scariest moment of my life.”

If you're wondering whether an inclined sleeper can be helpful for your baby's colic or acid reflux , the short answer is no, it can't. "It has no effect on reflux in infants and also risks the infant sliding into an unsafe sleep position," says Dr. Segura. And while your best bet is to hold your baby upright for 20 to 30 minutes after they finish feeding, we know that can feel exhausting after a 30 to 40 minute feeding, so tap a partner, friend or family member for help. "It's the perfect time for loved ones to lend their helping hands, says Dr. Segura. "They can enjoy those newborn snuggles while holding your baby upright, which also allows the milk to digest properly." You can also try burping at natural pauses throughout your feedings rather than waiting for one big burp at the end, she adds.

What to use instead of inclined sleepers

Instead of using inclined sleepers, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that babies only sleep on a hard, flat surface. Check out What to Expect’s top-rated baby cribs , bassinets , sleep sacks and other safe sleep items that can help. Also Follow the ABCs of sleep to reduce your infant’s risk of Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) :

A: alone — which means no blankets, stuffed animals, or bumpers

B: flat on their back

C: in a crib or bassinet, which are both regulated products and are guaranteed to have firm, flat surfaces

A flat surface is key to safe infant sleeping and napping…and you’ll sleep better at night knowing your little one is snoozing safe and sound.

If your baby is having trouble sleeping in their crib or bassinet at first, says Kelly Murray , certified sleep consultant in Chicago, Illinois. Murray says to keep offering those environments consistently — and make sure they're set up for good sleep (black out curtains at night and a sound machine are two musts!). Sometimes it just takes time for them to adjust, and their sleep will become more routine starting around 2 months, and even more so between 3 and 6 months.

You can also consider hiring a night nurse or sleep consultant if you have the means. Remember, in those first few months, it is not uncommon for babies to want to be held. Take shifts with your partner or other family members and hold them until they fall asleep, and then gently place them in their crib or bassinet. As they get older, you'll want to eventually put them down drowsy, but not fully asleep.

Are inclined sleepers still being sold?

"Based on the latest guidelines from the AAP and the CPSC, sleep products that incline more than 10 degrees are unsafe," says Dr. Segura. Because of this, legislation has enacted a threshold of ten degrees or less for any products marketed for baby sleep. This means that any products on the U.S. market now abide by these regulations. "It is so important to only purchase baby sleeping products from U.S. retailers, as they should be following the most updated federal regulations," she adds. This means that if you’re ordering a product from a site like Amazon, which can include retailers from overseas, you’ll have to do your due diligence to make sure you’re buying a product from one of the U.S. retailers on the site.

You can also check the Consumer Product Safety Commission's website to confirm that any product you’re buying or have been gifted hasn’t been recalled.

What to do if you have an inclined sleeper

It’s important to immediately stop using inclined sleepers if you have one. The CPSC advises that you should dispose of this gear immediately and not resell (or rehome) it.

If you were the original purchaser, you can also see if you’re eligible for a refund. Check with the brand’s website to see if you can return your recalled item. The Fisher-Price Rock ‘n Play Sleeper recall policy , for example, offers a full cash refund or a Fisher-Price store credit to those who qualify.