These moms came up with some creative ways to celebrate the 20-week mark.

By the time you're 20 weeks pregnant, you've made it through those wild weeks full of nausea , weird cravings , and "is this normal" Google searches. To honor this midpoint, maybe you'll queue up Bon Jovi's "Livin' on a Prayer" and scream, "Whoaaa, we're halfway there!" at the top of your lungs, or maybe run out to the market for a pint of Ben and Jerry's appropriately named flavor, Half Baked.

Each and every pregnancy milestone is worth celebrating, which is why these trending 20-week photoshoot ideas are oh-so-sweet. Whether you want to keep it simple with a quick selfie or mark the milestone with a sweet treat, find inspiration in these sweet, punny, and downright adorable ways moms are commemorating this special time.

Bake some cookies

overhead view of a pregnant mom posing next to some flour on a kitchen countertop with the words

Mom-to-be Kayla Djukic ( @kayladjukic ) grabbed some cookies, a few sonograms, and a bag of flour for her take on the "half-baked" trend. "You don't have to put a lot of effort or money into it," Djukic says. "I was lucky that I have a friend who is a photographer ( @sarahbiez) , but you can ask your partner to take the photos on your phone, or even set up a tripod!"

Find out what size fruit your baby is

pregnant mom posing with a banana next to her belly to represent the size of her baby

Every week, you can open the What to Expect app and find out how big your baby is now, not just in inches, but also in fruit. ( Week 8 is raspberry … Week 34 is pineapple.) Krisie Schoppaul ( @mrs.schoppaul ) took this feature to heart by marking the midway point with a banana.

Try something savory

pregnant mom posing with a can of baked beans

In a What to Expect Community forum, mom-to-be Tanya McLaughlin shared her unique "half-baked" idea for a 20-week photoshoot: posing with a can of baked beans. "We still call him Bean," she says. "It's a hard habit to break."

Make a bouquet

side view of a pregnant mom holding a bouquet of pink flowers up to her face

Perhaps the freshest take on the half-baked trend comes from mom-to-be Kylie Russell ( @kybooktok ), whose friend Amy Holladay snapped some photos of her belly with flowers. "I've always been into capturing memories with photos," she says. "I also thought 'half-bloomed' was especially cute with us having a spring due date."

Russell says she added her own blooms to a premade bouquet and also used it as a gender reveal . (She chose mostly pink flowers because they’re expecting a girl.)

Get your older kid in on the action

pregnant mom and her toddler son posing with a series of ultrasound photos and a pint of Ben and Jerry's Half Baked ice cream

There were two main requirements for Bijou Nguyen: a pint of Ben and Jerry's and her firstborn. "I think my older son was just starting to understand me having a baby in my tummy after accompanying me to my OB appointments and seeing my stomach get bigger," she says. "He joined for the photos, which I think made the whole thing a lot more fun!"

Document an adventure

woman and man posing for a photo on a scenic hike

Travel could look a lot different in the next few months, so why not hit the road now and take some pics on your babymoon ? That's exactly what Sarah Darby , associate director of SEO content strategy at What to Expect, has done during each of her pregnancies. "It was a perfect time to travel during pregnancy and a great way to reflect and relax while I was still comfortable enough to enjoy the vacation!" she says.

Use those wooden baby milestone blocks

pregnant mom holding wooden blocks that say

Marifer Fitzpatrick ( @maferfitz ) took out her baby photo shoot props early and posed with them at 20 weeks. "Pregnancy always feels like a mix of excitement, gratitude, and anticipation, and we wanted to pause and capture this season before life changes again," she says.

In the spirit of simplicity, Fitzpatrick has three non-negotiables: "natural light, a comfortable outfit, and a calm space make a big difference," she says. "Focus less on perfection and more on documenting the season you're in."