How to Manage IBS Flare-Ups While Pregnant (and Which Meds Are Actually Safe)

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnant woman with dog sipping tea, ibs during pregnancy

Take care of yourself and your-baby-to-be when you're dealing with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) during pregnancy.

GI issues are no joke, especially when it comes to IBS or irritable bowel syndrome. But when pregnancy is added to the mix, symptoms like gas, bloating, diarrhea, and constipation can actually worsen in some cases. And yet, with guidance from your doctor and a focus on healthy living, moms-to-be can manage flare-ups and feel better fast.

Most women can expect their digestive tracts to take a beating during pregnancy. Whether it's constipation, gas, diarrhea, bloating, nausea, vomiting, or a combination or all of the above, few expectant moms escape their nine months without some tummy troubles. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMorning Sickness: Nausea and Vomiting of PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMorning Sickness: Nausea and Vomiting of PregnancySee All Sources

But women with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) may be wondering how their condition will affect their pregnancies — and whether they'll be dealing with even more digestive symptoms than they would otherwise.

Though it's tough to predict what your experience will be like if you have IBS (and remember that each pregnancy is different), here's some info about what you might go through and how you may be able to prevent or control flare-ups while you're expecting.

Key Takeaways

IBS in pregnancy varies widely. Some moms-to-be have worse symptoms (bloating, GI woes), while others don’t notice changes. Every case is different, which means staying in touch with your doctor is important.

A change in meds and diet may be recommended. Some IBS prescriptions aren't compatible with pregnancy. But certain dietary shifts can ease symptoms, such as eating smaller meals, drinking lots of water, and nixing trigger foods.

Fight flare-ups for best results. Balanced meals, gentle workouts, focusing on probiotics, and easing stress can benefit your health and your pregnancy.

What is IBS?

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common long-term or recurrent disorder of gastrointestinal (GI) functioning that affects 10 to 15% of people and is characterized by abdominal pain or discomfort, bloating, gas, diarrhea, and constipation. If you've had to deal with IBS, you know that the symptoms can often be quite difficult to manage and can impact your quality of life.

For more info about pregnancy symptoms, check out the What to Expect app , your go-to guide packed with expert info, week-by-week changes, and tips from like-minded moms-to-be just like you.

How does IBS affect pregnancy?

As for how IBS affects pregnancy, the science is mixed. Some research shows a small increased risk of miscarriage or ectopic pregnancy, while other studies have found no increased risk. Just be alert to any signs of impending preterm contractions, but don't be worried. Ditto for any other potential risk associated with the condition.

The most important thing if you're pregnant and dealing with IBS is to make sure you're getting good prenatal care with a practitioner who knows about your condition and works with you to help keep it under control as best as possible.

How is IBS treated during pregnancy?

Take a look at your meds. If you've been taking medication for your IBS, speak to both your prenatal practitioner and your gastroenterologist (or other doctor who's treated you for the condition) about whether the drugs are compatible with pregnancy. Some IBS meds aren't safe to take while you're pregnant, so you may need to stop or switch to a different kind.

Use the same strategies. To keep your symptoms manageable, stick to the techniques you typically use to combat IBS during other times in your life: Eat small, more frequent meals (good advice for any pregnant woman), stay well hydrated (ditto), try to avoid excess stress (which often ups the symptoms of IBS), and steer clear of foods or drinks that make your symptoms worse (like overly greasy or fatty foods).

Gradually increase the amount of fiber you're getting. As you may already know, there are different kinds of fiber (soluble and insoluble) that can affect IBS in different ways, especially when you're pregnant. So go slowly rather than suddenly adding a lot of extra fiber all at once, or you could wind up exacerbating your symptoms. Think fruits and veggies like strawberries, blueberries, oranges, cucumbers, carrots, leafy greens, and broccoli; and breads, cereals, and other foods made of whole grains or oats.

Cover your nutritional bases. If you're following a low-FODMAP diet for your IBS (a plan limiting short-chain carbohydrates like fruit with a lot of fructose or onions and garlic, which are poorly absorbed in the small intestine and rapidly fermented by bacteria in the gut), talk to your prenatal practitioner about your diet to make sure you're getting the right balance of nutrients for your pregnancy. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHealthy Eating During PregnancySee All Sources [2]

Add probiotics. Consider incorporating some probiotics to your diet in the form of yogurt or yogurt drinks with active cultures, or in powder or capsule form. They can be surprisingly effective in regulating bowel function, and they're safe during pregnancy. Check with your practitioner for a recommendation.

Get moving! Exercise is important for IBS sufferers, and it's especially good for moms-to-be. Stick to pregnancy-safe workouts that make you feel good, mentally and physically.

What to Expect Community parent Katphinn is in the IBS boat: “I have IBS and a ton of food intolerances.” Her advice? “Hydrate. Stay away from FODMAPs. Eat what you know doesn't bother you.”

Pregnancy isn't always easy no matter what, and it can be trickier for moms-to-be with IBS. That said, the fact that you're aware of your condition and have ways to manage the symptoms actually gives you a head start that many women don't have. Just keep your eye on the prize at the end — that beautiful baby you can't wait to cuddle.