Is Acupuncture Safe During Pregnancy? What Experts Want You to Know

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Pear with pins illustrating prenatal acupuncture

Many people credit acupuncture with easing a range of pregnancy symptoms, including morning sickness and lower back pain. But is it safe? Here’s what to know.

Being stuck with needles may not sound appealing right now. But when it comes to managing pregnancy woes like morning sickness, lower back pain, and headaches, many moms-to-be sing acupuncture's praises. And there's some evidence to support its effectiveness.

In fact, research suggests that both acupuncture and acupressure may help ease some common aches and discomforts of pregnancy. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicAcupunctureSee All Sources [1]

Acupuncture

Here's everything you need to know about acupuncture during pregnancy, including what symptoms it may help improve and how to make the most of your visits.

Key Takeaways

Acupuncture may help relieve common pregnancy discomforts. Research suggests that acupuncture and acupressure can ease symptoms such as morning sickness, lower back and pelvic pain, headaches, sleep problems, and even anxiety or depression for some pregnant women.

Acupuncture is generally considered safe during pregnancy when performed by a qualified practitioner. Side effects, such as temporary soreness or redness at needle sites, are usually mild. It's important to choose a licensed, experienced acupuncturist who regularly works with pregnant patients and uses sterile, single-use needles.

Talk to your health care practitioner before trying acupuncture. While acupuncture may offer symptom relief with few risks, certain acupuncture points should be avoided during pregnancy because they may stimulate contractions.

What is acupuncture?

Acupuncture is a thousand-year-old healing art that originated in China. Traditional Chinese medicine views the body as two opposing forces, yin and yang. When an imbalance occurs between these forces, it blocks what Chinese medicine refers to as qi (pronounced chee ), or the flow of vital energy along internal pathways (known as meridians) in our bodies.

During acupuncture, a practitioner inserts hair-thin needles through the skin at points along the meridians, which is believed to correct imbalances and restore health. Trusted SourceSage JournalsThe Safety of Acupuncture During Pregnancy: A Systematic ReviewSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceSage JournalsThe Safety of Acupuncture During Pregnancy: A Systematic ReviewSee All Sources

While we don't fully understand how acupuncture works, there are studies that support its benefits. Acupuncture points correspond to deep-seated nerves, so some researchers believe that when the needles are twirled or electrically stimulated (known as electroacupuncture), the nerves are activated. That may trigger the release of brain chemicals, including endorphins, which block pain signals and may help relieve a number of pregnancy symptoms.

Acupuncture may also work by affecting the connective tissues at the points where the needles are inserted. Other research suggests that even a patient's belief in the treatment may help ease pain. Trusted SourceCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsInterventions for Nausea and Vomiting in Early PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsInterventions for Nausea and Vomiting in Early PregnancySee All Sources

Since pregnancy limits the types of pain medications you can take, it doesn't hurt to have another tool in your arsenal when Tylenol isn't enough.

While most studies seem to indicate that people experience some beneficial effect with a low risk of side effects, make sure you see a well-trained practitioner who comes recommended. Trusted SourceCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsInterventions for Preventing and Treating Low-Back and Pelvic Pain During PregnancySee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsInterventions for Preventing and Treating Low-Back and Pelvic Pain During PregnancySee All Sources

What are the benefits of acupuncture during pregnancy?

Many people credit acupuncture with easing a wide range of pregnancy symptoms, including:

Morning sickness

Some studies have shown that traditional acupuncture targeting the wrist can reduce the nausea and vomiting associated with morning sickness, though other studies have found no effect. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsDepression During PregnancySee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsDepression During PregnancySee All Sources

"I swore by it for my nausea!!" says What to Expect Community mom leh1988. "I had awful nausea from about weeks 5 through 10 and was having acupuncture every couple of days."

Back pain

Some research suggests that acupuncture can reduce pregnancy-related pain in the lower back along with pelvic pain. Trusted SourceCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAcupuncture for the Prevention of Episodic MigraineSee All Sources [6]

Trusted SourceCochrane Database of Systematic ReviewsAcupuncture for the Prevention of Episodic MigraineSee All Sources

Depression

Depression during pregnancy is surprisingly common, affecting nearly 1 in 10 women, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists(ACOG) Trusted SourceDovepressEffect of Acupuncture on Pregnancy-Related Insomnia and Melatonin: A Single-Blinded, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled TrialSee All Sources [7]. Some research suggests that a targeted form of acupuncture may help.

Trusted SourceDovepressEffect of Acupuncture on Pregnancy-Related Insomnia and Melatonin: A Single-Blinded, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled TrialSee All Sources

One study found that women who had acupuncture tailored to treat depression experienced a greater reduction in symptom severity than women who received general acupuncture or massage.

Headaches

Research suggests that acupuncture may also reduce pregnancy-induced headaches. While it's not completely clear how acupuncture eases pain, one systematic review of studies on acupuncture for migraine prevention found that the frequency of severe headaches was halved in some of the study participants. Headache frequency was also somewhat reduced compared with placebo acupuncture. Trusted SourceEvidence-Based Complementary and Alternative MedicineEffectiveness and Safety of Acupuncture and Moxibustion in Pregnant Women with Noncephalic Presentation: An Overview of Systematic ReviewsSee All Sources [8]

Trusted SourceEvidence-Based Complementary and Alternative MedicineEffectiveness and Safety of Acupuncture and Moxibustion in Pregnant Women with Noncephalic Presentation: An Overview of Systematic ReviewsSee All Sources

Sleep problems

Getting to sleep and staying asleep can be trickier than ever during pregnancy. But some research suggests that moms-to-be who get acupuncture may sleep better. In one small study, acupuncture significantly improved the sleep quality for pregnant participants.

"Had my first appointment yesterday for insomnia, and I slept better last night than I have in weeks," says Community mom catie.s.b., who has also used acupuncture for fertility and chronic back pain. "I hate needles, but it is so worth it."

Other pregnancy symptoms acupuncture may help treat include heartburn , leg swelling , carpal tunnel syndrome , and sciatica .

"I have been doing acupuncture for a few months now and found it helped with my anxiety," says Community. Member Calicokat47.

Is acupuncture safe during pregnancy?

When done properly by a trained professional, acupuncture during pregnancy is considered safe and has few risks. One review found that acupuncture isn't likely to be associated with miscarriage or other major complications.

Most risks associated with acupuncture seem to be fairly minor. They can include:

Soreness

Redness or infection at the insertion sites

Injury from needles placed too deeply

There are also possible risks if practitioners use non-sterile needles, which is one reason it's so important to choose a reputable therapist. Acupuncture needles are considered medical devices and must be sterile and labeled for single use.

A bigger concern during pregnancy is where the acupuncture is performed. Certain acupuncture and acupressure points (like those in the ankle) are believed to stimulate contractions — which is why they should be avoided until after delivery.

How can I safely use acupuncture during pregnancy?

Interested in acupuncture to relieve pregnancy symptoms? Keep these tips in mind:

Check with your practitioner. If you're considering acupuncture, talk about it with your practitioner first. Though many complementary and alternative therapies are generally considered safe during pregnancy, it's always best to review any health conditions, medications, or other issues to determine if acupuncture is right for you.

Choose an acupuncturist wisely. Look for a practitioner who's licensed by your state and certified by the National Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine (NCCAOM). Make sure they have experience treating pregnant women. If you need help finding an acupuncturist, ask your local doula association for recommendations or use the NCCAOM practitioner search page .

Consider costs. Before beginning treatment, ask the acupuncturist about the number of treatments you may need and how much each one costs. And check with your insurer — some cover the cost of acupuncture — to determine if you'll have to pay out of pocket.

Watch for signs of trouble. Unless you're specifically hoping to induce labor at term with your doctor's guidance, you shouldn't experience any unusual contractions during or after a session. If you do, or you notice any other concerning symptoms, contact your practitioner immediately.

More research is needed on the benefits of acupuncture and acupressure during pregnancy. But the studies we have suggest that these treatments may help ease pain, improve sleep, and support mood for some moms-to-be. And because side effects are uncommon, acupuncture may be worth considering if you're looking for additional ways to manage uncomfortable pregnancy symptoms.

What is acupressure?

The points treated in acupressure are usually the same areas used in acupuncture. But instead of using needles, pressure is applied through a firm massage. Fingers (especially thumbs), hands, elbows, knees, and feet are used as tools to rub, knead, drum on, and vibrate against specific areas of the body.

Shiatsu, the most well-known style of acupressure, is fairly vigorous. The therapist may apply firm pressure to each trigger point for three to five seconds.

Studies suggest that acupressure may help ease lower back pain, labor pain , nausea, and headaches. It may also help naturally induce labor and reduce stress and anxiety during labor.

A word of caution: Since the practitioner has to apply deep pressure to reach the acupuncture points, acupressure is often more uncomfortable than acupuncture and may cause soreness or bruising. Discuss any concerns with your practitioner before your session.

What is moxibustion?

Moxibustion is based on the same basic principles as acupuncture, but instead of inserting needles, long sticks of the mugwort herb are burned near specific acupuncture points on the body. Both the heat from the burning and properties of the herb itself are thought to provide physical benefits.

Some studies have shown that daily sessions of moxibustion (either alone or combined with acupuncture) may increase fetal activity and therefore help turn a baby from a breech position to the more delivery-friendly head-down position.

However, other studies have found moxibustion is not effective.