Is an 'Orgasmic Birth' Really Possible?

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

woman having orgasm giving birth

You may have heard the tales of so-called “birthgasm.” Here’s what research has to say about orgasm during birth, including why it may occur.

You’ve been prepared by friends, family, and even your doctor for the intensity of birth. So it might be pretty hard to imagine that while delivering a baby, you could also experience the polar opposite: the pleasure of an orgasm.

Every woman experiences labor differently, and there’s some evidence that a handful of people do climax while giving birth. Practitioners who work with these women say that the intensity of the feeling is about love related to feelings of relief as well as euphoria at welcoming a baby at long last.

Here’s what you need to know about orgasm during childbirth — or “birthgasm,” as it’s called by some.

Key Takeaways

‘Birthgasm’ is real, but rare. This pleasurable event is indeed possible during labor, but since few share their experience, it’s probably underreported.

Hormones play a role. An orgasm in labor may be linked to the hormone oxytocin. Add to this endorphins and birth canal pressure and you might end up with a big ‘O’!

Every labor is unique. And there’s no right way to deliver a baby. You might get lucky with a birthgasm, but it’s more likely you won’t (and that’s perfectly fine).

Is an 'orgasmic birth' really possible?

There is good reason to believe that a few women — though no one is sure how many — experience orgasm during labor or delivery. The most recent count (and it’s a rough one, at best) comes from a 2013 study in the journal Sexologies . The researchers surveyed a group of more than 100 French midwives who’d assisted in the births of 206,000 babies. They concluded that “obstetrical orgasm,” as it’s termed medically, was observed in 0.3% of births.

That’s not many, for sure. And there’s evidence that this number misses a lot of women who experience sexual pleasure and even orgasm during labor. More than 85% of the midwives in the French study said they believed a sexually pleasurable birth was possible, and more than two-thirds — 69% — said they’d witnessed at least one instance.

The last thing women might expect is to feel something good while in the midst of labor; in turn, those who do may feel embarrassed and even ashamed and might decide not to share the experience with anyone. Those are all understandable feelings that also make it much harder to get an accurate idea of how often orgasm during childbirth actually does occur.

Why does orgasm sometimes happen during labor?

You probably already know that pregnancy is all about hormones — in particular, estrogen, progesterone, and hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin) . Hormones are also essential to childbirth and to sexuality. Understanding the hormonal interplay that’s happening all along the way, from conception to pregnancy to delivery and beyond, makes it easier to see how natural it can be for a woman to feel sexual exactly when she probably least expects it.

Most important, oxytocin (the so-called “love hormone”), plays a starring role in childbirth. During labor, oxytocin is released in large quantities — in fact, it’s even used to induce labor or spur it on. The hormone stimulates contractions of the uterine muscles and increases production of prostaglandins, which also encourage contractions, and it’s responsible for kick-starting those maternal feelings.

Oxytocin is also released when a woman’s nipples are stimulated, whether that’s during sex, as a natural way to help jumpstart labor , or during breastfeeding. The hormone helps move milk into the nipple for nursing, and it plays a big role in sexual arousal and orgasm. Some research — in this case, oxytocin delivered intranasally in a small German study of 29 couples — links the hormone to stronger orgasms and more contentment after sex.

Feel-good beta endorphins, adrenaline, and noradrenaline, also kick in as labor pains intensify; these help give a woman the stamina she needs to complete this Herculean task and provide natural pain relief. In fact, some researchers suggest that orgasm and sexual stimulation may be underused pain relievers for women in labor.

How does 'birthgasm' work?

Though a birthgasm can happen at any time in labor, it may be likelier to occur closer to delivery, as the baby arrives in the birth canal. As the baby's head applies extra pressure to the vagina, feelings of pleasure may start or intensify for a laboring woman.

While the image might not be one you want stuck in your head — at least not in the middle of mind-numbing contractions — an infant’s head may even hit the sometimes elusive (and still-debated) G-spot, triggering an orgasm.

Download the What to Expect app for more about what really happens during labor, plus savvy tips for handling it from the experts in the know and moms who’ve been there.

What does an orgasm during labor feel like?

When a woman feels the contractions of an orgasm and/or extreme moments of pleasure right at the moment of delivering her baby, this may be called an “orgasmic birth.”

You may feel tremendous pressure and sensation in the vagina as your baby’s birth approaches, then a powerful, pleasurable release that’s both physical and emotional. But remember that every woman — and every labor — is different.

Is the baby affected in any way by an orgasm during labor?

If you have an orgasm during labor or while delivering your baby, she won’t be harmed in any way. There’s little reason to think your baby would even feel contractions of the pelvic floor muscles (as can happen during orgasm), especially with powerful uterine contractions happening pretty much simultaneously.

Can anyone tell an orgasm during labor is happening?

There’s no need to wonder or worry if those waves of pleasure are showing up on your face and those around you are noticing them. If you do experience a lovely sensation in the midst of all the hard work you’re doing, chances are good that everyone around you will chalk up any sounds or facial expressions you make to the rigors of delivering a new human into the world, not to ecstasy. (Whether you want to correct the record later is up to you.)

Can you encourage an orgasm to happen during birth?

If you’re open to introducing pleasure as a way to ease labor pain, consider what the environment is like where you’ll be delivering your baby. Low lighting, relaxing scents, comfy linens, and a soft touch can help you relax more and counteract fears and anxiety about the pain to come.

Consider which tools you can surround yourself with while you labor that will make you feel more calm, centered, and at home. Some frequently-used comfort measures include:

A tub or shower

Dimmed lights

Music

Aromatherapy

Acupuncture

Massage

Birthing ball

Whatever you choose to do, don’t consider having an orgasm during labor a goal or something to add to your birth plan. Try to simply be open to what happens. And if you do experience feelings of sexual pleasure or release, consider that this, too, is just another part of the natural experience of having a child.