Is Acne a Sign of Pregnancy?

is acne a sign of pregnancy, conceptual illustration of multi-colored dots

If you're breaking out more than usual lately, could you be pregnant? Learn more about whether acne is an early sign of pregnancy and what to do about it.

When it comes to pregnancy-related skin changes , most people love to gush about that rosy glow. But sometimes having a baby can also make you break out.

In fact, around 40% of pregnant people get acne, research shows, Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, International Journal of Women's DermatologyManagement of Severe Acne During Pregnancy: A Case Report and Review of the LiteratureSee All Sources [1] and it's possible for the painful red bumps to appear early on. Here's how to tell if your new spots are from an impending bundle — and how to manage them.

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, International Journal of Women's DermatologyManagement of Severe Acne During Pregnancy: A Case Report and Review of the LiteratureSee All Sources

Is acne a sign that you're pregnant?

A sudden uptick in pimples could mean that you're pregnant. Some women experience acne during their first trimester, even if their skin typically tends to be clear, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources

Early on, pregnancy-related pimples might pop up alongside other first trimester symptoms like fatigue , breast tenderness , nausea , food cravings or aversions , mood swings , constipation , headaches, and having to pee more often .

"Before becoming pregnant, I’d get the occasional pimple, but since being 4-6 weeks, it’s like my acne has shot up," says What to Expect Community member evec0731. "It’s gotten so bad ... it’s causing me physical pain just from being awake. I wash my face every day, but it’s not helping. If anything, it’s making it worse."

That said, you shouldn't rely on blemishes or other symptoms alone to confirm that you've conceived . (After all, new pimples can also be a sign that your period is on the way.)

If you think you might be pregnant, the best way to tell for sure is by taking a home pregnancy test . If it's positive, make an appointment with your doctor or midwife to get those results double-checked!

What causes acne in early pregnancy?

It all comes down to — you guessed it! — hormones. Specifically, reproductive hormones like progesterone, which cause your skin to produce more natural oil, or sebum, according to the Mayo Clinic. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicWhat's the Best Way to Treat Pregnancy Acne?See All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicWhat's the Best Way to Treat Pregnancy Acne?See All Sources

The oil, along with bacteria and dead skin cells, can clog your pores and lead to breakouts, especially on your face, neck, chest, or back.

"Mine has been breaking out around my chin and also on my shoulders (never had that before!!)," laments What to Expect Community member hazelthenut. "But I hit 10 weeks ... and it seems to be easing away now."

What acne treatments are safe for pregnancy?

Doubling down on basic skin care can help keep excess oil and buildup out of your pores and make you less prone to breakouts. You can:

Wash your face twice daily with warm water and a mild cleanser. Resist the temptation to overdo it — harsh scrubs or too-frequent washing can make the problem worse.

Avoid oily moisturizers, cosmetics, or sunscreens. Look for products labeled "non-comedogenic," meaning it won't clog your pores.

Try not to touch your face. The dirt and oils on your fingers can cause breakouts. So can picking at or squeezing existing pimples. "Even though it may be tempting, remember that squeezing can lead to scarring and discoloration, especially in those with richer or deeper skin tones," says Jessica Wu, M.D., a board-certified dermatologist in Los Angeles , and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. "If a whitehead is on the surface and comes out when you gently squeeze (with clean fingers!), probably no harm done. But if it doesn't come out easily, stop! Squeezing until you draw blood and leaving scabs can increase the likelihood of scarring."

As for acne-fighting cleansers, creams, and gels? While some skin care products are approved for pregnancy , not every zit-zapper gets the green light for pregnant moms.

Items containing benzoyl peroxide and salicylic acid are generally considered safe when used in small amounts for a limited time, says the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of DermatologyIs Any Acne Treatment Safe to Use During Pregnancy?See All Sources [4] Avoid topical products containing retinoids (retinol, tretinoin, adapalene, tazarotene), oral isotretinoin, and spironolactone, says Dr. Wu, as they may be harmful during pregnancy.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of DermatologyIs Any Acne Treatment Safe to Use During Pregnancy?See All Sources

If you have questions about a skin care product, it's always worth checking with your health care provider. You can weigh the pros and cons together to decide what's right for you and your baby.

A new crop of pimples could be an early sign of pregnancy, thanks to hormonal shifts that affect your skin's oil production. But the best way to confirm your hunch is with a home pregnancy test. If the results are positive, you and your doctor can talk about ways to keep your skin clear that also keep your developing baby safe.