Is BDSM Safe During Pregnancy? What Expecting Parents Need to Know

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Wooden hands bound with rope symbolizing BDSM during pregnancy

A healthy pregnancy doesn't necessarily mean putting your sex life on hold. Some BDSM activities may be safe with communication and modifications, while others — especially those that restrict breathing or increase the risk of injury — should be avoided.

A gentle version of bondage and light S&M can be safe during pregnancy, as long as you and your partner communicate clearly throughout the experience. There are a few precautions to keep in mind, however, including avoiding positions that could injure you or your baby and anything that may restrict your breathing.

Here are some additional guidelines, depending on where your fantasies take you.

Key Takeaways

Gentle bondage can be safe during pregnancy with modifications. Bondage and light S&M may be safe if partners communicate clearly, avoid pressure on the belly, limit time in one position, and account for pregnancy-related changes such as swelling and increased sensitivity.

Avoid any activity that restricts breathing. Erotic asphyxiation, muzzles, or anything that could reduce oxygen intake are unsafe during pregnancy because they can decrease oxygen supply to both you and your baby.

Prioritize comfort, safety, and stress reduction. Gentle spanking on the backside is probably fine, but activities involving intense fear, rough play, or potential injury should be avoided. Consent, comfort, and medical guidance should always come first when exploring sexual activities during pregnancy.

Is bondage safe during pregnancy?

If you're considering bondage when you're expecting, opt for a gentle approach that accommodates your growing belly and changing tolerance for pain and discomfort.

Some things to keep in mind:

Positions. A baby bump can make some sex positions uncomfortable, and, in some cases, even risky from a medical standpoint. Avoid positions that put pressure directly on your belly, and don't lie on your back for extended periods, especially after the fourth month.

Immobility . Remaining in one position for too long can be pretty uncomfortable during pregnancy. Speak up if something doesn't feel right — a good reason not to use gags or muzzles.

Swelling. Pregnancy-related swelling might make bonds around your wrists and ankles feel tighter and less comfortable. You might want to switch from handcuffs if you use them to lightly tied silk scarves.

Blood flow . Increased blood flow to the genital area can make tissues more sensitive during pregnancy. Take extreme care using any sex toys or partaking in rough sex. If you experience any significant vaginal bleeding , call your health care practitioner and head in for an exam, if recommended.

"Communicate," advises What to Expect Community mom here_we_go. "If it feels too rough to you, it's probably too rough. Baby is pretty well protected, but if you're not comfortable or not enjoying it, tell [your partner]. He can't read your mind."

Is erotic asphyxiation safe while pregnant?

Erotic asphyxiation is off-limits when you're expecting (and can be deadly even if you're not). Any sexual activities that purposefully or even unintentionally restrict your ability to breathe, including the use of muzzles, are risky in general — and even more so if you're pregnant.

Restricting airflow can reduce oxygen delivery to you, and, in turn, your baby. It's definitely not worth the risk.

Get more expert advice, track your pregnancy, and connect with other moms to be on our free What to Expect app .

Is spanking during sex safe while pregnant?

Have you been naughty (at least in your fantasies)? Then there's no reason why your partner can't give you a nice spanking — as long as you're comfortable with it. Just make sure it's very gentle, and that it's on your butt or thighs only, never your belly.

Is role-playing during sex safe while pregnant?

If answering the "repairman" at your front door in a racy teddy is what helps you feel sexy, by all means invite him in. But if you enjoy S&M role-playing scenarios that invoke a false sense of fear, you might want to postpone those until after you deliver.

Feelings of danger or intense fear can be exciting for some people, but they can also cause the release of the stress hormone cortisol. And the last thing you need right now is more stress .

Remember, too, that you should not consent to anything that feels unsafe or crosses your personal boundaries. If in doubt, let your partner know that you're not comfortable and suggest other ways to get intimate that do make you feel safe.

"My husband and I dabble in it and make private videos and pictures. It takes a lot of trust to be able to fully enjoy this, but it helped spice up our sex life and make it into something fun and exciting and ever-changing," says Community mom Carrie00004.

Worried that your very R-rated activities may not be appropriate now that you're a parent-to-be? Don't be. Your baby isn't aware of what you're doing, and you’ll have sexy memories to reminisce about when you’re busy changing diapers in a few months!

Pregnancy doesn’t have to put a damper on your sex life. As long as your practitioner has given you the green light for sexual activities during pregnancy , there's no reason to shy away from whatever turns you and your partner on.