Is Breast Tenderness in Early Pregnancy Normal? What to Expect in the First Trimester

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

pregnant woman with sore breasts

Breast tenderness is common during pregnancy, but it's usually temporary — and there are ways to relieve the discomfort.

In fact, breast tenderness is one of the first (and most common) symptoms of pregnancy, starting as early as weeks 4 to 7 and lasting through the first trimester. Hormones, growing milk glands, and increased blood flow can all leave your breasts feeling sore, swollen, and extra-sensitive.

Get clued in on what's behind breast discomfort during pregnancy, what the pain actually feels like, and how to get some relief.

Key Takeaways

Breast tenderness is one of the earliest and most common pregnancy symptoms. Hormonal changes, increased blood flow, and growing milk glands can make breasts feel heavy, sore, tingly, or extra sensitive — especially during the first trimester.

Your breasts go through major changes as they prepare for breastfeeding. Along with pain and tenderness, pregnant women may notice darker areolas, more prominent veins, sensitive nipples, and even leaking colostrum near the end of pregnancy.

Simple home remedies can help relieve breast pain during pregnancy and postpartum. Wearing a supportive wireless bra, using warm or cold compresses, moisturizing with lanolin cream, and choosing loose-fitting clothing can all help ease discomfort as your breasts continue changing before and after birth.

What does breast pain feel like during pregnancy?

Breast pain is as individual as any other pregnancy change. Your breasts may feel heavy, full, and tingly. Or you may feel a dull ache, soreness, or tenderness. You may even have sharp, shooting pain or nipple pain. Or you may feel no discomfort at all.

Breast tenderness is one of the many common pregnancy symptoms that you can track with the My Journal feature in the What to Expect app .

"First pregnancy, my breasts were so sore that wearing a shirt even hurt," says What to Expect Community mom Sassenach95. "Second pregnancy, no sore breasts, but they were fuller."

"I don't even know what sore breasts are supposed to feel like," says Community mom NK1121. "I have two boys and never have sore breasts, even on my period."

What causes breast pain and sore nipples during pregnancy?

The dazzling hormonal duo of estrogen and progesterone deserve most of the credit for breast and nipple changes and tenderness. Trusted SourceJohns Hopkins MedicineBreast Pain: 10 Reasons Your Breasts May HurtSee All Sources [1] Other factors include the healthy buildup of fat, tissue, and milk glands in your breasts, along with increased blood flow to the area. Together, these changes help your breasts get ready for breastfeeding.

Trusted SourceJohns Hopkins MedicineBreast Pain: 10 Reasons Your Breasts May HurtSee All Sources

And as you near the end of the third trimester , your body shifts into high gear to get ready for your baby's imminent arrival. You might feel breast pain and tenderness again at this point as colostrum production begins.

What other breast changes occur during pregnancy?

In addition to that tender, full feeling, you'll likely notice a few other breast changes during pregnancy:

Your nipples. Along with achiness and tingling, your nipples may be protruding more than usual and feel more tender. "I have noticed slight changes in my nipples (color, size, texture)," says Community mom smpick.

Your areolas. If you're like most women, your areola (the dark area around the nipple) may become darker, bigger, and possibly spotted — a phenomenon that will continue as the months pass. Your areola may also develop Montgomery's tubercles , little goose bump-like oil glands that help lubricate the area.

Your veins. You may also see a network of veins just below the skin's surface, which carry nutrients and fluids from mother to baby. How noticeable they are may depend on your genes, the size of your breasts, and whether you've had augmentation surgery.

Discharge. Got leaky breasts along with pain and tenderness? The production of colostrum — the precursor to breast milk and your baby's first food after delivery — can cause some pain and tenderness. You may even notice colostrum start to leak around week 38.

How can I relieve breast pain and sore nipples?

The best medicine for breast pain usually isn't a prescription (though talk with your doctor if the pain is intense). Instead, try these home remedies to relieve discomfort and tenderness:

Invest in a good bra. Get measured by a specialist, if you can, for a supportive (but not too tight!) fit.

Wear a comfy nursing bra. This item is a maternity must-have. Look for wire-free, unpadded options that don't have hooks or snaps, and consider wearing it at night. Position changes during sleep can irritate sore nipples or make tender breasts even more uncomfortable. A cotton sports bra without underwire is another good option. "After removing my regular bra I switch into a sports bra and even sleep in it," says Community member Ctrott22. "It's really the only thing that has helped. Leaving them unsupported hurts so bad that I have no choice but to have a bra on 24/7."

Apply cold compresses. Cold packs on your breasts can relieve discomfort. Protect your skin by wrapping an ice pack in a washcloth, or try a bag of frozen peas and carrots wrapped in a dish towel.

Hit the showers Not a fan of the cold? Warm water from the shower can ease pain too. "I would lay a warm washcloth across my entire chest area and under my arms in the evenings. and it seemed to give some relief," says Community mom mm222023. "Thankfully the pain went away after the first trimester and didn't come back until my milk started to come in."

Use lotion. Moisturize swollen breasts and tender nipples with a lanolin cream.

Wear loose clothing. Just like an ill-fitting bra, tops that are too snug may pinch your breasts and cause more pain. The fix: loose, flowy tops and oversized tees.

Ask about OTC relief. Check in with your doctor about taking an over-the-counter pain reliever if the other home remedies aren't helping.

Talk to your partner. Make sure they're aware of the situation so they can proceed with caution. "Oh my goshhhh. It really is a challenge to hug my husband!" says Community member AllForMyBaby0777.

How long do your breasts and nipples stay sore during pregnancy?

Breast pain and tenderness are common in the first trimester, and they tend to level off in the second and third. Discomfort can return when lactation starts and your breasts transition from producing colostrum to making more mature milk for your baby.

"I had bad breast and nipple pain until 10 weeks or so," says Community mom mlwoodworth.

Can breast pain continue after pregnancy?

Breast pain can also occur postpartum in the form of engorgement , which happens in the days after you give birth, as your breasts swell and harden with milk, extra blood, and fluids.

Engorged breasts can feel very hard, swollen, and painful, and may even feel warm to the touch. The skin around your nipples may feel flat and hard.

Engorgement can happen not only when your milk first comes in, but also later as you work to establish a solid breastfeeding routine . It's perfectly normal, and you can try following the same tips (like wearing a supportive bra and using compresses) to relieve some of the discomfort.

Breast pain and tenderness are very common during pregnancy and right after you deliver. But if the pain worsens or hangs on for longer than you think it should, check in with your doctor. With a few quick remedies and some early breastfeeding guidance , you'll be feeling more comfortable soon.