Is Bleeding After Sex During Pregnancy Normal?

Updates throughout to copy, sourcing and formatting, including a new medical review for accuracy.

red roses, bleeding after sex during pregnancy

If you’ve noticed spotting and bleeding after sex since you’ve been pregnant, rest assured that it’s usually nothing to worry about. Learn how to handle post-sex bleeding, and when to call the doctor.

Bleeding after sex when you’re pregnant can be unsettling at best, but it doesn't mean that something is necessarily wrong. As scary as it looks, bleeding in expectant moms can be very common .

Vaginal bleeding occurs in 15% to 25% of pregnancies, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). You’re more likely to spot in the first trimester, but blood flow can appear on and off throughout, particularly after you’ve had sex. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBleeding During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBleeding During PregnancySee All Sources

Still, it's always a good idea to check with your practitioner to confirm what's causing your post-sex blood flow, as well as get the green light to continue with intercourse.

Key Takeaways

Light bleeding after sex during pregnancy is pretty common and usually nothing to worry about — it's often due to normal changes in your cervix as your body preps for birth.

It's always a good idea to check in with your doctor if you notice any spotting just to make sure everything's okay and rule out anything serious.

If you experience heavy bleeding, pain, or bleeding that lasts several days, call your health care provider ASAP, as these could be signs of a more serious issue like preterm labor or placenta-related conditions.

What causes bleeding after sex during pregnancy?

“The first thing to do if you experience light spotting after intercourse is to take a big breath,” says Shannon Smith , M.D., a board-certified OB/GYN and partner at Brigham Faulkner OB/GYN Associates in Boston, Massachusetts, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . “This is very common and most likely your pregnancy is proceeding normally.”

Light to medium bleeding after sex is usually the result of normal changes to the cervix during pregnancy. The cervix goes through a process called "remodeling" in preparation for birth, which causes it to change shape, open up, shed cells, and become quite tender.

You probably won't feel it, but your body could be extra sensitive during sex, which can lead to light bleeding. In addition to spotting after sex, you might also be more likely to bleed after a pelvic exam or Pap test, ACOG says.

Vaginal bleeding very early in the first trimester can also be a sign of implantation. About a week after conception, the fertilized egg attaches to the lining of the uterus. This process, called implantation, can cause a little spotting or light flow. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human DevelopmentWhat Are Some Common Signs of Pregnancy?See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human DevelopmentWhat Are Some Common Signs of Pregnancy?See All Sources

Feeling unsure? The What to Expect app helps you track symptoms and get trusted advice — so you're never left guessing.

Rarely, bleeding during pregnancy can be a sign of something more serious, which is why it’s a good idea to check in with your OB/GYN about any spotting you notice.

For example, although it's unlikely, bleeding after sex could be a sign of an ectopic pregnancy , where the fertilized egg attaches somewhere other than the uterus. Sex that’s followed by bright red bleeding could be a sign of placenta previa , a condition that generally develops in the second or third trimester and is when the placenta covers part or all of the cervix. Placental abruption , which occurs when there's an early separation of the placenta from the uterus, can also cause heavy bleeding, with or without clots.

Sex does not cause miscarriage, but heavy bleeding — when you fill a pad every hour, or have lighter bleeding that lasts for days — sometimes indicates that a pregnancy is at risk of ending before 20 weeks.

If you’re having symptoms of a miscarriage , call your practitioner immediately. Many women at risk of miscarrying can go on to have healthy pregnancies with guidance from their doctors.

The first thing to do if you experience light spotting after intercourse is to take a big breath. This is very common and most likely your pregnancy is proceeding normally.

Dr. Shannon Smith, an OB/GYN in Boston and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

What to do about bleeding after sex during pregnancy

If you have spotting or a very light flow, don't insert a tampon. Instead, wear a pad. If the bleeding is copious, doesn't stop flowing or is accompanied by moderate to severe cramping, fever, back and pelvic pressure, or contractions, call your practitioner right away to find out what's causing it.

Also let your doctor know if you're having regular contractions that intensify and become more frequent, even when you change positions — as well as back pressure, bleeding, and pelvic pressure. These could be signs of preterm labor if they happen well before your due date.

When to call the doctor about bleeding after sex during pregnancy

Red or brown spotting or light flow mixed with mucus is usually normal, especially early on in your pregnancy. But bleeding after sex while you’re pregnant can be alarming, which is why ACOG recommends checking in with your practitioner any time you notice it, if only for reassurance that sexual activity isn't harming your baby.

Reach out to your doctor as soon as possible if you notice any of the following more serious symptoms, however:

Heavy bleeding

Bleeding that lasts for more than a few days

Bleeding accompanied by cramping, back pressure, contractions or a fever

Bleeding later in your pregnancy

Finally, always let your doctor know if you’re experiencing any kind of pain. “If your bleeding is accompanied by pain, no matter the amount, I would recommend contacting your provider,” says Dr. Smith.

Bleeding anytime during pregnancy, including after sex, can be stressful. It’s usually nothing to worry about but it's still always a good idea to speak to your doctor to rule out early labor or any other medical issues.

If your practitioner gives you the all-clear, know that regular sex during pregnancy can come with a lot of benefits. In fact, it's one of the healthiest ways an expecting couple can reduce stress, stay connected, and keep the romance alive while waiting for baby to arrive. So as long as there isn’t a medical reason for you to avoid sex, keep it up!