Is Bloating a Sign of Pregnancy?

is bloating a sign of pregnancy, heart-shaped balloons that are inflated and deflated

If you've been bloated after trying to conceive, it's possible that it's an early sign of pregnancy. Find out what causes bloating, how to tell whether it's a pregnancy symptom, and how to get some relief.

Here's a not-so-fun fact: Nearly two-thirds of pregnant women report bloating during their first trimester, research shows. Trusted SourceActa Obstetrica et Gynecologica ScandinavicaFunctional Bowel Disorders in Pregnancy: Effect on Quality of Life, Evaluation and ManagementSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceActa Obstetrica et Gynecologica ScandinavicaFunctional Bowel Disorders in Pregnancy: Effect on Quality of Life, Evaluation and ManagementSee All Sources

So if you notice a balloon-like belly after you’ve been trying to conceive, it's possible that your less-than-taut tummy could be an early sign of pregnancy .

Is bloating a common early pregnancy symptom?

Bloating is a common sign of early pregnancy, along with its unpleasant cousins gas and constipation, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsChanges During PregnancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsChanges During PregnancySee All Sources

In fact, research suggests that almost two-thirds of pregnant women experience that full, puffy feeling during their first trimester .

"This is my first pregnancy, but I find that I’m bloated a lot, especially after I eat or when I wake up or just later in the day," says What to Expect Community member Alivia22. "I’m only 6 weeks, 1 day, but I’ve been experiencing bloating since before I actually knew I that I was pregnant."

How to tell if you are just bloated — or pregnant

Bloating can happen for a lot of different reasons, so jeans that feel snugger than usual aren't an automatic pregnancy sign. It's often a precursor to your period (thanks, hormones!).

But bloating can also stem from not getting enough fiber or drinking enough water, eating gas-causing foods, being sedentary, having a food intolerance, or even dealing with an underlying GI issue (like irritable bowel syndrome), notes the National Library of Medicine. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline PlusAbdominal BloatingSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline PlusAbdominal BloatingSee All Sources

"During pregnancy, certain gas-causing foods can be really troublesome," says Jennifer Wu, M.D. , an OB/GYN in New York City and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "Beans, lentils and broccoli are at the top of the list. Foods that never caused a problem before may seem impossible."

If bloating is happening because you’re pregnant, there's a good chance your more swollen belly will be accompanied by other early pregnancy symptoms. Think: missing your period, fatigue, tender or swollen breasts, and nausea.

You shouldn't rely on symptoms alone to confirm that there's a baby on the way, though. The best way to tell for sure if new bloating means you're pregnant is by taking a home pregnancy test . If it's positive, make an appointment with your doctor to get those results confirmed!

What causes bloating in early pregnancy?

You might not be surprised to learn that hormones are to blame. During pregnancy, your body has a surge in the hormone progesterone. That causes your smooth muscles — including the muscles in your GI tract — to relax, slowing the rate of digestion. The result can be gas and constipation, causing that icky, stomach's-gonna-pop feeling, according to Kaiser Permanente. Trusted SourceKaiser PermanenteConstipation and Gas in PregnancySee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceKaiser PermanenteConstipation and Gas in PregnancySee All Sources

The problem gets amplified as your pregnancy progresses, since your uterus can start to press on your GI tract as it grows. The extra pressure can slow your digestion even more, creating (you guessed it!) more gas, constipation and bloating.

"So only 5 weeks, and I am SO BLOATED," says What to Expect Community member BS1137. "My jeans are so tight and uncomfortable. It’s not even in my head; my friend noticed it lol."

How to relieve bloating during pregnancy

Gaining the upper hand over pregnancy bloating means taking steps to keep things moving along in your GI tract so you can go to the bathroom regularly. Try these tips to relieve pregnancy bloating:

Drink plenty of fluids. Namely water, which helps keep your stool soft so it can pass more easily. Pregnant women should aim for eight to 12 8-ounce glasses per day .

Stick to mini-meals. Doctors often suggest stretching the three-meals-a-day regimen out to five or six smaller ones. You can also try minimizing portions of those gas-inducing veggies like broccoli, beans and lentils. "Smaller portions of those foods spread out over a time period may make them more tolerable," says Dr. Wu. "Cooked rather than the raw versions may also be easier on the stomach."

Fill up on fiber-rich foods . Think: fruits and vegetables , whole grains, beans, nuts, and seeds. Fiber helps keep you regular and supports good digestive health overall. Up your intake gradually if you're not used to eating a lot of it — having too much at once can make gas and constipation worse.

Stay active. Take a walk, go for a swim, or hit up a prenatal yoga class. Moving your body keeps everything in your GI tract moving along too, so you're less prone to bloating.

Sip pregnancy-safe tea. Options like peppermint and ginger tea can aid in digestion and relieve gas. They count towards your daily fluid quota too. But always check with your practitioner before drinking herbal tea , as some varieties aren’t safe or recommended during pregnancy.

Try a fiber supplement. Natural picks like psyllium add bulk to your stool, making them easier to pass. Just be sure to bump up your water intake.

Ask your doctor about a laxative. Most OTC options are considered safe to use during pregnancy, including saline laxatives (like Phillips' Milk of Magnesia, or Dulcolax) and stimulant laxatives (like Ducodyl), notes the Mayo Clinic. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicIs It Safe to Take Stool Softeners to Treat Pregnancy Constipation?See All Sources [5] "In general, probiotics that aid in digestion can also be used in pregnancy," Dr. Wu adds. Remember to always check with your provider before taking any medication when you're pregnant.

Scale back on the chips. Processed and packaged snacks and foods tend to be high in salt, which slows digestion and contributes to gas and bloating. Limiting them may help relieve some of the bloat.

Pay attention to triggers. Carbonated drinks, broccoli, cabbage, and artificial sweeteners are a few typical offenders. If you notice you tend to get extra gassy after eating or drinking a certain thing, try to cut back on it.

It's common to get bloated early in your pregnancy (and stay that way for the next nine months). Taking steps to encourage regular bowel movements can help stave off constipation and gas, which in turn will help you feel less bloated.