Is Cramping a Sign of Pregnancy?

is cramping a sign of pregnancy, woman hunched over in pain with arms crossed over her stomach

Learn whether cramping may be an early pregnancy symptom, how to tell, how it feels, and what to do about it.

You might be on the lookout for any possible clue that you could be pregnant when you're trying to conceive. While it's not super common, some women do experience mild cramping and/or spotting when the fertilized egg attaches to the lining of the uterus (aka during implantation). Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicImplantation BleedingSee All Sources [1]

Implantation Bleeding

So if you notice some minor abdominal aching or a pink tinge when you wipe, those could be encouraging signs.

What does early pregnancy cramping feel like?

Cramping that happens around the time of implantation can make you lower abdominal area a little uncomfortable. It might feel similar to light period cramping — think twinging, aching, or pressure. It usually only lasts for a day or so, and might ease up when you change positions, according to Tommy's. Trusted SourceTommy'sStomach (Abdominal) Pain or Cramps in PregnancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceTommy'sStomach (Abdominal) Pain or Cramps in PregnancySee All Sources

Early pregnancy cramping might occur alongside some very light bleeding or spotting, notes the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsChanges During PregnancySee All Sources [3] You might notice a few light stains in your underwear or see a tinge of pink or brown when you wipe after going to the bathroom.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsChanges During PregnancySee All Sources

"I had pink spotting with cramping," says What to Expect Community member ArrowsMom, describing what she thought was her period but turned out to be implantation bleeding .

Causes of cramping in early pregnancy

Cramping can be a sign of implantation, where the fertilized embryo attaches to the lining of the uterus. The uterine muscles stretch slightly when this happens, which can cause some mild abdominal discomfort and very light bleeding or spotting.

Implantation cramping and spotting typically occurs somewhere between days 20 and 26 of a 28-day menstrual cycle. That's around the same time you'd normally be due to get your period if you weren't pregnant.

"One of the earliest signs of pregnancy can be mild cramping and a little spotting, which occur during implantation," says Jennifer Wu , M.D., an OB/GYN in New York, New York , and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "This can confuse patients about their 'last menstrual period.' They may think they had a period, but it was just super light."

So initially, you might not be sure what you're dealing with. But if you're pregnant, the cramping and spotting should only last for a day or so. If you're not pregnant and are actually getting your period, the bleeding will start to resemble your normal flow (in other words, it'll become heavier and continue for several days), according to the Mayo Clinic. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicIs Implantation Bleeding Common in Early Pregnancy?See All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicIs Implantation Bleeding Common in Early Pregnancy?See All Sources

Once the embryo implants itself into the uterus, it starts releasing hormones to stop your periods and prepare your body for a baby.

Throughout the first trimester, those hormonal shifts can also contribute to cramping, as well as other early pregnancy symptoms like fatigue, breast tenderness, nausea, food cravings or aversions, mood swings, constipation, headaches, and having to pee more often, says the Office on Women's Health. Trusted SourceOffice on Women's HealthStages of PregnancySee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceOffice on Women's HealthStages of PregnancySee All Sources

Cramping that occurs a bit later on in pregnancy might be brought on by other symptoms like tummy trouble.

"The last couple weeks, I have had all-over abdominal discomfort, like even upper where my stomach would sit," says What to Expect Community user mrw718. "But once in a while, my stomach almost cramps like I’m going to get diarrhea. I have been dealing with constipation since early on in this pregnancy ... wondering if I should be worrying that it’s something more?"

When to call your doctor about cramping

There's no need to stress about cramping or spotting that's mild and short-lived when you're trying to conceive or have recently become pregnant. But you should call your doctor if you're experiencing more severe symptoms, such as:

Vaginal bleeding

Frequent or intense cramps

Unusual vaginal discharge

Lower back pain

Pain or burning when you pee

In some cases, these symptoms could be a sign of a condition that warrants medical attention, like a urinary tract infection or pregnancy loss.

A little bit of cramping or spotting can be one of the first signs that you're pregnant, and some women continue to experience them throughout the first trimester. They're usually par for the course, just be sure to let your doctor know if the cramping becomes severe or if the spotting turns to bleeding.

"If patient knows they are pregnant and has the mild cramping and bleeding, they will often get very worried," says Dr. Wu. "Good hormone levels that are increasing appropriately and normal sonograms are very reassuring at this early stage of pregnancy."

Key Takeaways

Cramping can be a sign of implantation. Mild cramping and spotting can occur when the fertilized egg implants into the uterus, typically around days 20 to 26 of a 28-day cycle. This cramping feels similar to light period cramps and usually lasts only a day or so.

Throughout the first trimester, hormonal shifts can also contribute to cramping , as well as other early pregnancy symptoms like fatigue, breast tenderness, nausea, food cravings or aversions, mood swings, constipation, headaches, and having to pee more often. Cramping that occurs a bit later on in pregnancy might be brought on by other symptoms like tummy trouble.

Mild cramping and spotting are generally normal, but you should call your doctor if you experience severe cramping, heavy bleeding, unusual discharge, or pain during urination, as these could signal complications like urinary tract infections or pregnancy loss.