Is Constipation a Sign of Pregnancy?

Is constipation a sign of pregnancy, woman holding her stomach drinking water

Struggling to go? Constipation is a common complaint that shows up in early pregnancy.

You know it the moment it hits — that uncomfortable, backed-up feeling. Indeed, constipation is no picnic, though it’s somehow made worse when it appears in the early weeks of pregnancy.

That’s because a rise in your body’s hormone levels can mire the digestive process, causing annoying colon congestion — aka constipation, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsProblems of the Digestive SystemSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsProblems of the Digestive SystemSee All Sources

In fact, up to about 40% of expecting women may experience constipation at some point in pregnancy, according to the Cleveland Clinic, and for some, the condition can last the whole nine months (and even beyond … sigh). Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicPregnancy ConstipationSee All Sources [2]

Pregnancy Constipation

But this doesn’t mean you have to suffer through the discomfort. Here’s more about treating constipation when you’re expecting, as well as when to call the doctor about it.

Is constipation an early sign of pregnancy?

Yes, constipation, along with moodiness , bloating , light spotting , and nasal congestion , can be a sign of pregnancy that emerges during the first trimester .

And this plugged-up sensation might worsen later in pregnancy as more pressure from your expanding uterus is put on your bowels.

You’ll recognize a case of constipation if you’re only having a bowel movement a few times a week and it’s difficult — or even painful — to pass hard stools.

If constipation is frequent, it could cause hemorrhoids or worsen a case you already have.

How to treat constipation during early pregnancy

As with any health condition, always check with your doctor before taking anything from the drug store or a supplement to treat your constipation.

Fortunately, there are a variety of non-medicinal ways to ease that backed-up feeling in pregnancy, including the following:

Focus on fiber. Truth: Fiber both bulks up and softens your stool, making it easier to go. ACOG suggests eating high-fiber foods with a goal of at least 25 grams a day. Try apples, bananas, berries, whole grains, nuts, seeds and leafy greens. And probiotics in some yogurts can prompt gut bacteria to better break down food so it flows more easily.

Get moving. Light exercise , like a daily 10-minute walk, can do wonders for constipation. Other safe workouts include using a stationary bike or swimming.

Stay hydrated. Drinking enough water every day (aim for eight to 10 glasses) helps soften foods and keep them moving along in your system.

Try fiber supplements or prune juice. Ask your doctor about these options for tough cases of constipation. A bran or fiber supplement might be able to be used to treat your constipation, and prune juice is a mild laxative that can help move things along if you like the taste.

Eat small meals. Ease back-ups with six mini meals a day, rather than three large ones.

Don’t hold back. Head to the loo when you need to — not going can worsen the issue.

Ask about a laxative. Speak with your doctor about pregnancy-safe laxatives , many of which are over the counter. But skip stimulant laxatives, as well as homemade and herbal remedies. And sometimes, prenatal vitamins , antacids, or iron supplements make constipation worse, so ask your physician about adjusting these medications.

When to call the doctor

If your constipation is hanging on, lasting beyond a few weeks, it’s time to put in a call to your doctor. Together, you can discuss whether a specific laxative, supplement, or change in medication can help your particular case.

You don’t need to suffer the strain and pain of constipation. Often, with some dietary changes, exercise and extra water, you can stave off this pesky early pregnancy symptom .