Is 'Cry It Out' Sleep Training Right for Your Baby?

Updates to language, tone and sourcing throughout.

cry

For some families, "cry it out," or the extinction method of sleep training, helps babies (and grown-ups) sleep through the night and get the rest they need. Here's what to know, including when to try cry it out and how fast it works.

There’s a reason brand-new parents are universally exhausted — it’s normal for a newborn to sleep for only a couple hours at a stretch.

But if your baby isn’t falling asleep on her own or sleeping six hours straight by the time she’s between 4 and 6 months old, you might want to consider sleep training your little one.

One of the most straightforward ways to sleep train your baby is with the "cry it out" method (CIO). It's not for every family — as the name suggests, it involves tears (baby's, and probably yours too).

If you're worried about letting your baby cry for a while before rushing in to comfort her, it can be reassuring to keep the ultimate goal in mind: helping baby learn the essential skill of falling asleep on her own and soothing herself back to sleep when she wakes up. Trusted SourceSleep FoundationThe Ferber Method for Sleep TrainingSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceSleep FoundationThe Ferber Method for Sleep TrainingSee All Sources

What is the cry it out method of sleep training?

Cry it out, also known as the "extinction method," is a sleep training technique that involves putting your baby to bed in her crib and allowing her to fuss or cry until she falls asleep on her own. That means you'll need to resist tactics like feeding your baby to get her back to sleep or rocking her to help her drift off.

The point of all sleep training methods isn’t to keep a baby from waking up during the night (everyone does, even adults). Nor is the goal for baby to get through the entire night without a feeding (breastfed infants might continue needing an overnight feed up to age 1 ).

The main reason to sleep train, using cry it out or any other method, is to teach your baby how to fall asleep on her own and how to get herself back to sleep when she wakes up.

Tips on letting baby cry it out

While it might seem hard to believe, crying it out is most likely much harder on you than it is on your baby.

Before you get started, make sure that baby isn't napping too much or sleeping too little during the day, since overtired babies have a harder time falling and staying asleep.

You’ll also need to establish a bedtime routine that doesn’t involve feeding or rocking to help your little one fall asleep. It's a good idea to have your baby on some kind of sleep schedule before you start too.

Ready to try the CIO method? Here's how:

Look for your baby’s cues that she’s tired. She might rub her eyes, suck her thumb, pull at her ear, or get cranky at the same time every night. Anticipating when your baby needs to sleep is crucial to CIO success, to ensure you get baby in bed before she’s overtired.

Start your 30- to 60-minute bedtime routine. This helps your baby wind down and prepare for sleep. Good baby bedtime routines often involve a bath, final feeding, a book, lullabies, and maybe a massage.

Put your baby down in her crib every time . Whether for bedtime or naps, the crib (and not a stroller or swing) is conducive to a safe, good night's sleep and helps establish a routine.

Put her down when she's still awake . The goal of sleep training is to give your baby the chance to learn how to fall asleep on her own, preferably when she's drowsy but awake instead of lulled to dreamland by a parent or other caregiver. Pat your little one gently, whisper "I love you," then calmly and quietly leave the room without waiting for her to nod off.

Expect some protest. Your baby may cry, sometimes even a fair bit. However long you leave baby by herself, it will likely feel much longer to you.

Don’t respond. Here’s where the going gets tough: The full-on cry it out method calls for you to let baby cry, without comfort from you, until she gets tired and falls asleep.

You're going to have a rough couple of nights (or even a week or more) as you listen to your baby wail. But remember this as you're sitting outside her door, thinking you're the worst parent in the world: Crying won’t hurt your baby in the long run. Ultimately you're doing your baby a favor by helping her learn to fall asleep on her own.

How long should you let baby cry it out?

The goal of the CIO method is to let baby fuss and cry on her own until she wears herself out and falls asleep. In the beginning, you may end up having to let baby cry it out for 45 minutes to an hour before she goes to sleep, though it varies.

Most parents who try the cry it out method find their babies cry increasingly less over the first three nights, and the tears stop somewhere between the fourth and seventh nights. After a few days or so, babies may simply fuss for a couple of minutes. Or they may just coo and kick for a bit before going to sleep without a complaint.

When to let baby cry it out

When to let your baby cry it out depends on your baby and your comfort with the method. Infants are generally developmentally ready to be sleep trained at 4 to 6 months. By about 5 to 6 months, they can sleep through the night without needing to eat, making it a good time to try the CIO method.

Keep in mind that your older baby may have already trained you to respond to her nocturnal tears with feedings, cuddling, and even a visit to your bed. By 6 months and up, those smart little cuties may have figured out that when they fuss overnight, they'll be picked up, rocked, or fed. But teaching them to sleep for longer stretches can ultimately be good for all of you.

Should you let baby cry it out for naps?

If you’re trying the CIO method at nighttime, you should try to let your baby cry it out for naps too.

But if your baby’s naptime is typically on the shorter side and only lasts 30 minutes to an hour, you may want to limit how long you let her cry (to around 10 minutes) before you go in to comfort her or try another method to put her to sleep.

After about a week of nighttime sleep training, naptimes should get easier. At that point, your baby will have gotten used to the idea that being put in her crib means that it’s time to sleep. And she will have discovered the self-soothing methods (pacifier, thumb-sucking, etc.) that help her summon the sandman.

What's the difference between the CIO method and the Ferber method?

Ready to try sleep training with your child, but looking for a gentler option that involves fewer tears than CIO? The Ferber method might be for you.

The cry it out method of sleep training involves putting your baby to bed and letting her cry until she falls asleep without a parent's intervention.

The Ferber method is a form of "graduated extinction" sleep training where you allow your baby to cry for a few minutes, then check back in to quietly comfort her for a minute or two. It involves gradually increasing the amount of time you leave her by herself until she’s asleep.

The theory was outlined in the book Solve Your Child’s Sleep Problems by Dr. Richard Ferber, Trusted SourceRichard Ferber, M.D.Solve Your Child's Sleep ProblemsSee All Sources [2] the former director and founder of the Sleep Center at Boston Children's Hospital.

Trusted SourceRichard Ferber, M.D.Solve Your Child's Sleep ProblemsSee All Sources

When to stop letting baby cry it out

As long as you know your baby is in a safe sleep environment (i.e., in her crib on a firm mattress without any pillows, bumpers, blankets or stuffed animals) and isn’t hungry, wet or sick, it's okay to leave the room and let her settle down on her own.

If you’re concerned about your child's safety or wellbeing, check on her — but try to keep any interaction brief and mundane. A video baby monitor can be reassuring. Try to give the CIO method enough time to see if it makes a difference. Stick to a consistent routine for a week or two before giving up on it entirely.

Also keep in mind that a big change or stress in your baby’s life, like a move, new sibling, new babysitter, ear infection, etc., can render sleep training futile. Wait a few weeks until things have gone back to normal before trying to sleep train.

Cry it out isn't for everyone, and it doesn’t work for every baby. And that's totally okay.

If CIO makes you really uncomfortable, remember that it isn’t the only option. You may want to start with another form of sleep training like Ferber or the chair method to see if it works better for you.

What to do if your baby spits up or throws up when crying it out

A small number of babies get so worked up from the cry it out method that they spit up or throw up. Luckily, it isn't technically a health concern, though it can be very upsetting and stressful. It also may be a sign that your baby is sick or this isn't the right approach for your family.

Don't force it. Talk to your pediatrician to rule out anything medical and get advice on whether you should keep trying or change gears. If it happens repeatedly, stop sleep training for a bit and check in with your doctor to see if there's another method better suited for your little one.

Try to avoid feeding baby too close to bedtime, which can disrupt sleep regardless. Instead, aim to nurse or bottle-feed during the first part of her bedtime routine rather than the last.

Criticism of crying it out

CIO critics sometimes point to a 2012 study finding that babies' levels of the stress hormone cortisol remained high even after they stopped crying and went to sleep on their own.

But that study was small (limited to just 25 babies between 4 and 10 months old) and had no control group to define what the study's author meant by "high" — meaning the babies in the study could have had elevated cortisol levels simply because their parents were putting them to sleep in an unfamiliar environment.

What's more, the study looked only at the extinction, "pure" form of cry it out, where parents let them cry for a long stretch all at once (a method that still does work for some families but isn't the only way to sleep train).

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) published its own long-term, larger study in its journal Pediatrics advocating sleep training as healthy and important when it comes to babies' development. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Pediatrics, PediatricsFive-Year Follow-Up of Harms and Benefits of Behavioral Infant Sleep Intervention: Randomized TrialSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Pediatrics, PediatricsFive-Year Follow-Up of Harms and Benefits of Behavioral Infant Sleep Intervention: Randomized TrialSee All Sources

The research showed that babies who are sleep trained using either the gradual, Ferber method or the straight CIO method were not at a higher risk of emotional, behavioral or psychological problems by age 6.

When to call the doctor

If your baby seems to be getting extremely worked up or is crying so much that she's getting sick, it’s worth checking in with your pediatrician to make sure there isn’t an underlying medical problem and this method is right for your little one.

You should also ask for guidance if your baby doesn’t respond to cry it out sleep training after about two weeks or so. Your doctor may be able to offer other tips to help both of you sleep better or steer you in a different direction.

No matter what you wind up doing to establish good bedtime rituals and sleep habits in your baby, remember that the days of nighttime feedings and wakings are numbered. Before you know it, your baby will be sleeping for increasingly longer periods at night as she grows. And then you can all get the rest you need.