Is Dizziness a Sign of Pregnancy?

dizziness a sign of pregnancy, spinning pinwheel

If you feel faint during pregnancy, you’re not alone. This early sign of pregnancy is common throughout the first trimester and beyond.

Feeling dizzy, faint, or lightheaded since you've been pregnant? You're not imagining things.

Some mild dizziness or lightheadedness while expecting is normal, especially since it’s related to two other common early pregnancy symptoms, nausea and vomiting, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMorning Sickness: Nausea and Vomiting of PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMorning Sickness: Nausea and Vomiting of PregnancySee All Sources

But that doesn’t mean you should dismiss dizziness or faintness as no big deal. The reason? It could point to a more serious condition.

To help with this fuzzy feeling, it’s good to know more about why dizziness during pregnancy happens in the first place and try some smart ways to relieve or even prevent it.

Here’s more about dizziness during pregnancy, including when to call the doctor.

Is dizziness an early sign of pregnancy?

Yes, some dizziness is an early pregnancy sign, typically occurring throughout the first trimester up until around week 12 .

Dizziness is particularly common in those first few months of pregnancy when changes in hormone levels cause blood pressure to drop, explains the American Heart Association. Trusted SourceAmerican Heart Associationizziness During Pregnancy: When Is It a Concern?See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Heart Associationizziness During Pregnancy: When Is It a Concern?See All Sources

You may experience faintness throughout all nine months, though once your little one arrives, these spells should taper off.

Another reason for the dizzy spells is the weight of your expanding uterus on the vein that brings blood to your heart. You might also feel overheated as your body preps for a baby on board, and this, too, can lead to dizziness.

Dehydration from nausea and vomiting may be another culprit. And eating too lightly may prompt your blood sugar to drop, leading to the same sensation.

What to do if you feel dizzy during pregnancy

It goes without saying that your safety is critical if you feel dizzy, especially if you’re driving, exercising, or carrying something heavy or hot.

If this happens, stop what you’re doing and ask for some help. And when dealing with light-headedness at other times, try the following:

Sit or lie down. If you can, it’s best to lie down and elevate your feet or sit with your head between your knees and take a few even breaths. These positions, along with simply bending over, can help increase blood flow to the brain and ease the dizzy feelings.

Move slowly. Changing positions quickly can bring on faintness. To help, get up from chairs and your bed carefully, and strive to sit and stand in different ways during the day.

Eat and hydrate. Planning regular meals, eating healthy snacks, and drinking enough water will help keep your blood sugar in check and dehydration at bay.

Stay cool. Avoid overheating by slipping away from hot, crowded rooms in search of cooler air outside. The same holds true for wearing too many layers and taking overly hot showers. Skip heavy clothes in favor of lightweight options, and aim to bathe in warm (not hot) water.

When to call the doctor

Because dizziness could be a sign of something more concerning, it’s important to share what you’re experiencing (including any bouts of fainting) with your doctor. Be sure to mention accompanying symptoms too, such as blurry vision or breathlessness.

Dizziness may be a sign of iron deficiency anemia, a common type of anemia among the general population, and the kind that plagues pregnant women most often.

It’s critical to treat anemia in pregnancy , as it can affect your growing baby. Without the right amount of iron in the body, the risk of some complications goes up, including premature birth, a low birth weight baby , and the need for a blood transfusion during delivery.

As disorienting as it is, some dizziness can be normal during pregnancy – you might just need a glass of water and a chance to sit down. But lightheadedness when you’re pregnant isn’t a symptom to ignore. Be sure to let your doctor know about your dizzy spells as soon as possible so they can decide whether your symptoms warrant any extra care.