Is Drinking Dirty Bathwater Bad for Babies?

drinking dirty bathwater

"My 8-month-old daughter always manages to grab the washcloth when she's in the bathtub and suck the dirty water out of it. I know it's gross, but can drinking dirty bathwater make her sick?"

Good for you for keeping a close eye on your baby during tub time. Babies need constant supervision when they're in the bath, but you may not always like what you see. Bathwater is a less-than-appetizing cocktail of soap, shampoo, dead skin cells, oils, bacteria and germs, often with a splash of urine thrown in.

Is drinking bathwater bad?

As unpleasant as dirty bathwater sounds, a few sips won't make her sick. The large amount of water in the tub typically dilutes anything potentially dangerous.

One time when drinking dirty bathwater — or even being in the bath — may not be such a good idea is when poop enters the picture.

If your baby has a bowel movement in the tub, take her out, confiscate the contraband washcloth and send it directly to the laundry bag. Get rid of any floating (or sinking) matter, and give the bathtub and bath toys a good cleaning with a disinfectant or soap and hot water before using them again.

What to do if your baby drinks bathwater

If your little one does sneak in some gulps of bathwater while in the tub, don’t panic. Just commandeer the problematic washcloth — and offending bath toys , if those plastic cups and bowls also tempt her to start sipping.

Offer an alternative plaything to satisfy her curiosity and (safely) up the bathtime fun . Plastic animals, dolls or cars may do the trick.

Only if your child manages to down an unusually large amount of bathwater may she potentially experience some stomach upset, and that’s usually due to the shampoo and soap present in the water. Check in with the pediatrician or call poison control if your child vomits repeatedly and can’t keep down fluids — or if you just want some peace of mind that all is well.

How to get your child to stop drinking bathwater

Soon enough, your little one will learn what water’s okay for drinking. By the time she’s around 10 months old, her memory is improving enough to recall your words, actions and tone of voice — including reminders to stop using the bathtub as a drinking fountain — from one day to the next.

To drive the message home, be consistent and repeat it every time the behavior comes up. It helps if you offer distractions and alternatives — like a different bath toy or a sippy cup of clean water — instead of relying on the word "no" each time.

Here's to fun in the tub!