Is Diarrhea a Sign of Pregnancy?

is diarrhea a sign of pregnancy, flying toilet paper roll

While diarrhea isn’t an official pregnancy symptom, this digestive concern can occur in the early weeks and later on for a variety of reasons.

A round of diarrhea is uncomfortable no matter when it happens. And if you experience loose stools during pregnancy, you might wonder if the two are somehow connected.

Certain digestive issues, such as bloating , nausea , and constipation , are common during the early weeks of pregnancy and can likely be pinned to your body’s hormonal changes .

But even though diarrhea can go hand-in-hand with pregnancy, the two are not always related.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) says that diarrhea is often due to an infection caused by a virus or bacteria, medications you’re taking, or a separate health condition. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsProblems of the Digestive SystemSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsProblems of the Digestive SystemSee All Sources

Still, you don’t have to put up with diarrhea while you’re expecting. Read on for more about what causes it and when you should reach out to your health care provider.

Is diarrhea an early sign of pregnancy?

While you can certainly have loose stools while expecting because of dietary changes, “diarrhea isn’t usually a sign of pregnancy,” explains Jennifer Leighdon Wu, M.D ., a board-certified OB/GYN in New York City and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

In fact, the opposite is more true when it comes to bowel movement trouble.

“Actually, patients often get constipated” when they’re pregnant, Dr. Wu says.

What causes diarrhea in early pregnancy?

Diarrhea may have a range of different causes, including the following: Trusted SourceCary OB/GYNDiarrhea During Pregnancy: Causes, Risks, and TreatmentSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCary OB/GYNDiarrhea During Pregnancy: Causes, Risks, and TreatmentSee All Sources

Virus or bacteria. Exposure to the norovirus is a common reason for diarrhea, along with the stomach flu . And some bouts can be traced back to a case of food poisoning .

Medications. Certain drugs, like antibiotics, antacids, and too many laxatives can bring on diarrhea. And for some women, their prenatal vitamin may lead to loose stools, often because of the fish oil, says Dr. Wu. That can be remedied by switching to a different brand of prenatal vitamin or to one that uses a vegetarian source of DHA.

Dietary changes. Your new pregnancy eating plan might include foods you haven’t had in a while and more water than usual — and both may impact the kind of stool you see.

Medical conditions. Diarrhea is a common symptom of some health issues, including irritable bowel system (IBS) and Crohn’s disease .

Labor prep. Diarrhea can strike shortly before delivery because your muscles are loosening as your body gets ready for labor.

Hormonal changes. Though the influx of hormones during pregnancy most often causes other tummy troubles, like morning sickness, bloating, and constipation, sometimes diarrhea or loose stools can be the result.

How to treat diarrhea when pregnant

Try the following ideas to ease, and possibly prevent, diarrhea:

Avoid fatty foods. Skip these, along with sugary drinks, gassy fruits and veggies (beans, peas, broccoli), and dried fruits. Add dairy to the list if it also bothers your belly too.

Go for a BRAT diet. This easy-to-digest idea stands for bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast. You might also include more nutrient-dense foods like eggs, unsweetened cereals and crackers, and cooked vegetables like green beans, carrots, beets and acorn squash.

Get plenty of water . Aim to consume eight to 10 glasses each day.

Consider a sports drink. Ask your physician about drinking this kind of beverage occasionally to replace lost fluids and minerals.

Be careful with meds. Check with your doctor before taking any OTC diarrhea medication.

When to call the doctor

Most cases of diarrhea are mild and clear up in a day or two. But call your doctor if you have more than three loose stools a day, the diarrhea hangs on longer than two days, or you notice only liquid, blood or mucus in your stools.

Diarrhea later in pregnancy could be a sign of labor and, when it continues for several days, dehydration is possible and your risk of premature labor can go up.

Diarrhea is usually short-lived, whether you’re pregnant or not. Still, if you have questions or concerns, you can always ask your practitioner about your stools (and don’t be embarrassed — they’ve heard it all before and won’t mind!).