Is Drop-Off a Nightmare? These Toddler TV Shows Can Help

kid and mom watching TV

Separation anxiety is totally normal — here's what to watch to help prepare your little one for the transition.

Day care or school drop-off can feel very hard for you and your toddler. Even after several tear-free departures, kids can find some morning goodbyes more challenging than others. “My boy is one week shy of being one. He has loved day care the last several months, and drop-off has been a breeze…until last week,” shared one What to Expect parent . “He is suddenly crying as soon as I put him down in the classroom. It breaks my heart.”

Why is drop-off so tough? Well, toddlers and young children understand that caregivers can leave, but they don’t fully understand that you will come back, explains Francyne Zeltser, Psy.D., a psychologist practicing in New York City. Separation anxiety in littles peaks between 10 and 18 months, and is typically outgrown by age 3. A little preparation can go a long way in helping your toddler feel more comfortable through the daily routine.

A good place to start is introducing them to kid-friendly TV shows that feature characters going through day care or school drop-offs, too. “These episodes are especially effective for toddlers because they rely on repetition, predictability, and clear emotional messaging that aligns with early development,” Zeltser says.

Key Takeaways

Separation anxiety is normal — and temporary. For many toddlers, anxiety peaks between 10 and 18 months and fades with time, consistency, and lots of reassurance.

Seeing a drop-off modeled can make it feel safer. Shows can help toddlers understand what to expect by using repetition, simple language, and clear emotional cues.

Small routines can make a big difference. A goodbye song, a quick game, or a family photo can make drop-off less overwhelming.

Here are expert-approved episodes that can help make drop-off just a little easier.

1. Daniel Tiger’s Neighborhood, "Daniel Goes to School"

Daniel Tiger

Inspired by Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood, the cartoon follows a young tiger who’s always learning more about his development, emotions, and general life lessons. Several WTE parents refer back to season one, episode three, “Daniel's Babysitter/Daniel Goes to School,” which shows Daniel worrying about his dad leaving him at school. Dad Tiger reminds him, “Grownups come back.” There’s even a catchy song you can sing to continue this learning long after you’ve stopped watching.

What experts say: “The phrase ‘grownups come back’ is simple, concrete, and reassuring, offering comfort without making unrealistic promises,” says Zeltser. “It naturally invites conversations about what happens after a grownup leaves, who will be there to help during the day, and how time passes until pickup.”

Where to watch: PBS Kids , YouTube TV , or Fandango

2. Bluey, "Daddy Dropoff"

Bluey

Bluey and her little sister Bingo create a fun drop-off routine that helps make the nerve-racking event easier. In the season two episode, “Daddy Drop-off,” Bingo is sad when her dad almost leaves without playing “Wind Up Bingo.” But after seeing how much she needs that extra push, he makes time for it. This small addition to the drop-off routine completely changes Bingo’s energy as she enters her first day of school.

What experts say: “This episode encourages conversations about creating consistent goodbye rituals, such as a specific game, phrase, or routine that helps a child feel ready and supported each morning,” says Zeltser.

Where to watch: Disney+ , YouTube , Apple TV , or Fandango

3. Peppa Pig, "The Playgroup"

Peppa Pig

If you have an older child preparing for their sibling to join in on the drop-off, it’s important to navigate feelings that both children may have. In the Peppa Pig episode (season one, episode six), “The Playgroup,” Peppa expresses her nerves about her baby brother George coming to her playgroup. However, after getting some motivation from her parents and seeing how much her friends love George, she’s much more enthusiastic about her newest classmate.

What experts say: “Peppa’s worry about George reflects a common but often overlooked fear in young children: anxiety about change, loss of specialness, or uncertainty about how a new situation will affect their role,” says Zeltser. “Parents can use this episode to talk with their child about what they are worried might happen at day care or school, and reinforce that new situations often turn out differently than expected.”

Where to watch: YouTube or Apple TV

4. Ms. Rachel, "Ms. Rachel & Elmo Get Ready for School"

ms rachel

In this episode, Ms. Rachel suggests bringing along a family photo to school as a source of comfort and highlights the many emotions kids might experience with her song, “Big Feelings.” You could plan to provide a photo for your child and sing Ms. Rachel’s song in the car on the way to day care or school.

What experts say: “The explicit focus on big feelings is especially important, as children are directly told that it is okay to feel excited, nervous, or sad about going to day care or school,” says Zeltser. “Parents can use this episode to create a visual or musical morning routine, talk openly about emotions that come up before school, reassure children about pickup time, and ask which part of the morning feels hardest to better understand their child’s experience.”

Where to watch: YouTube

5. The Berenstain Bears, "First Day of Kindergarten"

Berenstain Bears

Throwback episodes of shows like The Berenstain Bears often provide a slower-paced, educational tool for parents . In the third episode of the first season, Mama Bear reflects on Sister Bear’s first day of kindergarten. Sister was nervous, expressing fears about whether her teacher would like her or not. “Why wouldn’t she like you?” her mom says. Brother joined in to share all of the fun activities that would await her at school, and then he sat next to her on the bus. Later that day, Mama stopped by her school, and a very happy Sister gave her an update and introduced her to a new friend she'd made.

What experts say: “Sister Bear’s fears are stated explicitly, helping children learn language for their own worries, while the adults respond by gently questioning concerns rather than dismissing them,” Zeltser says. “The family balances reassurance with encouragement, reinforcing the idea that feeling nervous does not mean you cannot try something new." You can build on this with your own child by talking through specific worries, such as fears about teachers or peers, and practicing realistic responses, she adds. You can ask your child what might help them if those worries come true, and walk through what they can do to build confidence.

Where to watch: YouTube , Apple TV

6. Arthur, "Arthur’s First Day"

Arthur

In the TV special, which first aired in 1996, Arthur is eager to start his first day of fourth grade, until he learns his friend Buster isn’t in the same class. Meanwhile, his sister D.W. is starting kindergarten and struggles with explaining her preferred name, forgetting her lunch, and defending a friend who’s getting teased by another classmate.

What experts say: “Though slightly older in tone, this episode is very effective for preschool and early elementary children who worry about social belonging,” says Zeltser. “Arthur’s disappointment about not being with his friend and D.W.’s kindergarten mishaps reflect common school fears, including social uncertainty and mistakes. The episode emphasizes that things can go wrong and still turn out okay, modeling resilience, advocacy, and empathy.”

Where to watch: PBS Kids , Amazon , or Apple TV

7. Franklin, “Franklin Goes to School; Franklin Is Lost”

Franklin

At first, Franklin can’t wait to get out the door and get to school. But as the bus approaches, he suddenly has a tummy ache and tells his parents he wants to stay home. After some encouragement from his parents and a warm greeting from friends on the bus, he musters up the courage. When he arrives, he and his friend Snail make their way into the classroom, worrying about not knowing all the answers. Fortunately, their teacher reassures them that they’re in the right place to learn.

What experts say: “Franklin’s sudden physical symptoms normalize the way anxiety can show up in the body, helping children and parents understand that physical discomfort can be linked to big feelings,” Zeltser says. “The teacher’s message that students do not need to have all the answers reframes school as a place for learning rather than performing, which is especially powerful for anxious or perfectionistic children.”

Where to watch: YouTube , Amazon , Apple TV , or Roku Channel

Before your first (or next) drop-off, remember to get in the right mindset and try your best to influence your child to feel at ease.

“When parents feel anxious, guilty, or rushed during drop-off, children often absorb and mirror that emotional state, making regulation more difficult,” Zeltser says. “It is important for parents to understand that adjustment takes time, and consistency and predictability are key in helping children feel safe and confident in new routines.” It might be difficult for everyone those first few times, but you've got this — and your child does too.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

Separation Anxiety in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Crying at Drop-Off — Perfecting the Preschool Separation

How to Deal with Stranger Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Explaining a New Baby to a Toddler Is Hard — These TV Episodes Make It Much Easier Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Blankets, Loveys, and Separation Anxiety: What’s Normal for Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Separation Anxiety in Babies Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Tips for Handling the First Days of Preschool

Toddler Nightmares Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Toddler Afraid of the Dark? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Low-Stimulation Toddler Shows That Won’t Make You Want to Hit Mute Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

What Is Sleep Regression in Toddlers? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Toddler Night Terrors Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Common Toddler Sleep Problems and What to Do About Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Handle Toddler Tantrums When Leaving the Playground Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

4 Signs Your Toddler May Be Stressed Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window