How to Fuel for Delivery: What to Eat and Drink During Labor for Maximum Energy

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Toast with strawberry jam, a simple prenatal nutrition snack for pregnancy and labor preparation

Once the contractions kick in, should you take all food and beverages off the table? Here's everything you need to know about eating and drinking during labor.

Labor can be a long, tough process, which means you might feel peckish as you push. Fortunately, there's more and more evidence that eating a bit and staying hydrated is good for women in labor. Your best bet is to check with your provider to learn their stance, and, if the answer is yes, pick light foods like toast, Jell-O, and plain pasta. The result? You'll be able to keep your energy up as you work hard in labor and delivery.

Chances are, your doctor will be on board with the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists' (ACOG) guidelines: It's okay for moms-to-be to drink clear liquids if they're having uncomplicated labors. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsApproaches to Limit Intervention During Labor and BirthSee All Sources [1] But they may still draw the line at solid foods (like toast). Here's what to know.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsApproaches to Limit Intervention During Labor and BirthSee All Sources

Key-Takeaways

Check with your doc. Light food and clear liquids may be fine, especially in the early labor phase, but it depends on your provider’s preference (just ask).

Science is evolving. Nothing by mouth was the rule due to the anesthesia and vomiting connection. But the risk seems low and eating might even shorten labor.

Keep it light. If your OB says yes to some snacking, pick easy-to-digest, hydrating options like toast, applesauce, and popsicles.

Why do some practitioners recommend not eating during labor?

Why the eating ban in the first place? It was based on the long-held theory that food or acid in the digestive tract might be aspirated if you need emergency anesthesia. But not only are you unlikely to need such anesthesia, which is no longer used for C-sections, but studies have also shown the aspiration rate to be minuscule.

Another reason why many practitioners are more likely to okay snacking during labor: Some research has shown that labor is shorter — by an average of 16 minutes — in women who are allowed eating privileges. After all, labor lives up to its name. It's hard work, and hard work requires fuel. Laboring on empty can make it tough to summon up the strength for those last pushes.

If your practitioner gives the thumbs-down to ingesting anything at all when you hoped for a different answer, consider offering up the evidence (including those ACOG guidelines); but if your doctor still says no, it's best to heed that advice.

What to Expect Community parent scoopstroopx5 got the okay to snack, but it left her feeling queasy. “I was allowed to eat in labor but couldn't eat without throwing up. I did bring honey sticks to keep my sugars up.”

If you have more labor concerns and questions, the What to Expect app is your go-to guide for expert advice and a supportive community of mamas like you.

Which solid foods might a practitioner allow during labor?

If you do get the go-ahead on eating during labor, think small, and if your practitioner has suggestions, try to stick with them. In general, light snacks can keep your energy up and liquids will keep you hydrated. Stick with the following:

Toast with jam: Bland but sustaining, it'll give you a good energy kick (choose whole-grain toast for an even longer-lasting one) without straining your digestive system. Skip the butter, though, and the peanut butter.

Plain pasta: It's not the time to partake in a plate full of penne (especially not one tossed with Bolognese), but a small scoop of perfectly plain pasta can be precisely the bland snack you're looking for. Plus, it's a good way to carbo-load for this type of athletic event.

Applesauce or Jell-O: There's always room for these. They go down easy and offer the energy boost you'll need for those more-challenging delivery room moments.

Popsicles or sorbet: Try sucking on an ice pop. It'll keep you hydrated, give you a little jolt of energy and, if it's actually made with fruit, you'll be cramming in a few last-minute vitamins. (Hey, it's never too late for those!) Plus, it makes for a better choice than ice cream. (You probably don't want to digest fat or dairy right now.)

Which liquids might a practitioner allow during labor?

It's no surprise that water is on the list of ACOG's approved-for-labor liquids. Your practitioner may also permit or recommend:

Clear broth: Warm, easy to digest and nutritious, consider chicken or vegetable broth for the laboring soul — and body. Opt for homemade or low-sodium versions over high-sodium canned varieties, which can leave you super thirsty.

Beverages: Your practitioner may also allow fruit juice (without the pulp), carbonated beverages (like seltzer or Sprite), tea, black coffee, and sports drinks.

Ice chips: Long a staple on the delivery-room menu, ice chips are okay even if you're under a no-food restriction during labor. A few icy chips will be just the refreshing ticket you need when those breathing exercises leave you parched.

Even if you're really hungry (and chances are, eating won't be the first thing on your mind at that moment), resist the temptation to eat anything too heavy on the way to the hospital, and heed the advice of your practitioner.

In fact, you'd be smart to avoid anything that's high in fat or fiber-stuffed — you don't want to be competing with your digestive tract for energy reserves. (Plus the last thing you'll need is heartburn or diarrhea — you'll have plenty of other challenges to keep you busy.)

And whether you can eat or not during labor, your support system definitely can — and should. After all, you don't want your partner, relative, or friend fainting from hunger when you need them most. Remind them to have a meal before you head off to the hospital or birthing center and to pack a bunch of snacks so that they won't have to leave your side when their stomach starts growling.