Is Herbal Tea Safe During Pregnancy? What to Know Before You Sip

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

help me heidi murkoff, what herbal teas are safe during pregnancy, aerial shot of cups of different herbal teas

"I’m hearing so many conflicting things about whether herbal tea is safe to drink during pregnancy. Can you help me sort it out once and for all?"

Let’s face it, it’s hard to read the herbal tea leaves when there’s no reliable research on herbal tea to read — especially when it comes to what’s safe to sip during pregnancy and what’s not.

Key Takeaways

Research on herbal teas in pregnancy is limited, so it’s best to be cautious. The FDA advises moms-to-be to go slowly since herbs aren’t regulated and blends can contain unlabeled ingredients or contaminants.

Check with your OB or midwife before sipping herbal blends. Ask for a safe list and amounts now, and keep checking in while breastfeeding.

When in doubt, stick with safer sips and everyday herbs. Choose regular black tea flavored with fruit or spices, DIY fruit-and-ginger infusions, and talk to your provider about green tea/matcha (which can affect folic acid). Culinary herbs are A-okay and nutritious.

Because of that fundamental lack of evidence, the organizations we often look to first when it comes to the safe use of food and drugs (the Food & Drug Administration , or FDA, as well as the National Institutes of Health ) have advised that moms-to-be and breastfeeding moms proceed with caution down the herbal tea aisle — at least until more research is done and more is known about the impact of herbal teas on pregnancy and babies.

Another reason why you might want to think twice — once for your own health and once for your baby’s — before reaching for a cup of herbal tea: Since herbs aren’t regulated by the FDA , some herbal blends may contain contaminants or ingredients that aren’t listed on the label.

Even brews that sound like they’re fruit- or spice-based (say, "zesty ginger" or "cinnamon apple" or "orange spice") may actually be blended with herbs — definitely a case for being a careful label reader.

Does that mean you’ll need to bag herbal tea entirely? That’s a question that has no definitive answer until — you guessed it — there’s some more definitive research done. And that’s not likely to happen anytime soon, since research, particularly research related to pregnancy and lactation, takes time (more than the nine months or so you have ahead of you).

While some herbal teas are probably safe in moderate doses, there’s no scientific consensus on which ones are, which ones aren’t, and what “moderate” actually means. What is known is that medicinal herbs, including those that are packaged as teas, can act like medications do in the body (that’s the “medicinal” talking). But unlike FDA-approved drugs, the risks and benefits, side effects, strength, or dosing of herbal remedies or teas aren’t regulated or well-researched.

The best advice I can give you — really the only advice I can give you for now, and I know it’s not all that helpful — is this: Ask your doctor or midwife for a list of teas you can safely sip and in what amounts, and which ones you should take a pregnant pass on.

Even if overdue desperation has you reaching for the raspberry leaf tea or black or blue cohosh — believed by some to trigger contractions — it’s smart to ask first. Continue checking in for guidance about herbal tea safety when breastfeeding.

You can also use your best label reading skills to weed out teas that contain herbs, sticking with regular (black) tea that’s flavored with fruit or spices, or making your own tea concoctions with slices of fruit, fruit juice, mint, cinnamon, nutmeg, and that well-known pregnancy quease-easer: fresh ginger. (And speaking of weeds, don’t brew any tea from a plant growing in your backyard unless you’re absolutely certain what it is and that it’s pregnancy-safe.)

“I love my black tea with fresh cut lemon and a little bit of honey! So good! You could also try making iced tea and diffuse it with fruit like peach or strawberry or whatever fruit you’d like,” says What to Expect Community mom elliesmom24.

Get clear, evidence-based answers on what’s safe in pregnancy. Download the free What to Expect app for expert tips, week-by-week guidance, and quick checklists.

Does green tea get the green light? Since this brew can decrease the absorption of the vital pregnancy vitamin folic acid , you should check in with your practitioner about how green you should go. Matcha, too, should be approached with caution and in moderation, since it may decrease the effectiveness of folic acid even more than plain green tea does. Talk to your doctor about guidelines.

Just be mindful of how much caffeine you’re getting from black or green tea. A cup of brewed black tea delivers around 48 milligrams, while a cup of brewed green tea delivers around 29 milligrams. It’s generally recommended that pregnant women keep their total caffeine intake below 200 milligrams amount per day, according to the American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists (ACOG).

Herbs you don’t have to curb: culinary ones. Not only are they safe to eat, they add nutrients along with all that flavor. Just one case in delicious and nutritious point: basil, which adds vitamin A, vitamin K, lutein, and more. So pack in the parsley, sprinkle on the sage, and go all rosemary, baby.

Here’s to safe sipping!

Big hugs,

Heidi

What to Expect When You’re Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Herbal Remedies and Supplements in Pregnancy: What’s Safe and What to Skip , October 2025. American Academy of Family Physicians, Dietary Guidelines for Pregnant Women , 2025. American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists, How Much Coffee Can I Drink While I’m Pregnant? , October 2020. Mayo Clinic, Caffeine Content for Coffee, Tea, Soda, and More , February 2025. Mayo Clinic, Pregnancy Nutrition: Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy , November 2023. National Institutes of Health, Office on Dietary Supplements, Dietary Supplements and Life Stages: Pregnancy , April 2025. U.S. Food & Drug Administration, Medicine and Pregnancy , February 2025. U.S. Food & Drug Administration, Questions and Answers on Dietary Supplements , February 2024.

Updates history

October 28, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.