Is It Safe to Go to a Chiropractor During Pregnancy?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting, and new medical review.

pregnancy and chiropractic care

A chiropractor's gentle adjustments may have a positive impact on your pregnancy. Here’s what you need to know about going to a chiropractor while pregnant.

During pregnancy, your body ramps up production of a hormone called relaxin. Aptly named, relaxin loosens ligaments and joints to help make way for your baby’s journey through the birth canal.

But relaxin, combined with your bigger belly, can leave you loose-limbed, wobbly, and even a bit clumsy . Your ligaments and muscles may also struggle to keep up with your quickly changing body, which can put added strain on your back and spine.

That’s where prenatal chiropractic care may be helpful. By adjusting and realigning your spinal column (and the ligaments and muscles around it), a prenatal chiropractor may be able to ease some of the discomfort that goes along with being pregnant.

“I had sciatica during my pregnancy, and I believe the chiropractor helped a lot and made my lower back feel way better,” says What to Expect Community mom hill910.

Think an adjustment is in order? Here’s what you need to know.

Key Takeaways:

Prenatal chiropractic care may help ease common pregnancy aches. Gentle adjustments are designed to realign your spine, muscles, and ligaments, which can bring relief from back, hip, and pelvic pain that often comes with a growing belly.

The Webster Technique is sometimes used to give baby more room. This approach focuses on the sacrum and round ligament and may encourage baby into an optimal head-down position in later pregnancy.

Chiropractic care during pregnancy is generally considered safe — with the right provider. Look for a licensed chiropractor trained to treat pregnant patients, and always check with your doctor before scheduling a visit.

What is a prenatal chiropractor?

Prenatal chiropractors are practitioners trained to work with expecting moms. They use safe, pregnancy-friendly techniques like stretching, gentle pressure, and specific joint adjustments to help relieve aches and pains.

One approach some prenatal chiropractors use is the Webster Technique. This method focuses on the sacrum (a large bone at the base of your spine) and the round ligament in your belly.

The idea is that easing tension in those areas gives your baby more space to move — and in later pregnancy, may even encourage a breech baby to turn head-down.

“My baby was still breech at 36 weeks and I was prepared to try anything to get her to flip on her own,” says What to Expect Community mom jess-dean. “I did the spinning babies inversion and saw a Webster certified chiropractor twice and within a week she flipped!”

Results can vary, of course. Another What to Expect Community mom, jwp430, at 36 weeks, adds: “I have seen a Webster certified chiropractor since 29 weeks, but haven’t had any luck with it turning baby yet. It has definitely helped with pregnancy aches, though.”

Prenatal chiropractic visits typically range in cost from around $65 to $100 each, and insurance often covers the cost of visits.

Prenatal chiropractic adjustments are generally considered safe when performed by a provider trained to work with pregnant patients . But it’s always a good idea to:

Check with your doctor first to make sure chiropractic care is safe for you and your baby.

Choose a licensed chiropractor with experience treating pregnant women.

Look for pregnancy-friendly equipment , like an adjustable table that keeps pressure off your belly.

Once you’re in the third trimester, you’ll also want to avoid lying flat on your back during sessions.

So far, research hasn’t shown an increased risk of miscarriage with prenatal chiropractic care. Still, more studies are needed.

“I am 100% behind chiropractic care from a compassionate and supportive individual,” says What to Expect Community mom gardenhomemaker. “Don’t be afraid to try out a few different options if you don’t love the first place you go.”

What are the benefits of seeing a chiropractor while pregnant?

While research is limited, many moms-to-be say visits to the chiropractor help them feel more comfortable during pregnancy. Possible benefits may include relief from:

Back, hip, pelvic, and joint pain

Neck pain and headaches

Pressure on the sacrum and pelvis

Muscle and ligament tension

Discomfort related to baby’s position

Some people also believe chiropractic care can shorten labor or ease morning sickness , but those claims aren’t well studied.

“I actually was experiencing a lot of hip pain in the last few weeks,” says What to Expect Community mom lololeopard. “I went and got an adjustment done and feel like a new woman! It really caught me off guard the noticeable difference I felt.”

Find out more about what's safe and what isn't when you're pregnant in the What to Expect app .

How often should you go to a chiropractor while pregnant?

There’s no one-size-fits-all schedule, but most practitioners recommend regular visits — around once a month throughout pregnancy for optimal alignment of the spine. If you have a particular discomfort that you’d like addressed, you may want to visit more often.

Talk to your doctor and make sure it’s safe for you to start treatments, especially if you’re considered a high-risk pregnancy .

What to Expect Community mom maggiefl2319 says her chiropractor “was excited to work on me through this journey and made me feel really safe explaining what’s different and how he can help me be more comfortable especially as I get further along.”

Pregnancy brings plenty of changes — some exciting, some uncomfortable. While the research on prenatal chiropractic care is still growing, many moms say it’s made a real difference in how they feel.

If you’re curious, talk with your provider and seek out a chiropractor who’s experienced in treating expecting moms. With the right support, you may find a little extra comfort as you prepare to meet your baby.