Is It Safe to Use a Laptop While You're Pregnant?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"I recently read that laptop use may hurt a man's fertility. Now I'm wondering if using a laptop might hurt my baby."

Balancing a laptop on your increasingly shrinking lap isn't easy — but it hasn't proven to be dangerous either. Although a few studies have shown a link between the heat emitted from a laptop and a decrease in a man's fertility, most experts agree that such low levels of heat don't pose a risk to a developing fetus.

Neither is there a known radiation risk to your baby from using a computer or a laptop.

Key Takeaways

Laptops are safe. Experts say the heat and radiation from this device won't affect your baby-on-board.

Sit up straight! Hunching over a laptop on your growing belly can lead to an achy back. Your best bet: Place it on a table or desk for maximum comfort.

Do what feels best. It's perfectly fine to be extra careful and skip resting your laptop on your belly (peace of mind = priceless).

But to play it safe, you might want to keep the laptop away from your lap and off your belly — which would be a tough balancing act anyway.

After all, the computer isn't called a bellytop. Besides, by perching your laptop on a desk or table during your pregnancy, you'll probably end up with less back strain — and fewer typos too.

We've got more safety tips on the What to Expect app , plus expert guidance and trusted advice for every stage of your pregnancy.

The bottom line? You're safe to keep typing away on your laptop while you're pregnant, so take that off your "to-worry-about" list. Using a laptop won't hurt your growing baby.

Don't work too hard,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Are Cellphones Safe During Pregnancy? Here’s What the Science Says , November 2025. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Exposure to Electromagnetic Fields From Laptop Use of "Laptop" Computers , 2012. National Cancer Institute, Electromagnetic Fields and Cancer , May 2022. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, The Fundamental Reasons Why Laptop Computers Should Not Be Used on Your Lap , December 2016.

Updates history

November 18, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Are Cellphones Safe During Pregnancy? Here’s What the Science Says Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is It Safe to Use Hot Tubs and Saunas During Pregnancy? Here's the Deal Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Strength Training in Pregnancy: How to Safely Lift Weights While Expecting Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Smoking Cigarettes During Pregnancy: Is It Ever Safe? Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Working While Pregnant: Your Rights, Safety Steps, and Comfort Hacks Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

These Are the Exercises You Should Avoid During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Is It Safe to Take Baths While You're Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Vaping and Pregnancy: Are E-Cigarettes Really Any Safer for You and Your Baby? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Is It Safe to Use Marijuana During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Can You Drink Any Alcohol While You're Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Should I Use Sunscreen When I'm Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Should You Worry About a Fever During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Running While Pregnant? Red Flags That Mean It’s Time to Stop Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Butt, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnancy and Meditation Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window