Is It Safe to Take Baths While You're Pregnant?

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

Looking Good During Pregnancy

Wondering whether it’s safe to relax in the tub while pregnant? Soak away, mama — just take these precautions first.

Right now, nothing sounds better than a relaxing soak in the tub — not only because the warm bath water is soothing to your skin, but because it can also ease pregnancy aches and pains, especially that sore back. But when you’re expecting, is it really safe to take a spa-like soak in the bathtub?

"My whole life has been a bath almost every night and shower to wash my hair once or twice a week, but I’ve heard baths are not good [during pregnancy]?" asks What to Expect Community user alizlec.

Rest assured, you won’t have to switch to lukewarm showers for the rest of your pregnancy. It’s perfectly safe for pregnant women to take baths during pregnancy — as long as you take a few precautions.

Key Takeaways

Warm baths are safe during pregnancy — just avoid hot water and limit soaks to under 10 minutes to prevent overheating or dizziness.

Skip hot tubs, saunas, and essential oils (unless approved by your doctor), and steer clear of strongly scented or dyed bath products to reduce the risk of irritation or infection.

Epsom or milk baths may help with aches and soreness, but always check with your healthcare provider first and ensure the water stays below 98°F and the milk is pasteurized.

Can you take a bath while pregnant?

As long as you’re bathing in warm — not hot — water, then yes, you can safely take baths while pregnant. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicWhat To Know About Taking a Bath While PregnantSee All Sources [1] The real question might be, “Are you able to take a bath?”

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicWhat To Know About Taking a Bath While PregnantSee All Sources

Thanks to your ever-expanding stomach, dropping energy levels and increasing clumsiness , it can be hard work to hoist yourself into the tub — never mind reach all the places that need sudsing and rinsing. Remember, too, that you’ll have to hoist yourself out again, then bend over your belly (careful now) to towel off.

Given that you’re a little shaky on your feet these days, play it safe by using non-slip mats in the bathroom. (Though keep in mind if you do accidentally fall while pregnant , your baby is pretty well-protected in there.)

Thinking about incorporating some spa-like scents? Hold off on adding essential oils to the tub until you get the okay from your practitioner. It’s unclear whether pregnant women should use aromatherapy , especially during the first trimester.

In fact, if you’re feeling queasy, it’s probably best to avoid scented bath products as well as anything that contains dyes, fragrances and tons of additives. Pregnant women are prone to urinary tract infections (UTIs) and vaginal irritation. Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Health & Human Services Office on Women's HealthUrinary Tract InfectionsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Health & Human Services Office on Women's HealthUrinary Tract InfectionsSee All Sources

Can you take hot baths during pregnancy?

It’s not a good idea to take hot baths — or soak in a hot tub or sauna — during pregnancy. Anything that raises your core body temperature to over 101 degrees Fahrenheit may increase the risk of neural tube defects in babies.

Plus, pregnant women are already prone to dizziness and low blood pressure, so taking a bath in a tub that’s too hot could put you at higher risk for a fall.

Try to keep the water temperature around 97 or 98 degrees. You can measure the temperature levels with a bath thermometer — which will come in handy once you start filling up your baby’s very own bathtub .

Even if your bath is tepid at best, try to limit your soak to under ten minutes. This way, you won’t overheat or over-dry your skin.

Get more expert tips and guidance about what's safe during pregnancy in the What to Expect app , plus chat with other parents with the same birth month as you to get their take.

Can you take an Epsom salt bath during pregnancy?

Epsom salt (magnesium sulfate) is a naturally occurring mineral salt that is sometimes added to bath water. Before adding it to a bath, however, you should consult with your doctor. It’s not clear whether it’s always safe for pregnant women. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicShould You Take an Epsom Salt Bath?See All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicShould You Take an Epsom Salt Bath?See All Sources

Epsom salt may help ease the following symptoms:

Muscle aches, particularly those in the shoulders, neck, and back

Joint discomfort

Headaches and migraines

Severe morning sickness, also known as hyperemesis gravidarum

Adding Epsom salt to a bath post-pregnancy may also help relieve soreness after a vaginal delivery.

Can you take a milk bath during pregnancy?

Milk bath maternity photos — which feature a pregnant woman reclining in a bathtub full of milk — make for a special pregnancy memento. And as long as you’re not allergic to milk, milk baths are usually safe to take during pregnancy.

You should, however, only use pasteurized milk (the unpasteurized kind can harbor dangerous bacteria), make sure the milk isn’t spoiled and keep the liquid’s temperature at no higher than 98 degrees.

Still don’t feel comfortable bathing in a bathtub? Take a relaxing shower instead. Stand under the pulse of the shower head and let the water massage your body. It can do wonders for an aching back!