Is It Normal for Babies to Get Angry?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

Is it normal for babies to get angry? Here's what parents need to know about baby temper tantrums, plus how to diffuse a bad mood.

"My 6-month-old gets really mad when she's strapped in the car seat or when she can't reach a toy. Is it normal for a baby to get so angry?"

For some babies, minor hassles like a ride in the car seat or an out-of-reach toy are no big deal. For others, they’re catastrophes worthy of a baby-sized tantrum.

How your baby reacts depends a lot on her personality. Some babies are happy to go with the flow. Others — like yours, it seems — are more intense, driven and spirited. Don’t look now, but it sounds like your little one could be a type-A personality through and through.

Of course, it’s normal for any baby, laid-back or not, to get angry or frustrated when things aren’t going her way. (You’d probably lose it, too, if you couldn’t reach something you wanted.) So just because your pint-sized provocateur throws a tantrum doesn’t mean she’s destined to be an angry baby for good. It just means you need to arm yourself with a few tricks to diffuse bad moods, calm your baby quickly and keep your cool yourself.

The next time your tiny tot starts to tantrum, try one of these ideas:

Give your angry baby words. Okay, your 6-month-old isn’t talking yet, but you can give voice to her out-of-control emotions even if she can’t. So when you say things to her like, “Are you frustrated because the ball rolled away?” or “You must be really angry about sitting in this car seat again,” you let her know you understand how she feels as well as teaching her words she’ll use later on. Plus, just describing what’s going on in a neutral way can help you calm down, too.

Distract an angry baby. When you’re at home, swooping in at the first sign of frustration to offer a different toy or a change of scenery can sometimes nip a fit in the bud. If your baby can’t stand the car seat, sweeten her captivity: Offer her an enticing toy or book, but let her enjoy it only when she’s in the car. That way it’ll retain its magical power to distract and soothe her again (and again).

Respond to her needs. No matter what your mother-in-law says, you won’t spoil your baby when you pick her up or cuddle her when she’s upset, particularly when she’s overtired and needs to calm down before she naps.

Prevent problems. Any baby can lose it when she’s feeling hungry or tired, so keep her well fed and well rested to minimize the meltdowns. If she’s getting frustrated because you won’t let her play with objects that are off-limits (like that awesome remote control!), move them out of sight.

Learn to read her cues. Overstimulated babies are also prone to breakdowns, but try not to let her get to that point. If she turns her head when you give her a toy to play with or wiggles angrily when you pick her up, then a little downtime may calm her. Park her in her bouncy seat near the largest window in whatever room you’re in, put on a soothing CD, and let her chill by gazing at the view outside.

Focus on the positive. Yelling will just aggravate an angry baby's feelings of frustration. Instead, focus on praising what your little one does right, offering major applause for even minor successes (like settling down and playing when she’s in her car seat). The encouragement will help your baby take things in stride.

Good luck turning your angry baby into an angel baby (at least most of the time!),

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect The First Year, 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. American Academy of Pediatrics, What's the Best Way to Discipline My Child?, November 2018. American Academy of Pediatrics, Top Tips for Surviving Tantrums, April 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, Emotional and Social Development: 4 to 7 Months, August 2009. Mayo Clinic, Parenting Tips: How to Improve Toddler Behavior, August 2019. Mayo Clinic, Infant Development: Milestones from 10 to 12 Months, June 2020. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Milestone Moments.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Separation Anxiety in Babies Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Toddler Temper Tantrums Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do When Your Baby Hates the Car Seat, Bouncer or Stroller Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Soothe a Crying Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's What to Do if Your Baby Is Crying in Her Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Soothe a Sensitive Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Get Your Baby to Stop Fighting Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Losing Your Cool With Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Reasons Your Baby Won't Sleep and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

What Do Your Baby's Cries Mean? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Managing Aggressive Toddler Behavior Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Deal with Stranger Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Toddlers Love Throwing Things — Here’s Why, Plus How to Deal With It Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Triggers Screaming in Toddlers — and How to Respond Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's What to Do When Your Toddler Goes Through a Regression Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window