Is It Time For Your Child to Stop Napping? Here's How to Make the Transition Smoother So No One Loses Their Cool

toddler nap

Every child is different, but most kids stop napping sometime around 4 years old. Here's what the sleep consultants say.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Ah, the complicated topic of naps. Some kids are napping angels, while others, well, they just aren't. But what about dropping the nap all together? It's a dreaded question for some parents as they fear that those couple of silent hours may go away, while others welcome the transition so they can spend more daytime hours out and about as a family.

Sleep is vital for babies and young children. However, as they get older, it’s normal for kids to need less sleep during the day. Cutting back on nap time helps them fall asleep at a reasonable hour at night. But this begs the question: when will they actually stop napping for good? Our sleep specialists explain when your child may be ready to drop their last nap, tips on how to make the transition easier and what to do instead of naps during their daily routine.

When do most kids stop napping?

Every child is different, but generally, most children transition from two naps to one nap between 12 and 18 months and then drop their last nap between 3 and 5 years old, says certified pediatric sleep consultant Jessica Hudson . In the What to Expect Community , moms are finding just that — most moms say their kiddos stopped napping around the 4-year mark.

“With each month that passes in a baby’s first year , their total sleep needs in a 24-hour period goes down,” Hudson says. “The nighttime goal stays around 11 to 12 hours, so it’s the daytime sleep that decreases as they get older.”

The total amount of sleep infants and toddlers need depends on their age. Here are the general sleep guidelines according to pediatrician and sleep specialist Angela Holliday-Bell, M.D .:

1 to 3 months need 14 to 17 hours

4 to 12 months need 12 to 16 hours

1 to 2 years old need 11 to 14 hours

3 to 5 years old need 10 to 13 hours

With all that in mind, Hudson adds that some older children may still need a nap on days full of activities (think: after a gymnastics-themed birthday party or a travel day trekking around an airport). In other words, even if your child is ready to drop their last daytime nap, that doesn’t mean daytime naps are gone forever.

How to tell if your child is ready to drop their nap

So if your child is approaching the typical age of doing away with naps but you aren't sure if they are truly ready (remember, every kid is different), there are three main signs to watch out for that could signal your child is ready:

They're not sleeping during naptime: If their nap “naturally just becomes quiet time or your toddler lays there awake for the full nap consistently for 1 to 2 weeks” that may mean they don’t need the nap anymore, Hudson says. This is especially true if they're not sleeping during the day for naptime, but still consistently sleeping through the night just fine (meaning they aren't overtired, even without a daytime night). If they seem overtired (night or early wakeups), they may still need that daytime nap.

They're having trouble falling asleep at night: If your little one is resisting their normal bedtime , or if they take more than 20 minutes to fall asleep at night, Hudson says you may want to consider transitioning to no naps.

They're waking up early in the morning: Consistent early morning wakeups (waking up well before they normally do or have in the past) are also an indication that your child has reached their max hours of sleep needed before it’s time to wake and is ready to stop daytime napping, Dr. Holliday-Bell says.

How to make the no-nap transition smoother and easier

As with any transition, there will be an adjustment period for both you and your child once you start cutting back on naps. And remember, it doesn't have to go from 100 to 0 in the first week. Here are some pro tips to ensure the change goes as smoothly as possible:

Maintain a consistent schedule: To establish a foundation for a smooth transition, it's important to keep to the same wake-up time and bedtime every day when you can, Dr. Holliday-Bell says.

Make bedtime temporarily earlier: During the transition period, move up your child's bedtime temporarily. “This ensures your toddler isn’t going down for the night overly tired, which often results in restless sleep, frequent wakings and early morning rising,” Hudson says.

Alternate nap days: To make the transition gradual, Dr. Holliday-Bell recommends alternating between having a daytime nap as usual one day and the next day keeping them awake all day. From there, she advises gradually dropping each nap day until you get to a full week of no napping.

Catnap if necessary: On particularly busy days, your child may really be craving that daytime nap, which is OK.

No late afternoon naps: That said, Dr. Holliday-Bell advises against a late afternoon nap as that can interfere with your child’s ability to fall asleep at bedtime. How late is too late really depends on your child's bedtime, but if bedtime is between 7 and 8 p.m. for example, napping past 4 p.m. would likely interfere with their nightime sleep.

How to implement quiet time in place of nap time

Let's face it, nap time is also great for parents: It allows you to get things done or just relax on the couch. So if you’re dreading dropping the nap and losing this time to yourself, experts recommend swapping naptime with quiet time so you still get that much-needed break. Plus, quiet time offers many benefits for kids.

“An important part of naps is simply the ‘brain break’ and not even the actual sleep,” Hudson says. “Little ones get easily overstimulated and quiet time in their room can serve as a reset.” It also ensures they don’t get to bedtime overly tired , she adds. In addition to recharging them, Dr. Holliday-Bell says quiet time supports creativity, helps children process information from the day and fosters independence.

To implement quiet time, Hudson recommends making it a positive experience. Explain why rest is important and let them know the only requirement is that they’re alone in their room or another designated area with minimal stimulation.

Together with your child, prepare a “quiet time box” full of activities that encourage independent play such as puzzles, books and certain no-noise toys, Dr. Holliday-Bell suggests. Moms in the What to Expect Community swear by books of course, the Toniebox audio player, Mr. Penci’s Scribble and Write tablet and other open-ended toys like cars and trucks.

You can do a transitional, relaxing activity together at the start of quiet time, such as reading a book together or singing songs. Then quietly excuse yourself, allowing them to play alone, Dr. Holliday-Bell says.

As for how much time to block out for quiet time, “start slow, for about 15 to 20 minutes. Then slowly increase the time until you get to about an hour,” Dr. Holliday-Bell says. Starting with short periods of quiet time, Hudson adds, is key as that helps them build confidence and prevents quiet time from becoming a negative thing.

When it comes to dropping your child's nap, ultimately, you'll know when it's right for them. The good news is that it doesn't have to be an all or nothing thing either — it's okay if the transition takes a little time (for everyone).

American Academy of Pediatrics, AAP endorses new recommendations on sleep times , June 2016. WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Naptime Guide and Schedules , May 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Here’s How Much Sleep Toddlers Need , April 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Bedtime and the Best Sleep Schedule for Your Toddler , May 2022.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

Is Your Baby Dropping a Nap? Here’s a Guide to Losing the Morning Snooze Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is It Possible to Sleep Train Your Baby for Naps? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Baby Nap Schedules: How to Help Your Little One Get the Daytime Sleep He Needs Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Stop Co-Sleeping and Move Your Little One to Her Own Crib or Bed Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do if Your Baby Refuses to Nap Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Tired of Bedtime Battles? Try These Toddler Sleep Strategies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Is Sleep Regression in Toddlers? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Sleep Train Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Is My Toddler Waking Up at Night? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Toddler Overtired? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

The 15-Month Sleep Regression: Could Your Toddler Be Going Through It? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

When and How to Night Wean Your Baby — Without Losing Too Much Sleep in the Process Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Understanding Wake Windows by Age and How to Time Baby's Naps for Better Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Babies and Toddlers Adjust to Daylight Saving Time (and Back Again!) Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Will My Baby Sleep Through the Night? Here's the Scoop Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window