Is It Normal Not to Experience Breast Growth in Early Pregnancy?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Light copy changes and updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

Two yellow lemons on pink background

"I've always had very small breasts. Now I'm 4 months along, and my breasts have yet to grow. Is this normal? I keep reading about how my breasts should be huge by now. Will they ever grow? And if they don't, will I be able to breastfeed?"

For most (but certainly not all) women, pregnancy acts like a breast enhancement. In just the first few months, some women may find their breasts swelling a cup size or more, and sometimes the largeness lingers long after the baby is born. Breasts may also be more tender or even painful, especially during early pregnancy. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsChanges During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsChanges During PregnancySee All Sources

Key Takeaways

Breast growth during pregnancy varies — while many women notice swelling early on due to hormones like estrogen and progesterone, others see little or no change until later (or after birth when milk comes in).

Lack of early breast growth is normal and not a reliable sign of any problem (or of the baby’s sex, despite old myths).

Breast size doesn’t determine breastfeeding ability. Most women, regardless of breast size, can successfully produce enough milk for their babies.

Pregnancy hormones, chiefly estrogen and progesterone, are to thank for this growth. They work to pack on extra fatty tissue, increase blood flow, and trigger other changes to your chest in preparation for you feeding your baby. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSymptoms of Pregnancy: What Happens FirstSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSymptoms of Pregnancy: What Happens FirstSee All Sources

Not every expectant mom, however, experiences big breast changes early in the game. Experts aren't entirely sure why, but it may have to do with the amount of hormones affecting the breasts.

"This my second pregnancy and both pregnancies my boobs didn’t grow at all," says What to Expect Community user mimikiki8.

(An old wives' tale says that breasts that don't grow a lot during pregnancy are a sign that you're having a boy! A tall tale indeed...)

Of course, at the 4-month mark, you still have plenty of time to grow. And if you don't notice changes before your baby is born, you're sure to a few days after, when your milk comes in .

As for your future breastfeeding abilities, this is one case where size really doesn't matter. Even if your bust stays small throughout your pregnancy (and even postpartum, after your milk comes in), you'll almost certainly be able to meet the needs of your hungry baby.

Feel free to discuss your breastfeeding concerns with your practitioner. You can also keep track of symptoms throughout your pregnancy using the My Journal tool in the What to Expect app , plus get tips for managing other symptoms. And rest assured that women with smaller breasts can still breastfeed successfully.

Heidi Murkoff

Sources

Changes During Pregnancy

Show in the article

Symptoms of Pregnancy: What Happens First

Show in the article

Benefits of Breastfeeding for Mom and Baby

How to Relieve Breast Pain and Tenderness During Pregnancy

When Does Breast Milk Come In?