Is It Safe to Use Hot Tubs and Saunas During Pregnancy? Here's the Deal

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

hot tubs and saunas during pregnancy, Ask Heidi Murkoff, sauna and towels

Your aching back and other pregnancy pains might have you craving a soothing soak in a hot tub or a relaxing lounge in a sauna. But is it safe to go into a hot tub or sauna while you're pregnant?

Here's what you need to know about saunas and hot tubs during pregnancy.

Key Takeaways

Skip hot tubs and saunas for now. They can raise your core temperature too high, which may pose risks to your developing baby — especially early on.

Don’t worry if you used a hot tub before you knew you were pregnant. Most people get out long before their temperature reaches a risky level. But if you have any concerns about your exposure, talk to your provider.

A warm (not hot) bath is your safest soak. It eases aches without raising your body temperature too much, so it’s perfect for a little relaxation during pregnancy.

Can you get into a hot tub or sauna while you're pregnant?

While you don't need to switch to cold showers, it's probably a good idea to skip the hot tub and the sauna when you're pregnant. While sitting in a sauna or soaking in a hot tub may seem like the perfect remedy for soothing your pregnancy aches and pains , both activities are risky.

First of all, pregnant women are at a greater risk for dehydration, dizziness, and lower blood pressure in general, and these symptoms may intensify in extreme heat.

Plus, anything that raises your core body temperature to more than 101 degrees Fahrenheit and keeps it there for a while is potentially hazardous to your baby — especially during the early months, when your little one's body and brain are developing.

Research shows that exposure to high temperatures can increase your baby’s risk of neural tube defects of the brain, spine, or spinal cord during the first month of pregnancy, including spina bifida , a birth disorder that occurs when a baby’s backbone doesn't fully close as it develops.

Are hot tubs and saunas ever safe during pregnancy?

Again, you'll probably want to avoid the saunas and hot tubs completely during pregnancy until your doctor gives you the green light after you've delivered. But if you absolutely can’t resist, take these safety precautions to reduce the risk of harming your baby:

Most hot tubs are set at between 100 and 102 degrees F, with 104 degrees F being the maximum temperature setting. Adjust yours to maintain a lower temperature — around 97 to 98 degrees F — and keep a thermometer in the water to make sure it stays that way.

Limit soak or sauna time to less than 10 minutes.

Get out of the tub as soon as you feel any discomfort, including sweating or signs of overheating like dizziness or clamminess.

If you have any chronic health conditions or pregnancy complications, or if you're already feeling warm due to exercise or fever, stay out of the tub.

Dip only your feet into the whirlpool's warm water, and limit the soak to less than 10 minutes at a time.

Want guidance on what else to skip during pregnancy — and what’s safe? Get all your questions answered and concerns addressed in the What to Expect app .

What if you’ve already been in a hot tub or sauna? It’s a question on the mind of many parents-to-be.

“I’ve been going to the sauna and hot tub for the first 6 weeks before knowing I was pregnant,” says What to Expect Community member AgnieszkaHallab, “and now I’m freaking out.”

The reassuring news is there isn't much cause for concern. Most women get out before their body temperature reaches 101 degrees because the heat gets too uncomfortable, so it’s likely you did too.

But if you’re worried, speak with your practitioner, who may recommend an ultrasound or other prenatal test to make sure everything is on track with your baby's development.

Your best bet while you’re building that baby is to stick to a warm (not hot) bath — since most of your upper body stays of the water in the tub, you’re a lot less likely to overheat. Add some bubbles and a scented candle to the mix and watch your tension go right down the drain.

Here’s to a safe and healthy pregnancy!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Is It Safe to Take Baths While You're Pregnant? , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Sweating During Pregnancy , September 2022. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, About Spina Bifida , January 2025. National Institutes of Health, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, What Causes Neural Tube Defects? , August 2018. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, A Case-Control Study of Maternal Bathing Habits and Risk for Birth Defects in Offspring , October 2013. Cleveland Clinic, Hot Tub Safety During Pregnancy: What to Know , May 2025. UT Southwestern Medical Center, Is It OK to Use a Hot Tub During Early Pregnancy? , March 2025.

Updates history

November 26, 2025

Editor: Lisa Lombardi/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Is It Safe to Take Baths While You're Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Hydrotherapy During Pregnancy and Labor: How Warm Water Can Help Ease the Aches Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

These Are the Exercises You Should Avoid During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Why You're More Likely to Get Sunburned During Pregnancy (and How to Prevent It) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Should I Use Sunscreen When I'm Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Strength Training in Pregnancy: How to Safely Lift Weights While Expecting Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Prenatal Massage: What’s Safe, What Helps, and What to Avoid Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Running While Pregnant? Red Flags That Mean It’s Time to Stop Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Butt, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Why Swimming is the ‘Secret Weapon’ for a Smoother Labor Experience Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Is It Pregnancy Fatigue or Heat Exhaustion? How to Tell the Difference Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Your Guide to Prenatal Yoga: Benefits, Safety Tips, and What to Expect in Class Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Is It Safe to Use a Laptop While You're Pregnant? Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window