Is It Bad for Babies and Toddlers to Eat Off the Floor?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

How bad is eating off the floor? Does the five-second rule really work? Here's why you don't need to panic when your baby puts something from the floor into his mouth.

Last week's Cheerios. The remote you couldn't find yesterday. A toy swept under the couch. If it's on the floor, chances are it'll find its way into your baby's mouth.

Grossed out yet? While you shouldn't encourage this behavior, you don't need to take drastic measures to prevent your baby or toddler from eating off the floor — or panic if you're unable to intercept it.

Germs from inside your house are ones that your child has already been exposed to, especially if he does most of his playing on the floor. That means they're usually not harmful and in fact may make his immune system stronger by giving it a little practice.

Even germs that he picks up from the floor of your neighbor's house or at the day-care center can help on this front. So stay calm when you catch your little in the act of eating off the floor (read: no need to launch germ warfare with antibacterial rinses or wipes, even if it's days past the five-second rule).

Instead, save your truly heroic efforts for keeping the very unhealthy and the downright unsafe from reaching his eager mouth. Those include:

Soggy leftovers. Topping the "very unhealthy" list are damp objects left on the floor — that day-old teething biscuit he sucked on for hours, the pacifier soaking in a puddle of juice, or the glob of sweet potatoes that's been decomposing under the high chair since Sunday — because bacteria multiply rapidly on wet surfaces. These are definite eating-off-the-floor no-nos.

Outside threats. Also unhealthy (and unsuitable for consumption, five-second rule or not) are objects picked up from the ground outdoors or in public spaces, where less-benign germs (those from dog poop, for instance) make their unwholesome home. Before letting your baby pop a dropped pacifier or bottle back into his mouth when you're outside, rinse it under water (or use a diaper wipe if there's no water around).

Lead alert. Paint chips may contain lead from hidden paint layers in homes built before 1978 (when lead-based paint was outlawed). Because lead can be toxic to infants even in tiny amounts, one savvy way to detox your home is to check all baseboards and low windowsills for any cracked or peeling paint.

Bite-sized dangers. While germs and babies shouldn't mix, the "downright unsafe" category also includes objects that pose a choking hazard. You'll need to be extra vigilant to keep such items out of your baby's reach — and out of his mouth. Always do a sweep of the area where your child will be playing before you set him down, and remove any small objects (coins, batteries, pet kibble, buttons and so on) from the floor and low shelves and furniture. Any object that can fit through a toilet-paper tube — whether a toy or a hard piece of food — is a choking hazard. And being the smart parent that you are, make sure you're well-versed in infant CPR .

Good luck,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year, 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Germs and Babies , November 2018. U.S. National Library of Medicine, Medline Plus, Choking , March 2016. U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Once Baby Arrives from Food Safety for Moms to Be , September 2018.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Why Babies Put Everything in Their Mouths Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

8 Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

How to Babyproof Every Room in the House Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Stop the Mess: Smart Ways to Handle Toddler Food Throwing Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Baby Self-Feeding Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Finger Foods for Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

8 Walking Safety Tips for Toddlers to Keep Spills and Hazards at Bay Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Encourage Your Baby to Eat Finger Foods Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Play With Your Baby Safely Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Food Allergies in Babies and Toddlers: What Parents Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

What Parents Need to Know About Heavy Metals in Baby Food Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Should Parents Be Concerned About Lead Paint in Children's Toys? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Introducing Solid Foods to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window