Is It Safe to Take Tylenol When You’re Pregnant?

Updated with latest quotes in reference to the 2025 claim that there's a link between autism and taking acetaminophen during pregnancy.

tylenol during pregnancy, conceptual image of pills with a heart

Learn whether acetaminophen is okay to take for pain relief or fever when you’re expecting.

The only thing you want when you feel a headache coming on is fast relief. But should you still reach for Tylenol (acetaminophen) if you’re expecting?

The short answer is yes, but as with every medication you consider right now, it’s important to speak with your doctor first.

“When my patients have fever or pain, I advise them that Tylenol is the safest medication available,” says Shannon Smith, M.D ., a board-certified OB/GYN in Boston, Massachusetts , and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

For more about taking Tylenol during pregnancy, including dosages, possible risks and some alternatives for pain relief, read on.

Key Takeaways

Acetaminophen is safe to take during pregnancy when used wisely. Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is considered safe to take during pregnancy at any stage — but always in the lowest effective dose, for the shortest possible time, and under your doctor’s guidance.

Don’t stress about the controversy. While some studies have raised concerns about Tylenol and child development, major medical groups including ACOG agree that there’s no proven link, and it remains the safest pain reliever during pregnancy.

Alternatives can help too. For mild pain, you can try rest, hydration, massage, or ice/heat before reaching for Tylenol — but for fevers or stronger pain, acetaminophen may be the best choice to keep you and your baby safe.

Is it safe to take Tylenol (acetaminophen) during pregnancy?

Acetaminophen, known by the brand name Tylenol, is safe for most women during pregnancy, say the experts including the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsACOG Response to Consensus Statement on Paracetamol Use During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsACOG Response to Consensus Statement on Paracetamol Use During PregnancySee All Sources

Headaches are common, especially in the first trimester, as they may be caused by a surge in hormones and an increase in blood volume.

Still, “it’s best for women take the lowest effective dose for the shortest amount of time” during pregnancy, says Dr. Smith.

What is the controversy around taking Tylenol when you’re pregnant?

The Tylenol controversy relates to research suggesting that taking it while pregnant might affect a baby’s development. Trusted SourceUT Southwestern Medical CenterAcetaminophen Is Still Safe in Pregnancy, Despite ControversySee All Sources [2] Acetaminophen is a “Pregnancy Category B” drug in the U.S., which means it’s deemed safe. Class B also indicates that no studies have shown that the medication leads to birth defects in animals, though there is no specific research on pregnant women.

Trusted SourceUT Southwestern Medical CenterAcetaminophen Is Still Safe in Pregnancy, Despite ControversySee All Sources

Dr. Smith notes that the data has questioned an association with prenatal acetaminophen use and the development of several childhood conditions, including asthma , lower IQ, autism spectrum disorder , gross motor development and communication problems, and ADHD .

“But in an analysis of this research, most clinicians felt the data demonstrating a true link is lacking,” she says.

ACOG concurs, confirming that acetaminophen is safe to take during pregnancy.

"ACOG and obstetrician-gynecologists across the country have always identified acetaminophen as one of the only safe pain relievers for pregnant individuals during pregnancy," ACOG says. "This consensus statement, and studies that have been conducted in the past, show no clear evidence that proves a direct relationship between the prudent use of acetaminophen during any trimester and fetal developmental issues."

The current Department Health and Human Services under Robert F. Kennedy Jr.'s leadership released a report in September 2025 claiming that one cause of autism appears to be pregnant women's use of acetaminophen, citing the earlier research and an August 2025 study that appeared in BMC Environmental Health. Trusted SourceHarvard T.H. Chan School of Public HealthUsing Acetaminophen During Pregnancy May Increase Children%u2019s Autism and ADHD RiskSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceHarvard T.H. Chan School of Public HealthUsing Acetaminophen During Pregnancy May Increase Children%u2019s Autism and ADHD RiskSee All Sources

But an array of medical experts, including ACOG, again refuted that theory.

"Suggestions that acetaminophen use in pregnancy causes autism are not only highly concerning to clinicians but also irresponsible when considering the harmful and confusing message they send to pregnant patients, including those who may need to rely on this beneficial medicine during pregnancy," ACOG said in a statement. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsACOG Affirms Safety and Benefits of Acetaminophen During PregnancySee All Sources [4] “Today’s announcement by HHS is not backed by the full body of scientific evidence and dangerously simplifies the many and complex causes of neurologic challenges in children. It is highly unsettling that our federal health agencies are willing to make an announcement that will affect the health and well-being of millions of people without the backing of reliable data."

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsACOG Affirms Safety and Benefits of Acetaminophen During PregnancySee All Sources

And even the study authors, led by Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health faculty dean Andrea Baccarelli, said that fever and pain during pregnancy can also be harmful to a developing baby, and acetaminophen should still be used in moderation to treat those conditions.

“We recommend judicious acetaminophen use — lowest effective dose, shortest duration — under medical guidance, tailored to individual risk-benefit assessments, rather than a broad limitation,” the authors wrote.

How much Tylenol is safe to take when pregnant?

Before taking any medication , always discuss it with your doctor first and keep in mind that using Tylenol in a limited way for a short period of time is often best.

As for a general dosage during pregnancy, Dr. Smith says she prescribes 325 milligrams to 1,000 milligrams every six hours.

Pregnant and dealing with pain or a fever, and wondering whether Tylenol is okay to take? Get answers, dosage tips, and when to call your doctor in the What to Expect app , where you can also keep track of your medications with the My Journal tool.

When during my pregnancy can you take Tylenol?

You can take Tylenol at any point during pregnancy.

What can I take Tylenol for when pregnant?

Tylenol can be taken for headaches, pain and fever during pregnancy and is recommended over ibuprofen (Advil) or naproxen (Aleve). And while you might be wary of taking medications now, it may be needed in certain severe cases.

For example, a very high fever during pregnancy could harm your baby-to-be, so acetaminophen may be necessary to bring the thermometer’s number down.

Dr. Smith adds that “fever can cause congenital malformations in the first trimester and other complications in pregnancy in later trimesters, so in certain instances we always recommend treating the fever completely with Tylenol.”

Are Tylenol PM and Extra Strength Tylenol safe to take when pregnant?

Yes, both of these types of Tylenol are okay to take during pregnancy.

“Tylenol PM is just acetaminophen with diphenhydramine, or Benadryl. This is a great option if you have a headache or pains and are looking to get some sleep. But if you're just looking for something to help with insomnia, then skip the Tylenol and take Benadryl,” says Dr. Smith.

his is a great option if you have a headache or pains and are looking to get some sleep. But if you're just looking for something to help with insomnia, then skip the Tylenol and take Benadryl,

Extra Strength Tylenol, on the other hand, comes in 500-milligram tablets, but it’s also safe to take, Dr. Smith says. Her dosing recommendation in pregnancy is one to two tablets every six hours for a maximum dose of 4,000 milligrams in a 24-hour period.

What are the risks of taking Tylenol when you’re pregnant?

Nearly every medication carries some risk in pregnancy, but acetaminophen has been used for many years and is considered safe.

And even in light of the recent news of possible in utero effects of acetaminophen, the recommendations from major medical organizations, including ACOG, haven’t changed.

"I don’t feel the least bit guilty about taking Tylenol," says What to Expect Community mom lifesadance22. "It’s about the only approved OTC med we can take during pregnancy for pain." And, she adds in reference to the research — all of which has been in the form of observational studies, not clinical trials, meaning they don't prove cause and effect — "correlation does not equal causation."

Alternatives to Tylenol during pregnancy

Tylenol may well be the best course of action for high fevers and other pain. But if yours is on the mild side, you can try the following supportive therapies for pain relief instead, Trusted SourceMayo ClinicWhat Can I Do About Headaches During Pregnancy? I%u2019d Rather Not Take MedicationSee All Sources [5] according to Dr. Smith.

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicWhat Can I Do About Headaches During Pregnancy? I%u2019d Rather Not Take MedicationSee All Sources

Ice or heat. Try one of these on painful spots (back, neck) to ease the ache.

Massage. This is also a good alternative for nagging physical pain, says Dr. Smith.

Rest up. A lack of Zzzs can lead to a headache, Dr. Smith says.

Keep a diary. This way, you can identify triggers that cause a headache. You might find that the smell of some foods or other particularly strong odors are behind your pain.

Breathe! It might help to sit still and relax, whether you hit up a prenatal yoga class, soak in a warm bathtub, or try a few minutes of quiet, mindful meditation.

Stay hydrated. And eat well too. Regular meals and snacks may stave off a headache.

When to call the doctor

If your fever or pain persists, even though you’ve been taking acetaminophen for several days, call the doctor. And if you experience more severe signs of distress, such as shortness of breath, fatigue, or trouble breathing, get in touch with your physician right away.

Aches and pains are common in pregnancy, but you don’t have to suffer with them. Always speak with your OB/GYN about taking any medication and inquire about Tylenol for a headache, since a low dose of acetaminophen for a short while is considered safe while expecting.