Is It Safe to Keep a Belly Button Piercing During Pregnancy?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

belly piercing during pregnancy, Ask Heidi Murkoff, pierced pregnant tummy

Pregnant with a belly button piercing? Here's what you need to know to prevent infection during pregnancy.

Worried you'll have to ditch your belly button piercing once you're pregnant and your tummy starts to bulge with baby? Not necessarily.

As long as your piercing is healed — for example, you didn't get it done within the last month or so — and healthy, there's no medical reason why you need to remove your hardware during pregnancy.

After all, your belly button marks where you were connected to your own mom in the womb, not where your baby connects to you — which means that a piercing won't allow pathogens in.

Key Takeaways

Your belly piercing might be just fine. If there’s no irritation and your skin looks healthy, you don’t automatically have to lose your belly ring in pregnancy.

Comfort above all. Is your jewelry feeling tight or rubbing against your clothes? You can always swap out metal for a flexible, pregnancy-safe version.

Wait on new piercings for now. The current hole you have is probably fine, but since infection risk increases when you’re pregnant, it’s best to hold off on getting new belly button piercings.

Of course, as your stomach starts to jut out and your skin gets increasingly taut, you may find that the jewelry becomes too uncomfortable to wear. Watch for redness in the skin surrounding your piercing, which probably means that it's too tight.

Your belly ring might also start to rub against your clothing and even get caught, which can hurt, especially if your belly button "pops" later in pregnancy.

If you opt to take out your jewelry entirely, run your belly ring through the hole every few days to keep the piercing from closing. Or consider replacing it with a flexible belly bar made of PTFE (polytetrafluoroethylene — aka, Teflon — which is the stuff used on nonstick pans that was reformulated so it no longer contains the potentially dangerous chemical PFOA). Because these bars aren't made of rigid metal, they're more comfortable, and can be cut to the size that suits your growing bump.

If the hole does happen to close, though, you can always get it re-pierced after you give birth.

What to Expect Community parent Justmovingthrough recently followed this exact plan. “I kept my belly ring but used the pregnancy ones and then eventually just got it redone when I finished breastfeeding,” she reports.

As for getting your belly button or anything else pierced during pregnancy, it's better to hold off until after delivery. It's not a good idea to puncture the skin when you're expecting , since doing so ups the odds of an avoidable infection. Remember: Changes to your immune system during pregnancy can put you and your baby at higher risk of infections.

Download the What to Expect app for more beauty tips, expert advice, and a huge network of supportive parents who’re going through pregnancy right along with you.

Because of that heightened risk, if you recently got your belly button pierced before you found out you were expecting, it's probably best to take the ring out if the area hasn't healed yet (for example, it's still red) and re-do it after the baby's arrival.

Removing a newly-done piercing will also reduce the chance that an unhealed hole in your stomach will stretch and become even bigger after you give birth. And if you notice that the area is weeping, red, or inflamed, it's a good idea to take the jewelry out in that case too, regardless of when you had your belly button pierced.

Here's to your beautiful, healthy baby bump!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Tattoos During Pregnancy , November 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics, 10 Simple Steps to Prevent Infections During Pregnancy , December 2024. New England Journal of Medicine , Pregnancy and Infection , June 2014.

Updates history

November 6, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

When Your Belly Button Pops During Pregnancy (and Why It Happens) Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Hernia During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Why Your Pregnant Belly Itches (and What Actually Helps) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Here’s How to Remove Unwanted Hair Safely During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Kameelah Phillips, M.D.

Should I Worry About Skin Tags During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is It Safe to Use Hot Tubs and Saunas During Pregnancy? Here's the Deal Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

These Are the Exercises You Should Avoid During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

10 Things to Know About Your Baby Bump Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is It Safe to Go to a Chiropractor During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Why You Might Feel Bloated When You're Pregnant — and What You Can Do About It Medically Reviewed by Kameelah Phillips, M.D.

Can You Drink Any Alcohol While You're Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

How to Relieve Itchy Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is Back Pain a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Can You Get a Tattoo While You're Breastfeeding? Here's What the Experts Say Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Can Your Baby Feel It When You Rub Your Belly? The Sweet Science Will Melt You Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window