Is it Safe to Get A Facial When You're Pregnant or Trying to Conceive?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

A woman receiving a facial treatment

You don’t have to swear off skincare entirely — but some treatments and ingredients are better avoided when you're pregnant or TTC. Here’s what’s generally safe and what’s not.

Wondering if you should keep that appointment for a facial now that you're pregnant or trying to get pregnant? It's a good question. What to Expect When You're Expecting author Heidi Murkoff has the answer.

Key Takeaways

Yes, you can still get a facial — you just need to be choosy. Most pregnancy-safe facials are totally fine, but anything with retinoids, high-dose salicylic acid, electric stimulation, or injectables like Botox is a no-go while you’re pregnant or trying to conceive.

Choose gentle options . Hydrating, collagen, oxygen, steam, LED, and fruit-acid facials are generally considered safe. When it comes to lasers or microdermabrasion, check in with your health practitioner first — opinions vary, and you'll want to err on the cautious side.

If you’re trying to conceive, acne meds matter. Prescription treatments like Accutane or Retin-A need to be stopped at least a month before you start trying.

"Is it safe to get a facial when you're pregnant or trying to conceive? What about other skin treatments?"

If you’re pregnant or trying to conceive and aren't sure if your beauty and skin regimens are still safe, it's great that you're thinking twice.

Luckily, you don't have to steer clear of treating yourself to facials altogether. Most topical products and treatments are considered safe during pregnancy. That said, there are some indulgences that you'll need to avoid when you're expecting:

Facials featuring ingredients that are not safe for pregnancy , such as retinoids or high doses of salicylic acids

Electric stimulation used for deep cleaning

Botox

Also check with your practitioner before booking a laser treatment or microdermabrasion facial. Some experts say they're off-limits during pregnancy, while others say they're safe in some cases.

"Where I go offers a momma-to-be a specific facial (avoiding certain ingredients), and body pillows are used once you hit 28 weeks so you aren't on your back," says What to Expect Community mom christinabean34.

Safer facial options during pregnancy include:

Hydrating facials

Collagen facials

Oxygen facials

Steam facials

LED facials

Facials that feature fruit acid peels and extractions

"I got facials during pregnancy!" says What to Expect Community mom hazelgirl11. "I just never got any of the fancy stuff, and I did tell her I was pregnant before starting. I just got a basic facial with a lot of masks and extractions."

If you're thinking about getting pregnant and are currently using any acne medications — such as Accutane or Retin-A — you'll need to stop at least a month before you actively try to conceive. Since conception timing isn't always predictable, stopping early helps reduce any potential risk.

"I got one [facial] last week!" says What to Expect Community member dairyQueenlover. "I've struggled with acne this pregnancy and I feel like it helped clear it up a bit!"

Luckily, there are steps you can take to tame breakouts naturally — including drinking plenty of water, keeping your face clean, and using an oil-free moisturizer. Over-drying your skin can actually make acne worse — adult acne usually responds better to a softer approach.

Your diet plays an important role too. Foods high in essential fatty acids, vitamin C, folic acid, iron, niacin, and vitamin A support healthy skin. Just don't take extra vitamins or supplements beyond your prenatal vitamin without the okay of your doctor. Some nutrients, like vitamin A, can be harmful to your baby in high doses.

Treating yourself to a skin treatment is still on the table — just choose options that are safe for you and your baby, and loop in your practitioner if you have any questions.

Get more expert guidance as well as daily tips throughout your pregnancy on our What to Expect app.

Enjoy!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Thinking About Botox During Pregnancy? Here's What to Know, October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip), December 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Guide: Ingredients to Avoid, January 2024. Dermatologic Surgery, Safety of Cosmetic Dermatologic Procedures During Pregnancy, October 2013. March of Dimes, Isotretinoin and Other Retinoids During Pregnancy, June 2019.

Updates history

January 25, 2026

Editors: Karen Miles/Rebekah Wahlberg

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

What Our Community Is Talking About

40 Plus Ladies TTC Part 6

Late June early July testers!

There are 91,505 active discussions happening now in our Trying to Conceive community group.

Your Next Read

Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is Acne a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Pregnancy Acne: Why It Happens and Safe Ways to Treat It Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Oily Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Thinking About Botox During Pregnancy? Here's What to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Can Leave Your Skin Feeling Parched Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is Better Skin Hiding in Your Grocery Cart? What Dermatologists Want Pregnant Moms to Eat (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Skin Changes During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Should I Use Sunscreen When I'm Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Makes Your Skin Sensitive — and What Actually Helps Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why You're More Likely to Get Sunburned During Pregnancy (and How to Prevent It) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window