Is It Pee, Discharge, or Your Water Breaking? How to Tell the Difference

Light copy updates, updates to sources, fact-checked for accuracy.

Blue bar of soap splashing into water on a pastel background

Learn more about the trickle that signals labor is finally on its way, including what it feels like and what you should do.

A pregnant woman's “water breaking” refers to the rupture of the amniotic sac (or membranes), resulting in leaking fluid that’s typically clear and odorless. This is a signal that your baby is almost ready to be born, and most moms-to-be experience their water breaking during or at the beginning of labor. If the fluid is green or brown, it warrants an immediate call to your doctor.

By now, you may be wondering when — and at what inconvenient place — your water will break. Most women will have their water break during the early stages of labor — and it's usually a much less dramatic event than you may have been led to believe.

Key Takeaways

Your "water breaking" is the rupture of the amniotic sac. Amniotic fluid is typically clear or pale yellow with a sweet smell; if it looks green or brown, or if rupture occurs before 37 weeks, contact your doctor immediately.

For most pregnant women, their water breaks during active labor — only about 1 in 10 moms-to-be experience it beforehand, and many require artificial rupture by a practitioner.

If your water breaks without contractions, labor usually follows within 12 to 24 hours. But to reduce infection risk, most practitioners will induce within 24 hours if contractions don't start naturally.

How can you tell if your water breaks?

It’s hard to say exactly how much fluid you’ll lose when your water breaks. It may feel like stream of warm liquid that makes your underwear and possibly even your pants wet. But more likely is that it will be a slow and steady trickle of fluid. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicWater Breaking: Understand This Sign of LaborSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicWater Breaking: Understand This Sign of LaborSee All Sources

"I was pushing at the hospital and felt a warm gush, I stopped pushing and yelled, 'Did I just pee?!' My doctor laughed and said, 'No, your water just broke!'" recalls What to Expect Community mom HC07.

Community mom mcdonohue had a different experience: "With my first, my water popped quiet dramatically, a huge gush and it looked like I peed my pants while we were out to lunch with my husband's coworkers. With my second, my water broke at home while I was feeding my toddler lunch. It was a small trickle instead of the big gush."

Once your water breaks, you may notice a continuous drip of clear or pale yellow and odorless or sweet-smelling amniotic fluid that won’t let up until your baby is born. You’ll want to wear a pad until you can get to the hospital or birthing center (or bring a towel and a change of underwear).

If you’re not sure whether your water broke, call your doctor or head to your place of delivery as soon as possible so they can verify whether you’re actually leaking amniotic fluid.

What causes your water to break?

No one knows for sure what triggers the chemical chain reaction that begins labor — typically around week 40 of pregnancy — but experts point to a number of complicated factors, including brain signals from the fetus.

Is it my water breaking or is it discharge?

Amniotic fluid is a pale, straw-colored fluid. Vaginal discharge , on the other hand, is a thin, milky-white mucus that’s similar to but heavier than what you might experience between periods.

Your water breaking may be accompanied by bloody show. This mucusy discharge is streaked pink or brown with blood, and it’s a sign that labor is imminent.

You might also lose your mucus plug , which looks like you probably imagine: a glob of mucus. It’s usually a sign that labor is near (though some women can lose it weeks before delivery), but you may not notice it at all.

Is it pee or did my water break?

Though many pregnant women leak urine, especially in the third trimester , a sniff will probably clue you in. If the fluid is yellowish and smells of ammonia, it's probably urine. If it doesn’t smell or smells sort of sweet, it’s probably amniotic fluid.

Will my water break before I go into labor?

Don't worry too much about your water breaking when you're in the checkout line: Only about 1 in 10 women experience the rupture of the amniotic sac before they go into labor, according to the Journal of Midwifery and Women's Health. That means that for the other 90% of women, their water will break once they’re already having contractions. Trusted SourceJournal of Midwifery & Women%u2019s HealthRuptured Membranes: When the Bag of Water BreaksSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceJournal of Midwifery & Women%u2019s HealthRuptured Membranes: When the Bag of Water BreaksSee All Sources

So chances are good that you'll have plenty of warning or you'll already be in the hospital when your water breaks. And lots of women require the artificial rupture of the membranes by their practitioner, called an amniotomy.

What if my water breaks but I don’t have any contractions?

It’s likely that labor’s on the way, and soon. Most women whose membranes rupture before labor begins can expect to feel the first contractions within 12 hours of that initial trickle, while others can expect them to start within 24 hours. In the meantime, you won't run out of amniotic fluid — your body continues to produce it right up until delivery.

For some moms, however, labor takes a little longer to get going. To prevent infection through the ruptured amniotic sac (the longer it takes for labor to get going, the greater the risk), most practitioners induce labor within 24 hours of a rupture if you’re near your due date; some induce as early as six hours after.

What should you do if your water breaks?

Your health care provider has probably given you a set of instructions to follow when your water breaks. Follow them. If you don't remember the instructions or have any doubts about how to proceed, call your practitioner night or day.

If your instructions are to wait for contractions over the next 12 hours or so, you'll need to guard yourself and your baby against infection now that the protective barrier of the amniotic sac has been breached. Use panty liners or maxi pads, not tampons, to keep the amniotic fluid from wetting your clothes, and keep your vaginal area clean. When you go to the bathroom, be especially careful to wipe from front to back. And not that you're likely in the mood, but sex is now officially off-limits.

If you tested positive for group B strep in the weeks leading up to your due date, your practitioner will tell you that you need to get to the hospital right away after your water breaks (if it happens before you have contractions and go into labor), since there is a risk of infection. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsGroup B Strep and PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsGroup B Strep and PregnancySee All Sources

What happens if your water breaks early?

If your water breaks after week 37 of pregnancy but before you’re in labor, it’s known as prelabor rupture of the membranes. Labor will likely begin on its own within 12 hours. If it doesn’t, your doctor will induce labor soon to reduce the infection risk. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsPrelabor Rupture of MembranesSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsPrelabor Rupture of MembranesSee All Sources

If your water ruptures before week 37 of pregnancy, it’s known as preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) . You may have an increased risk of PPROM if you:

If your water ruptures before week 37 of pregnancy, it’s known as preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) .

Smoke during pregnancy

Have experienced vaginal bleeding during the second and third trimesters

Had an early membrane rupture in the past

Have bacterial vaginosis

Are carrying multiples

If your water does break before 37 weeks, call your doctor immediately. PPROM may require hospitalization or delivery and comes with the risk of preterm labor , infection of the amniotic fluid, placental abruption , and umbilical cord prolapse.

Should you call the doctor if your water breaks?

Wondering when it's time to call your practitioner ASAP? Follow these guidelines:

Your water breaks and the fluid looks green or brown, which may mean your baby had a bowel movement in utero (known as meconium ).

You're at 37 weeks or earlier in your pregnancy (though it's unlikely this will happen).

Your water breaks and your baby is in a breech position . Breech babies have a higher risk of complications during delivery, so you’ll likely need a C-section.

You experience a small, one-time gush of fluid. It's possible the membrane has ruptured, but your baby's head came down and stopped the leak. This ups the risk of infection.

You feel something in your vagina or see a loop of the umbilical cord at the vaginal opening. Call 911. Rarely, when the membranes rupture before labor begins and the baby’s not yet engaged in the pelvis (more likely when the baby is breech or preterm), the umbilical cord can become “prolapsed” — swept into the cervix or even the vagina with the trickle of amniotic fluid.

Chances are, your water will break right on time — think: when you’re already in the hospital, not halfway through dinner at a fancy restaurant. In fact, some women don’t notice their water breaking at all. Whenever your water breaks (or even if it doesn't before you're in the hospital), just know that it won’t be much longer before your little one arrives.