Is Loud Music Dangerous When Pregnant? Here's How to Keep Your Baby's Ears Safe

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Hand holding pink boombox stereo against green background

"I'm pregnant and have tickets to a rock concert, but I'm concerned about my baby's safety. Can loud music harm his hearing? Is there any danger to listening to loud music in my car?"

A night on the town with friends can be a great way to kick up your heels before your evenings become booked solid with baby duties. But will booming bass and screaming vocals be bad for your baby in utero?

Probably not. At almost all concerts, the music isn't loud enough and doesn't last long enough to cause any damage to a fetus. Still, you might want to take a few precautions.

Key Takeaways

Your baby can hear, but it's muffled. Your body plus all that amniotic fluid helps to soften noise, which means rock music isn't nearly as loud for your wee one.

Concerts and the car radio are fine. As long as the music isn't cranked to the max or on for hours at a time, occasional loud tunes aren't harmful.

You can always turn it down. If it sounds too loud, maybe it is. The fix: adjust the volume or sit farther away so both your and your baby's (growing) ears are protected.

Babies begin detecting limited noises around week 16 of pregnancy. At about 24 weeks , your baby's outer, middle, and inner ear — including the cochlea, the snail-shell-shaped tube in the inner ear where vibrations are converted into the nerve impulses we perceive as sound — are well-developed, and baby's ear is mature enough that he will likely turn his head in response to voices and noises.

The sounds inside your uterus, of course, are muffled — and not just by the physical barrier of amniotic fluid and your own body. In his fluid-filled home, a baby's eardrum and middle ear can't do their normal job of amplifying sounds. So even sounds that are quite loud to you won't be to your baby.

Of course, that's only true as long as the sounds aren't excessive and don't last too long. What experts are particularly concerned about is prolonged and repeated exposure to very loud noise from, say, an eight-hour-a-day shift in an industrial workplace.

The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) advises that pregnant women avoid routine exposure to noise louder than 115 decibels (think of the noise a chainsaw makes). Studies indicate that regularly experiencing that level of noise raises the odds of a baby suffering some hearing loss, especially at higher frequencies. Repeated exposure to very loud noise can also increase the risk of premature delivery and low-birth-weight babies.

Frequent brief exposure to extremely intense sound, at 150 or 155 decibels (ever stand right next to a screaming jet engine?), can cause similar problems for fetuses. But you'd have to sit in front row seats, next to the amps — and be at a really loud concert — to get close to that intensity (you'll know because your own hearing will be fried).

Now hear this! The What to Expect app has answers to all of your week-by-week baby development questions from pros in the know, plus tips from veteran parents too.

Still, it's not a bad idea to play it extra safe during your pregnancy. So position yourself toward the back of the concert hall, away from the speakers. You'll enjoy the music just as much — and you'll be certain your baby's ears are safe. As for music in your car, if you drive often and like your radio loud enough to shake other cars, you might want to turn it down a bit.

Have fun,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Your Baby's Tiny Ears Are Tuning In — Here's When Hearing Develops in the Womb , October 2025. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), About Noise and Reproductive Health , December 2023. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Development of the Auditory System , October 2015.

Updates history

October 16, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Should I Play Music for My Baby in the Womb? Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Your Baby’s Tiny Ears Are Tuning In — Here’s When Hearing Develops in the Womb Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Are Cellphones Safe During Pregnancy? Here’s What the Science Says Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is It Safe to Use a Laptop While You're Pregnant? Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Thump-Thump! Here's When You'll Hear Your Baby's Heartbeat and Every Amazing Week-by-Week Change Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Fetal Heart Monitors During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Can White Noise Help Your Baby Sleep Better? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Can You Drink Any Alcohol While You're Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Musical Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

These Are the Exercises You Should Avoid During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Smoking Cigarettes During Pregnancy: Is It Ever Safe? Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

How Much Caffeine Is Safe During Pregnancy? The Sneaky Sources That Put Moms-to-Be Over the Limit Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Strength Training in Pregnancy: How to Safely Lift Weights While Expecting Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

What Every Mom Needs to Know Before Bringing a Baby to a Sporting Event Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window