Is Pink Discharge Normal When You're Pregnant?

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

Pink Discharge in Women

If you notice pink discharge while expecting, the causes are usually benign. Here’s what could be behind it.

You probably know that seeing pinkish or light-colored blood when you’re on the brink of getting your period means a light flow is about to start. But spying pink discharge during early pregnancy can bring up a lot of questions — and even some concern. And what should you make of light-colored spotting that crops up at other times?

Here’s more about what pink discharge during pregnancy means, as well as during your monthly cycle, and when to see the doctor.

Key Takeaways

Pink discharge can be common during pregnancy and usually is no cause for concern. Up to 1 in 4 pregnant women experience some vaginal bleeding, and light pink or pinkish-brown spotting early in pregnancy is usually due to implantation bleeding or minor cervical irritation.

Possible causes for pink discharge vary depending on timing. Early pregnancy spotting may result from implantation, infection, intense exercise, or (rarely) ectopic pregnancy. Later on, pink discharge can also stem from minor vaginal tears, ovarian cyst rupture, or amniotic fluid leaks.

When to call your doctor: While pink discharge often resolves on its own, seek medical care if it’s heavy, persistent, has a strong odor, or comes with cramping or pain.

What is pink discharge during pregnancy?

Pink discharge or light pink spotting during pregnancy is often nothing more than benign vaginal secretions combined with blood, and a number of things can cause it. It’s also very common: Up to 1 in 4 women experience some kind of vaginal bleeding during their pregnancy. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusVaginal bleeding in pregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusVaginal bleeding in pregnancySee All Sources

Pink discharge early in pregnancy may appear light pink or a darker shade of pink since it’s a mix of clear vaginal fluid and a little bit of blood. "I had light pink bleeding when I wiped for the entire 5th week," says What to Expect Community user cheersto2under2.

If your pink discharge is related to implantation bleeding (more on that in a minute), it may look pinkish or brownish. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSymptoms of pregnancy: What happens firstSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSymptoms of pregnancy: What happens firstSee All Sources

What does pink discharge during early pregnancy mean?

Light spotting is rather common while you’re expecting and can start around weeks 3 or 4. There are a few reasons for pink discharge during early pregnancy, including:

Implantation bleeding

Pink discharge in early pregnancy may occur due to implantation bleeding , which is a small amount of light spotting or bleeding that occurs about six to 12 days after conception. This type of bleeding is not at all uncommon and is thought to happen when the fertilized egg attaches to the lining of the uterus.

The fertilized egg has to burrow into the lining to implant — and the result can be a spectrum of discharge or spotting, from light pink to red to brown. Implantation bleeding usually occurs when you’d expect your period, but it will definitely be lighter than menstrual bleeding. Some women don’t experience implantation bleeding at all while others may not notice they have it.

It’s also possible that you’ll mistake pink spotting for a light period, though once you determine that you’re in early pregnancy, bear in mind that some cramping or spotting is normal as a fertilized egg implants and begins to grow in the uterus. However, if you are experiencing persistent cramping or bleeding, call your doctor as these may be signs of a vaginal or uterine infection or something rare and serious, like an ectopic pregnancy. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursEctopic PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursEctopic PregnancySee All Sources

Infection

After implantation bleeding, the next common reason for pink vaginal discharge in pregnancy is a sexually transmitted infection (STI), such as gonorrhea or chlamydia. Sometimes, a non-sexually transmitted infection like bacterial vaginosis or yeast can cause an infection and inflammation of the cervix, leading to pinkish discharge. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionSexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)See All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionSexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)See All Sources

Know that a small amount of vaginal odor is normal, but if you smell something stronger, it could signal an infection.

Intense exercise

If you're doing a lot of heavy lifting or strenuous exercise during early pregnancy, you may notice some pink discharge.

Ectopic pregnancy

An ectopic pregnancy is one that grows outside the womb, usually in a fallopian tube. It too may cause some vaginal bleeding or discharge, along with cramping or pain in the abdomen or pelvic region. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusEctopic PregnancySee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusEctopic PregnancySee All Sources

Check in with your practitioner if the pink discharge doesn't go away after a day or so, or it’s heavy.

Other causes of pink discharge during pregnancy

Pink discharge can also occur at other points during pregnancy (or even when you’re not expecting) for some other reasons:

Tiny vaginal tears. If you get a bit rowdy in bed with your partner, small vaginal lacerations can cause bleeding or pink discharge.

An ovarian cyst that has burst. Ovarian cysts , another culprit, are fluid-filled sacs that form on one or both of a woman’s ovaries. Sometimes they can rupture during pregnancy and cause bleeding or spotting, but it’s not usually a cause for concern. Most practitioners will just monitor the situation and wait for it to resolve on its own. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsOvarian CystsSee All Sources [6]

Leaking amniotic fluid. A slow leak may cause a little wetness or pink discharge here and there. If you’re not sure whether your water broke , call your doctor.

Worried about what your pink discharge might mean? Open the What to Expect app to track your symptoms, spot what’s normal, and figure out when to call your OB/GYN.

What causes pink discharge when you're not pregnant or trying to conceive?

Pink discharge that shows up when you’re not actively trying to have a baby may be pinned to a few different causes, such as:

Ovulation

Pink spotting between menstrual periods is sometimes due to ovulation , or the release of an egg from the ovaries. The egg "bursting" from the ovary can cause pain and some bleeding, much like pink discharge.

When spotting is caused by ovulation, you may also notice the blood is mixed with cervical mucus . More is produced around this time of the month, and it's often thin, extra stretchy, clear or pale white (like egg whites). This cervical fluid creates the ideal environment for sperm swimming toward an egg.

That said, not all women see pink discharge at this point in their cycle. About 5 percent of healthy, menstruating women experience spotting from ovulation, according to a study in the American Journal of Epidemiology .

The start (or end) of your period

If you spot light pink discharge when you wipe, it could mean your period is about to begin. The vagina naturally secretes dead cells from its lining as a way of cleaning the area and keeping it healthy.

In fact, the amount and color vaginal discharge changes throughout your menstrual cycle. And toward the end of it, it’s not uncommon for fluid to lighten and appear as light pink discharge.

Hormonal contraception

Some forms of birth control may also cause irregular pink spotting or breakthrough bleeding at a time when you’re not expecting your period. Any type of hormonal birth control can cause pink discharge, including pills, implants, IUDs , birth control shots and skin patches.

But pink vaginal spotting or breakthrough bleeding is more commonly seen in women who are using low-dose or very low-dose birth control pills, implants or hormonal IUDs. If you smoke or are less than consistent with your pill-taking schedule, you may experience this bleeding more often.

What can you do about pink discharge during pregnancy?

Pink discharge during pregnancy is an annoyance, to be sure, and the treatment of it depends on the cause. If an infection is suspected, see your doctor for next steps. And if you’re dealing with implantation bleeding, the quickest fix is simply to wear a thin pad until it subsides.

When to see a doctor for pink discharge

If you're concerned about any kind of vaginal bleeding during any point in your cycle or while you’re pregnant, check in with your health care provider. An immediate call to the doctor is necessary, however, if you experience intense cramping and bleeding or severe lower belly pain.

In some cases, pink vaginal fluid may indicate an early miscarriage, but it could also be nothing. Either way, put your mind at ease and call the doctor. The sooner you’re seen and evaluated, the better for your health — and then you can get back to enjoying your pregnancy (or trying to conceive!).

Sources

Vaginal bleeding in pregnancy

Show in the article

Symptoms of pregnancy: What happens first

Show in the article

Ectopic Pregnancy

Show in the article

Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs)

Show in the article

Ectopic Pregnancy

Show in the article

Ovarian Cysts

Show in the article

Spotting or Bleeding During Pregnancy

Is It Implantation Bleeding or Just My Period?

Ovulation Symptoms

What Happens If You Have an Ectopic Pregnancy

Cramping During Pregnancy: Normal or Something More?

What Happens If You Get an Ovarian Cyst When You're Pregnant?

Cervical Mucus and Pregnancy

Vulvovaginal Health

What You Should Know About Breakthrough Bleeding with Birth Control

Menstrual Bleeding Patterns Among Regularly Menstruating Women

Ovarian Cysts: Overview

Vaginal Discharge