The newest generation of moms say it's a great way to spread the word; here's how to do it without ruffling any feathers.

You spend a significant amount of time building the perfect baby registry when you're expecting. Once you've finally added all those tiny onesies, diapering supplies and big-ticket items, the next step is to share the finished product with loved ones so they know exactly what you need. But when it comes to *where* to distribute your registry, parents-to-be have mixed feelings. In particular, moms are unsure whether it's helpful or cringey to post a link to your baby registry on social media.

"Would it be tacky to post a link to my registry on social media?" wonders What to Expect Community user Jmillsaps25. "We have family and friends that live out of town. I figured instead of sending the link individually as they ask, it would just be easier to make one big post … But I don't know if that's considered rude."

Turns out, there's somewhat of a generational split when it comes to attitudes about registry sharing. Millennial moms are more likely to feel that social media isn't a polite place to spread the word, but more Gen Z parents-to-be are perfectly comfortable posting their registries for everyone to access quickly. So what makes sense for you — is it fair play or a faux pas to share the link to your baby registry on social media?

Key takeaways

Most parents (65%) approve of sharing a baby registry on social media.

More Gen Z moms in particular say it’s a good idea (80%) as opposed to Millennials (59%).

If you're worried about it coming off as rude, you can adjust the language or privacy settings on your post to put less of an emphasis on gifts.

Most moms think posting a registry link on social media is a great idea

The vast majority of moms — 65% — believe that posting your baby registry on social media is not only nice, but a great way to share the link with loved ones, according to a recent What to Expect survey of 401 women who are currently pregnant or have at least one child under age 5.

"It is becoming very common and accepted to do it," notes What to Expect Community mom N=Mama2youngins. "I've seen it plenty of times from friends and family, and I've never once felt obligated to purchase or felt like it was rude to post or send."

The reality in 2025 is that social media is part of the 'village' and a way to get eyes on something.

What to Expect Community Member

A much smaller percentage of moms, 19%, think sharing your registry link on social media is a little tacky, while 15% don't have an opinion one way or the other.

"It's personally not something that I would do," says user Rachael-evin. And says Jbranmama, "I think sending people a link to your registry or posting it somewhere if people don't ask for it is super tacky and it's you just asking for gifts. It's one thing if it's attached to your shower information."

Gen Z moms are even more likely to give it the thumbs-up

Posting a registry link on social media is much more of a norm among younger parents. A solid majority of Gen Z moms (80% versus 59% for Millennial moms) think posting a link to a baby registry is "a great way to spread the word."

"The reality in 2025 is that social media is part of the 'village' and a way to get eyes on something," says user NatC317. "There's nothing tacky about giving people the option to contribute if they want to, and if they don't want to, they can keep it moving."

What's more, many Gen Z parents have already done this: 2 in 5 say they've shared a link to their registry on social media, while only 1 in 4 Millennial parents can say the same.

"This tracks with other data we've collected about Gen Z ," notes Dominique De Lope , consumer insights expert at What to Expect. "What we tend to see with Gen Z is that they have a much deeper comfort with social media and less sensitivity to sharing personal information with others this way — they're used to sharing their lives online." As a result, it makes sense that Gen Z parents would be more comfortable sharing their registry on social media, too.

Gen Z parents may also believe social media is a "safer" place to share information like this, De Lope adds, since they don't feel "like they are putting pressure on a gift giver directly by sharing it in real life."

Should you post your registry link on social media?

Ultimately, there's no right or wrong answer here. As What to Expect Community user BabyMcDCominInHot puts it: "You know your friends and family best to know how it might be received."

Still, if you're on the fence, here are some pros and cons to keep in mind:

Pros

It's easy. There's no denying that a quick post simplifies the process of distributing your registry link to loved ones.

You never know who will want to send a gift. There are certain people you might not think to invite to your baby shower , for example, but it's possible they'd still like to celebrate your new arrival.

It's inclusive. Friends and family who live far away or wouldn't be able to attend your baby shower can still feel like they're part of this major moment in your life.

Cons

It may come off the wrong way. "As much as I would LOVE all the extra gifts that might come from posting my registry, it does kinda feel like a grab," says user Crewsocksmama.

Some people might find it impersonal. Again, you know your friends and family best, but some people may prefer a direct message with the link.

There's no guarantee people will see it "due to algorithms and such," points out user Elianarra.

You might have privacy concerns. When you share your baby registry online, it's on view for everyone. Will your mailing address or due date be visible?

If you want to share your registry link, here are some tips

Ask nicely

It sounds obvious, but being mindful of your language when sharing the link can make clear that you're not just looking for gifts. Says user Krk4: "[I'll] caption [my registry post] with something like 'Several people have asked for our registry, and this is the easiest way for us to share it with our whole family. Thank you to anyone who supports our growing girl.'"

Here's another way to phrase it, courtesy of user Crewsocksmama: "'Hey, I know you guys would love to be at our shower but are just too far away! A few of you have asked if I have a registry for the baby, so I just wanted to pass this link along. We love all of you so much and already feel encouraged by just your support alone!"

Consider tweaking your privacy settings

If you're someone with privacy concerns, make any changes to your account or registry before posting the link. In particular, it's important to make sure your mailing address is hidden.

On Facebook, you can change your settings so only certain people can see your posts, and Instagram allows you to select "close friends" who can view your Stories.

Choose your audience mindfully

While it's certainly fine to post your baby registry directly on your Facebook page or Instagram Story, some people might prefer to distribute it in a smaller social media setting, like in a private Facebook group or with their "close friends" list on Instagram.

Another option is to include the registry link with an invitation to your baby shower, which ensures that the only people who receive it are those who are also invited to the in-person event.

Consider an e-vite

Email invites for baby showers such as those from Paperless Post are popular these days, and they make it easy to share your registry link if you're uncomfortable posting it with your full social media following.

Some people also send invites via text: "What I did was create photos of an invite on Canva for a baby shower with the registry details," says user Annamaks. "We texted it to everyone, and it had a link to the RSVP website and registry."

Include lower-priced items on your registry

If you're mindful about not asking for too much, make sure you have plenty of inexpensive items on your registry. Think: onesies, pacifiers, board books and small accessories like hats and socks. (This baby registry checklist has lots of ideas.)

You could also mark bigger items as "group gifts" so people can contribute smaller amounts, if they prefer. Another option is to build your registry so big-ticket items are only visible to certain people: "On some registries, you are able to add things but still keep them 'hidden,' so that might be a good option for the more expensive items," says mia001001.

Methodology

The Everyday Health Group Pregnancy & Parenting Talk to Moms Monthly Poll was conducted by Everyday Health Group – Pregnancy and Parenting between February 28 and March 6, 2025. We surveyed 401 women ages 18 to 44 who have at least one child 0 to 5 years old.

Everyday Health Group Pregnancy & Parenting, Talk to Moms Monthly Poll, March 2025. WhatToExpect.com, A Complete Guide to Baby Shower Etiquette , November 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Baby Registry Checklist: Exactly What to Put on a Baby Registry , April 2023. Dominique De Lope , What to Expect, Associate Director Trade Insights.