Is Spotting a Sign of Pregnancy?

is spotting a sign of pregnancy, different colored pink and red hearts

Any vaginal blood you notice during pregnancy can be scary. But some early spotting is common and not always a sign that something’s wrong.

If you’re trying to conceive or you’re already expecting (yay!), the last thing you want to see on your underwear is a bit of blood. But it’s important to remember that bleeding early on in a pregnancy is not uncommon, according to the American College of Gynecologists and Obstetricians (ACOG), Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBleeding During PregnancySee All Sources [1] and much of the time, it’s not a sign of a bigger health concern.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBleeding During PregnancySee All Sources

In fact, if you notice some spotting, it could be implantation bleeding , which is a normal, early sign of pregnancy that can happen at about six to 12 days after conception. And there are few other common causes of spotting that you should know about.

Read on for what’s behind light bleeding in early pregnancy, whether it’s cause for concern, and when you should call the doctor.

Is spotting a sign of early pregnancy?

Yes, spotting can be a sign of early pregnancy, though it’s one not of the more “classic” ones you might expect, such as a missed period , tender breasts , nausea and fatigue .

Still, light spotting can occur early on too, along with bloating , constipation , mild cramps and nasal congestion . Spotting might begin around week 3 or 4, and it’s not often not a sign of something serious.

Causes of spotting in early pregnancy

There are a variety of reasons for some spotting early in pregnancy, but they’re usually rather routine. Still, if you’re worried, you can always ask your doctor for some advice.

Implantation bleeding. This type of light bleeding, which affects about 1 in 3 women, according to Penn Medicine, Trusted SourcePenn Medicine, Lancaster General HealthImplantation Bleeding or Your Period? How to Spot the DifferenceSee All Sources [2] can occur when a fertilized egg attaches itself to the uterine lining. By wiggling around in the wall of your uterus, the egg breaks small blood vessels, causing some bleeding. Implantation bleeding is on the light side (not like a period), may last a few hours or even a couple of days, and looks pink or light brown in color.

Sex or an exam. The cervix is more sensitive as it gets ready for pregnancy and has developed more blood vessels too, which means having sex, a Pap smear, or an internal pelvic exam can cause a little bleeding, according to Cleveland Clinic. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicBleeding During PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Infection. A urinary tract infection (UTI) or a sexually transmitted infection (STI) , such as gonorrhea or chlamydia, can irritate the cervix, causing light bleeding. Once treated with antibiotics, however, the spotting should end.

Subchorionic bleeding. This spotting might be light or a little heavier and happens when blood collects between the fetal membrane, near the placenta, and the wall of the uterus. Much of the time, this light bleeding clears up on its own. Subchorionic hematomas , as this type of bleeding is called, are common, happening in 2 to 3 percent of pregnancies and up to half of IVF pregnancies.

Is spotting cause for concern in early pregnancy?

It’s hard not to worry about any amount of bleeding you notice early in pregnancy. But, much of the time, spotting isn’t cause for concern if it’s related to one of the above reasons. Your best bet is to check in with the doctor to explain what you’re seeing and seek some reassurance.

When to call the doctor

It’s important to contact your doctor if the blood you see is heavier than light spotting or you have other symptoms with it, like cramping or lower belly pain. Your health care provider will likely want to examine you to determine the cause.

Keep in mind that spotting and even actual bleeding can happen occasionally throughout pregnancy and still result in a healthy baby.

Any sign of blood in early pregnancy can be alarming at first. But know that light spotting is fairly common and is usually not cause for worry. Still, it’s a good idea to check in with your doctor to make sure all is well so you can rest easy.