Is There a 9-Month Sleep Regression?

9-month sleep regression, mom rocking older baby in bedroom

Popping awake at night or skipping a nap are common signs of this bump in the sleep road. Here’s more about sleep regression and how to get through it with aplomb.

After so many feedings in the wee hours when your infant was tiny, a solid night’s sleep seems like it should be your reward when your baby is 9 months old . And yet, even during the latter half of the first year, those precious Zzzs can be interrupted.

We’re referring to what some call the 9-month sleep regression, a minor setback that can happen when baby is around that age. There are also the 8-month and 10-month sleep regressions, and other similar blips in sleep that can surface at various moments during the first year and even into toddlerhood. Trusted SourcePenn Medicine, Lancaster General HealthUnderstanding and Navigating Sleep RegressionsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourcePenn Medicine, Lancaster General HealthUnderstanding and Navigating Sleep RegressionsSee All Sources

Fortunately, this phase is temporary — and you don’t have to go it alone.

“The pediatrician has knowledge of your baby's medical history and growth and can help trouble-shoot, especially if sleep issues are persistent,” says What to Expect Medical Review Board Member Dr. Jesil Pazhayampallil , a pediatrician in Long Island, New York.

Read on for more about the 9-month sleep regression, signs to watch for, and tips for handling it.

What is the 9-month sleep regression?

The 9-month sleep regression is a short-lived disruption in your baby’s usual sleep schedule that might make it harder for your little one to drift off or cause her to wake up crying in the night.

“My happy, good-sleeping baby has been replaced with a miserable grump who wakes up multiple times at night,” says What to Expect Community member kamirich1 about her 9-month-old. “I was not expecting it at all.”

You might already be familiar with sleep regressions , as they can occur at the 3- and 4-month mark , at 6 months , between 8 and 10 months, at 12 months , and later in the toddler years .

The sleep interruptions your baby is experiencing can happen at tuck-in time, late at night, and also during naps .

“My baby is 9 months old and has recently been waking up almost every hour for the past two weeks,” says What to Expect mom KDamp1225. “I’m assuming it’s a regression or growth spurt currently, but even his ‘normal’ sleep is a minimum of three wakeups. … I’m at a loss. I was hoping things would be getting better by now.”

When your baby is 9 months old and going through this kind of a bump, it could be time to reassess day sleep and possibly make a switch.

“Babies may be ready to decrease the number of naps during the day around 9 months, and thus the timing of the nap may need to change,” says Dr. Pazhayampallil.

What are the signs of the 9-month sleep regression?

Here are some of the common signs of the 9-month sleep regression:

Extra fussing at naptimes and bedtimes

Waking up at night or during a nap

Difficulty falling asleep

Shortened naps or no nap on some days

More clinging and crying when you leave the room

New milestones, like forming words and pulling up

What causes the 9-month sleep regression?

There are many possible causes for the 9-month sleep regression, including normal routine and habit changes that happen as babies grow, and milestones they’re in the middle of working on, among others.

“A lot of people think infant sleep is linear and babies will sleep for longer as they age,” says Dr. Kyle Monk , a pediatrician at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . “But in actuality, babies’ sleep patterns change as they’re naturally going through a number of developmental phases.”

Some of these changes include newly learned gross motor skills , babbling , and even forming some early words . There are others, too, that your baby may be focusing on.

“Around 9 months, babies are learning how to crawl and may even be pulling up to standing ,” Dr. Monk says. “And a baby’s social skills are also developing, as some infants may start saying ‘mama’ and ‘dada’ and might be communicating by clapping and waving .”

Instead of taking her usual nap, your baby may want to practice her “talking” and work on standing in the crib. Once she manages to get up, she might cry because she doesn’t know how to sit down again.

Object permanence is another milestone your little one is grasping right now. That can feed into separation anxiety , which actually tends to be at its worst around 9 or 10 months.

Finally, let’s not forget teething . Around this time, your baby’s mouth is starting to fill up with those adorable pearly whites — and the pain that comes with cutting teeth can certainly interrupt a nap or nighttime sleeping.

How long does the 9-month sleep regression last?

The 9-month sleep regression, like the others that can crop up, is generally a brief stage in your baby’s life. This sleep snag will typically last a couple of weeks, but it could stretch a bit longer.

“Try to be patient and support your infant through this stage,” advises Dr. Monk. “And know that all babies learn to eventually sleep for long stretches.”

Tips for managing the 9-month sleep regression

Start with the obvious, says Dr. Monk. “Check for a wet diaper, hunger, a temperature change, sickness, and teething,” she suggests.

Next, try the following tips for handing a 9-month sleep regression:

Find support. Both Dr. Monk and Dr. Pazhayampallil remind parents that they don’t have to fly solo. Call the pediatrician if you’re concerned or have questions about your baby’s sleep.

Focus on routine. Don’t shorten or skip the usual tuck-in steps in order to get your baby to bed faster. The same bath, feeding, story, song, and snuggles are still a comfort right now.

Practice alone time. Step out of your baby’s sight during the day to reinforce the fact that you will return, even though she can’t see you for a minute or two.

Make wake-ups low-key. Don’t rush in when your little one cries at night. Instead, visit her for a quick moment, with the lights on low, and keep your engagement brief. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources [2]

Repeat sleep training. If you’ve sleep-trained your baby in the past, you might want to try again, says Dr. Pazhayampallil. “Sleep training after 6 months is usually not a one-and-done thing, as disruptions will come up, such as illness, travel, new milestones, or growth,” she notes.

"Parents do not have to be slaves to these blips in sleep schedule," says Lauren Crosby , M.D., a fellow with and spokeswoman for the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "I tell parents that whatever the reason that it happens, if the child is not sick, has been feeding well, has not recently traveled, resume the sleep routine and re-sleep train right away. Otherwise, bad habits develop quickly."

If a sleep regression shows up at your house, try to be calm and find some reinforcements. Take turns with your partner or a babysitter when dealing with the nap and nighttime visits. And know that in a week or two, this phase will have eased and your baby will be on to the next adventure.

Key Takeaways

The 9-month sleep regression is a usually a short-lived disruption in your baby’s sleep schedule that happens when she's about 9 months old.

Signs your baby is going through the 9-month sleep regression could include increased fussiness at naptime or bedtime; more frequent overnight wake-ups; trouble settling down to sleep; new milestones like crawling, standing up, or talking; clinginess when you leave the room; and teething.

The 9-month sleep regression usually only lasts a few weeks , but it may stretch a little longer.