Is the 8‑Month Sleep Regression in Full Swing? Here’s What You Can Expect

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

8-month sleep regression, baby standing up in crib

Your baby’s a solid sleeper, so why is she suddenly waking up overnight again? She could be experiencing a rather common 8-month sleep regression. Here’s what you need to know.

Baby sleep can seem like a one-step-forward, two-steps-back process. There are many good nights, of course, but also those filled with tears. And sometimes, the whole sleep train seems to go off the rails. During one of those phases when your baby is older, you might find yourself dealing with the 8-month sleep regression.

Try not to panic in the face of this or any other sleep regression . Instead, read on to learn when it can happen, what’s behind it, and how to deal with the change in (and loss of) your baby's Zzzs.

Key Takeaways

The 8-month sleep regression is short-lived. This temporary phase happens because your babe is accomplishing so much, both physically (crawling, pulling up) and cognitively — that sweet babbling!

You’ll know it’s a sleep regression when… There are many signs that your little one’s shut-eye is disrupted, including trouble drifting off, more night waking, longer daytime naps, extra crying, and clinginess.

A calm approach + solid routine = Zzzs. To get through this hiccup, keep your baby’s sleep times consistent, practice being apart, and let her fuss a bit. You can even bring back some sleep training strategies to try again.

What is the 8-month sleep regression in babies?

The 8-month sleep regression typically crops up between 8 and 10 months of age (and is sometimes called the 9-month sleep regression, or the 8- to 10-month sleep regression). As with other sleep regressions, this one is characterized by disruptions in your baby's sleep cycle.

The 8-month sleep regression is a surprising (though completely normal) shake-up in your baby’s established nighttime routine, marked by more trouble sleeping and falling asleep, and more frequent wake-ups overnight. The result? Lost sleep for you both.

Sleep regression at this point is likely connected to your little one's rapid growth and brain development, along with the major physical skills she's learning.

At 8 to 10 months of age, your baby may be on the verge of some exciting new milestones, like crawling, pulling up, talking or even taking a few steps. (Lots of babies attempt to walk by around their first birthday, though some may do it a bit sooner and others a little later.)

The 8-month sleep regression can also have an emotional component, so popping awake because of separation anxiety can also happen.

You might actually recognize this sleep bump in the road from a few months back, as the 4-month sleep regression is also a common occurrence in infancy. Some babies also go through a 6-month sleep regression.

How long does the 8-month sleep regression last?

You can breathe easy with this baby stage because an 8-month sleep regression is temporary. Getting through this snooze snag usually requires the newness of your baby’s skills or emotions to wear off — and once it does, she should be back to her usual self in the crib.

Take heart in the fact that if you worked hard to sleep train your baby, she’ll likely remember what to do at night and will ease back into her regular pattern without too much fuss (fingers crossed!).

And if you do need to sleep train her again, know that it’s not as harsh as it seems and it’s almost always harder for you than it is for your baby, tears and all.

Causes of the 8- to 10-month sleep regression

An 8-month sleep regression may be caused by the following developments and changes:

Crawling. Your 8-month old’s physical skills are getting better every day and she could be practicing her advanced moves (creeping, crawling , pulling up, scooting) at night, or at least itching to practice them.

Talking. By this age, most babies are babbling up a storm and you might even hear "mama" or "dada" or other early baby talk coming from the crib. It’s exciting — but try to ignore this "talk" during an 8-month sleep regression in the hopes that she’ll drift back to sleep. Or maybe you’ve got a singer at your house like What to Expect Community parent mommytobabymm does. “We had a schedule and from 9 months she just decided she would rather sing at night instead of sleeping,” she shares.

Separation anxiety. An 8-month sleep regression might be connected to your baby’s social strides. Separation anxiety , which can begin around this age, can come with a fair share of crying. Babies typically start to experience separation anxiety between 8 and 10 months old when a parent or caregiver leaves the room or goes somewhere without them. Your little one can go through the upset of separation anxiety at bedtime, too, when you put your baby in her crib and leave the room.

Signs your baby is going through the 8-month sleep regression

Keep your eyes peeled for the following clues that might indicate a sleep regression:

Crankiness . A fussy baby might not be getting the requisite sleep she needs, so stick with your regular routine and know that babies this age need 12 to 16 hours of sleep in a 24-hour period (usually 9 or 10 to 12 hours at night), including daytime naps.

More frequent night waking. If your previously "good sleeper" is suddenly waking up more than usual overnight , this can be a sign she's going through this latest sleep regression.

Restless sleep, including trouble falling asleep. Has it suddenly become harder (again) to get your baby to settle down, and does she stir a lot in her sleep? The 8-month sleep regression may be to blame.

Clinginess. If your baby is going through the 8-month sleep regression, she may act upset when you’re not around as well as hold onto you extra tightly when you're with her.

More daytime sleep. Playing catch-up during the day is normal for a baby who’s not sleeping as well as she used to (watch for a longer daytime nap).

Tips for managing the 8- to 10-month sleep regression in your baby

Help your baby rest peacefully with these smart moves:

Practice separation. Short moments apart from your baby during playtime might help her understand that even though you’re out of sight, you’re still around and will come back.

Keep up the routine . Life gets in the way, of course, with travel, sickness, and other changes around the house. But through it all, strive to keep the sleep routine sacred, especially during a sleep regression, so you both can rely on it as a way to slow down and tuck in.

Consider trying sleep training again. If you sleep trained your baby before, you may want to try the technique that worked best again if she's really having trouble getting through this latest sleep regression. The good news is that it likely won't take as long this time around!

Let your baby see you at night, but don't linger. Since sound sleep for babies this age may be more elusive in part because of separation anxiety, letting your baby see you when she wakes up or can't settle down at night can help, as long as you keep visits to the crib as brief and uneventful as possible.

Give it some time. Try to be patient and remember that the 8-month sleep regression is temporary. Your baby won't be in this phase forever.

Need more information about your baby's schedules and these pesky sleep regressions? Track your little one's sleep with our Baby Tracker, keep notes in My Journal, and get expert-backed advice (plus real-work tips from parents who know the deal) in the What to Expect app , your go-to for all things baby sleep.

Your best bet when you realize your baby is going through an 8-month sleep regression is to take it in stride — and also take turns if you can. Dealing with a cranky baby several nights in a row may leave you frazzled, so sharing the load with your partner or a babysitter makes good sense. Soon this phase will pass, and you’ll be on to the next one (and you’ll need your strength!).