Is This the Self-Care Secret to Easing Pregnancy Swelling and Soreness?

lymphatic drainage massage

Swollen ankles, meet your match. Lymphatic drainage therapy might just bring you some relief.

Moms-to-be are turning to lymphatic drainage massage treatments to ease common pregnancy ailments like sore muscles and swollen feet.

“I tried out lymphatic draining on my legs and the difference was incredible (plus it felt amazing!), shares What to Expect Community mom Petunia92 .

Will getting a lymphatic massage really help you feel better? Let's take a closer look at this massage technique and see if it's safe and effective for you and your growing little one.

Key Takeaways

Lymphatic drainage massages are especially popular among pregnant women who feel bloated and uncomfortable.

They're safe during pregnancy as long as your massage therapist uses a light touch and is experienced in prenatal massage techniques.

If anything feels uncomfortable or painful, have the therapist stop.

What is a lymphatic drainage massage?

A lymphatic drainage massage, also known as manual lymphatic drainage, is a light-touch massage therapy that helps get the fluid in your body moving to ease swelling and pain, improve blood circulation, and support healing.

The massage uses soft, slow, and repetitive hand movements to push the fluid from your swollen areas through your lymphatic vessels and into your lymph nodes, which helps get rid of any toxins in your body, and may help improve your immune system as a result.

Why are moms getting lymphatic drainage massages during pregnancy?

Swelling is super common during pregnancy, says Anna Scire , LCMT, MLD-C, CKTP, RYT, licensed massage therapist who specializes in lymphatic drainage therapy and owner of Anna Scire Massage Therapy, Boston.

You can gain about 6 to 8 liters of extra fluid in your body and it often pools in your fingers, arms, legs, and feet. Moms-to-be turn to lymphatic drainage therapy to help alleviate the puffy feeling this causes.

A lymphatic drainage massage acts as a delicate guide, helping that fluid flow more freely and get reabsorbed by your lymphatic vessels — the tiny tubes that carry extra fluid back into your bloodstream. The result? You may feel lighter and less puffy.

A lymphatic drainage can also help with relaxation and deeper sleep, easing constipation, and support for your immune system, “which naturally shifts during pregnancy,” says Cortney Santos, a Certified Lymphedema Therapist (CLT) and Licensed Bodywork Practitioner in Bedminster, New Jersey.

Many pregnant women like WTE mom Petunia92 come out of their lymphatic drainage massages feeling calm and relaxed. “Let me tell you — this massage has changed my life,” she says. “Not only did I totally pass out during the session and got an amazing nap out of it, but I actually have ankles again.”

Are lymphatic drainage massages safe during pregnancy?

Since this massage is gentle in nature, it is typically safe for all pregnancies. However, you should avoid getting one if you have a high-risk pregnancy for the safety of you and your baby, says Shannon Smith, M.D., a board-certified OB/GYN and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board.

You should also avoid a lymphatic drainage massage if you have a history of blood clots and clotting disorders, pre-eclampsia or hypertension, or severe varicose veins, says Dr. Smith. “Always check with your provider before scheduling to ensure they think it is safe.”

A lymphatic drainage can also help with relaxation, deeper sleep, easing constipation, and support for your immune system.

Cortney Santos, a Certified Lymphedema Therapist (CLT) and Licensed Bodywork Practitioner

It is more common to get a lymphatic drainage massage in your second and third trimesters. Since this massage is so gentle, both Scire and Santos say it is also safe to get one in your first trimester . If you are unsure or considering getting manual lymphatic drainage, you should always speak with your healthcare provider first.

Tips for getting a lymphatic drainage massage during pregnancy

The key to lymphatic therapy is a very light touch. Your therapist should use “very gentle, slow, and rhythmic strokes starting at the collarbone and working down through the body toward the areas that need drainage support,” says Santos. “Because our superficial lymphatic system is just below the skin, no deep pressure, kneading, or digging into muscle is needed.”

You shouldn’t feel any intense pressure or pain. During pregnancy, practitioners should use extra caution around your ankles to avoid pressure points and, of course, your growing belly. Don’t be afraid to ask where a therapist received training or how often they work with pregnant clients, says Santos. Your therapist should be a Certified Lymphedema Therapist (CLT) or a certified manual lymphatic drainage therapist (C-MLD, CMLDT).

“Trust your gut,” she says. “If your practitioner rushes their movements, uses deep pressure, pulls out some wood tools, or seems unsure about pregnancy modifications, then keep looking.”

How often you get this massage depends on your preference and your needs. A massage every two to four weeks is great for general maintenance and wellness, says Santos. If you are someone who is experiencing a noticeable amount of swelling, fluid retention or bloating, “weekly sessions, especially in the third trimester, can be incredibly relieving.”

Other ways to relieve pregnancy swelling or bloating

Can't get in to get a lymphatic drainage massage? Not to worry. You can try other lymphatic techniques at home:

Elevate your legs: Simply lie down and put your legs up in the air or against your headboard, or place a pillow under your legs, for about 15 to 20 minutes a few times per day. This will keep pressure off of the veins in your legs and improve your blood circulation.

Take ice baths: Dip your feet or calves in cool water daily for up to 5 to 10 minutes to achieve relief from pain and swelling. The colder the temperature of the water, the shorter your soak should be. The cold temperature will cause your veins to narrow and decrease the amount of swelling in your limbs.

Wear compression gear: Compression socks , stockings, or sleeves can help apply pressure to the parts of your body that typically experience swelling, helping to prevent fluid from building up in your arms, legs, or feet.

Try dry brushing: On dry skin, lightly brush in an upward or circular motion using a shower brush with stiff bristles. Start at the furthest part of your arms and legs and work your way towards your torso. This can also help to improve your blood flow and lymphatic fluid drainage.

Cortney Santos , LMT, CLT, certified lymphedema therapist, licensed bodywork practitioner, and founder of Colysa Therapies, Bedminster, NJ. Anna Scire , LCMT, MLD-C, CKTP, RYT, licensed massage therapist who specializes in lymphatic drainage therapy and owner of Anna Scire Massage Therapy, Boston, MA. Shannon Smith , M.D., FACOG, board certified OB/GYN and partner at Brigham Faulkner Ob/Gyn Associates in Boston, MA, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . Cedars-Sinai, FAQs About Lymphatic Drainage Massage , August 2023. Cleveland Clinic, Edema , May 2022. Cleveland Clinic, Why Gua Sha Might Be Good For You , June 2021. Cleveland Clinic, The Truth About Dry Brushing and What It Does For You , November 2021. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Aesthetic Surgery Journal Open Forum, The Utility of Lymphatic Massage in Cosmetic Procedures , February 2023. UT Southwestern Medical Center, 5 ways to manage swollen legs and feet during pregnancy , September 2021.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Prenatal Massage: What’s Safe, What Helps, and What to Avoid Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Is Reflexology Safe During Pregnancy? Here's How It Works and When to Try It Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Why Swimming is the ‘Secret Weapon’ for a Smoother Labor Experience Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Yes, Your Feet Really Are Getting Bigger: Why 75% of Pregnant Women Experience Swelling Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Hydrotherapy During Pregnancy and Labor: How Warm Water Can Help Ease the Aches Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is Acupuncture Safe During Pregnancy? What Experts Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Comfort Boosters: Here's the Deal on CAM Therapies During Pregnancy Fact Checked by Karen Miles, Contributing Writer/Editor

These Pregnancy-Safe Leg and Booty Moves Boost Stability And Ease Aches Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is It Safe to Go to a Chiropractor During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip) Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Stretching During Pregnancy: 9 Feel-Good Moves Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Worried About Tearing During Birth? Perineal Massage May Help Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

How a Breast Massage Can Help With Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Most Uncomfortable Part of Birth Might Come Afterwards Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Does Fertility Massage Really Work? Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window