Is Your Baby Refusing to Sleep in the Crib? Here's What to Do

Light copy changes, updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

baby won't sleep in crib, sad baby in bed

Has your infant made it clear she wants to sleep anywhere but her crib? Here's why this can happen and how to convince her that her own bed is the best place for Zzzs.

Setting up a cozy crib was a delight while you were expecting — those sheets with yellow ducks and that adorable moon-and-stars mobile. But now your sweet baby is staging a revolt and wants nothing to do with the nest you've carefully feathered.

"My newborn will not sleep in the bassinet or crib," says What to Expect Community user babybaeeee. "I didn’t have this issue with my firstborn. What gives?!"

Whether your little one used to snooze like a champ in the crib but now she's protesting it, or she hasn't been a great crib sleeper from day one, you're definitely not alone, as both situations are common. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources [1] Fortunately, there are a few ways to reverse the trend so you can get your baby back into the crib and off to dreamland.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources

Key Takeaways

Babies might resist the crib for a number of reasons. Many newborns prefer sleeping in arms or on your chest, and sudden crib protests from older babies may stem from growth spurts, teething, illness, milestones, or sleep regressions.

Put your baby down drowsy but awake, wait briefly before checking in on her, transition her gradually from the bassinet, and ensure you're always following safe sleep practices, including using only a firm, flat surface like a crib, bassinet, or playard.

Maintaining a healthy sleep routine can also help: Encourage plenty of daytime play, use swaddles or sleep sacks (depending on her age), maintain a comfy room temp (68–72°F is ideal), and always avoid unsafe sleep spots like car seats or swings.

Why won’t my baby sleep in the crib?

When a newborn won't sleep in the crib or bassinet, it could be because she's gotten used to falling asleep in another place. Some of the most common spots where she may drift off include in your arms or on your partner's chest. (Babies should always be moved to their crib or bassinet if they fall asleep anywhere else, including car seats, infant pillow, or inclined sleepers. Sleeping anywhere other than a crib, bassinet, playard, or portable crib can increase the risk of suffocation and SIDS.) Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources

As delicately as you transfer her from your embrace into the crib, the hand-off may be short-lived. Since a good portion of newborn sleep is spent in the REM or active sleep state , marked by twitching limbs, sighs, cries, and even brief waking, once she rouses and realizes she's not sleeping where she started off, she'll likely fuss.

Why won’t my baby sleep in the crib anymore all of a sudden?

If you're hearing new cries of protest when you put your infant in the crib and your baby suddenly doesn't seem to want to sleep there anymore, it could mean she's going through a temporary phase. Here are some of the reasons it might be happening:

Growth spurts. An increase in appetite can occur at any time, but fast-growing babies typically have one at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, and 3 months of age.

Teething pain. Babies as young as 3 or 4 months old can start experiencing gum soreness and discomfort due to teething , though the first tooth doesn't typically appear until around at least 6 months. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsTeething Pain Relief: How to Soothe Your Baby's DiscomfortSee All Sources [3]

Illness. A cold, ear infection, rash, or other ailment can disrupt your baby's sleep and make her not want to be put down in her crib.

New milestones. Rolling over , sitting up , and babbling are just a few of the exciting tricks your baby may be trying to master in the crib at night.

Sleep regression . This event is a normal setback in your baby's nighttime routine that can occur around 4 months , 6 months, between 8 and 10 months , and again at 12 months of age . "I suspect we’ve entered the 8-month regression," says What to Expect Community user girlmama1020. "For over a month we’ve been working on getting LO to sleep in her crib and finally had progress. She was napping and sleeping for most of the night in her crib. She would go down very easily. Then all of a sudden, that was over. All the progress we made is out the window because she will not sleep there anymore. Not even nap!"

How do I get my baby to sleep in the crib?

Of course, you'll feed your baby during a growth spurt as well as ease her tooth pain and rule out any sickness. Next up, try a few of the following strategies to get your baby to sleep in the crib:

Put her down drowsy. As sweet as it feels, don't let your babe fall asleep while lying in your arms or resting on your chest. Rock her and sing a bit, but then place her on her back in the crib when she's drowsy but still awake so she learns how to drift off in her own bed.

Stall before checking in. Since babies are restless sleepers and may cry a bit in the crib, wait a few minutes before going to her as she just might fall back to sleep on her own.

Stay the course. If you're transitioning your baby from a bassinet to a crib , there may be tears. To quell the fuss during the switch, try to ease her into the new arrangement in stages while sticking to your usual bedtime routine . For example, let her start by napping in the crib before making it the spot for nighttime sleep too.

Don't rely on car seats, swings or slings. These familiar perches may soothe your little one, but they're not designed for safe sleeping . If your baby starts to nod off in one, transfer her to the crib as soon as possible.

Up the playtime. Set aside plenty of time during the day for your infant to hone her new skills, like rolling, creeping, and crawling and she just might give it a rest at night.

Stick with firm, flat surfaces. Worried your baby isn't comfy or that a softer mattress will yield more Zzzs? Don't be tempted to add sheep skins, bumpers, blankets, or stuffed toys to the crib. A firm mattress that's free of these things is the safest sleep environment.

Use a swaddle or sleep sack. You can up the snug factor by swaddling her from birth to about 2 months of age (or as soon as she tries to roll over), though be sure to practice safe swaddling practices like only placing her on her back and monitoring her closely. Or dress her in an equally cozy sleep sack if she's older. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSwaddling: Is it Safe for Your Baby?See All Sources [4]

Check the temperature. A too-cold or overly warm room isn't ideal for good sleep, so be sure the temperature is between 68 and 72 degrees Fahrenheit . Consider running a fan in baby’s room too, which cools things down and provides white noise.

Still struggling to get into a good routine with your baby's sleep? Open the What to Expect app to track your little one's sleep and see what’s typical right now — so your whole family can get some more rest.

A rebellion in the crib is hard to take, but know that this bump in the sleep road is fixable. Keep putting your baby down in her crib and she'll soon become accustomed to sleeping in her cozy little bed and even look forward to it every night.