Is Your Toddler Clumsy? When It’s Normal and How to Help Kids Find Their Feet

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

toddler running

Your little one will stumble, trip, and bump her way across many a room. Here's why, and what you can do to minimize mishaps.

Your toddler is incredibly adorable, highly opinionated, and … pretty darn clumsy. In fact, it might seem like hardly a day (or an hour) goes by without your mini adventurer stumbling, tumbling, or walking straight into a stationary object.

"My son has been walking since around 11 months (currently 14 months) but seems so clumsy," says What to Expect Community parent avg-xoxo. "He trips over his own feet and the things around him multiple times a day and falls down. Just this morning he busted his lip on the ground from tripping over his feet."

Bumps and falls can be unsettling for some toddlers, especially if the collision course results in a boo-boo. But it's normal for your sweetie to be unsteady on her feet, and not just because she's still learning how to get around on them. (Though as you might've guessed, that certainly plays a big part!)

Here are some of the reasons why toddlers fall a lot and how to keep your little one safe. Plus, find out when to talk with the doctor about balance problems in toddlers.

Key Takeaways

Frequent tripping and falling is normal for toddlers because they’re still mastering walking, balance, coordination, depth perception, and attention — all of which develop gradually when they're 2 to 3 years old.

Most bumps only need simple comfort and basic first aid, but parents should call a doctor if there are any head injury symptoms, if clumsiness is excessive for the tot's age, or if it's paired with other issues like vision concerns, ear problems, or unusual difficulty walking.

Follow these tips for scaling back on falls: childproof your house, provide safe climbing and play areas, make sure your child is wearing appropriate shoes or socks, avoid hard surfaces, supervise your little one closely, and stay calm when spills happen so your tot keeps exploring with confidence.

Why do toddlers fall a lot?

Good news: Wobbling and tumbling are par for the course for 1- and 2-year-olds (hence the term "toddlers"), so there's likely no need to worry about your little one's lack of coordination. In most cases, frequent falls and balance blips are a routine part of toddler development. That's because ...

Your toddler is still getting the hang of walking

Toddlers who are just learning to walk are unsteady on their feet — and can stay that way for months. Getting around on two legs is a major milestone, after all, and it takes some time to fully master.

She's not super coordinated yet

Like walking, balance and coordination are skills that take time for toddlers to develop. If you've ever tried to pick up a hobby like paddleboarding, surfing, skiing, or bicycling as an adult, you know that balance-intensive activities require practice, practice, practice before you can do them fall-free.

She may not be paying attention to where she's going

Your sweetie might be more fixated on her feet or the person or object she's trying to reach than the route she's taking to get there. And even if she does spot the coffee table or that pile of sneakers at the last minute, she may not be able to steer away from it before a crash — especially if she's running at top speed.

She's easily distracted

It's no secret that your toddler's attention span is short — really short. In the midst of speeding towards one thing, something else might spark her interest and inspire her to change course, even if that means tumbling over her toy cars to get there.

Her vision is still developing

Your toddler's depth perception hasn't fully developed, so she's not the best at judging distances. Even at age 2, a child's 20/60 vision is naturally far-sighted — and won't actually settle to 20/20 until she reaches school-age.

She's not aware of fall risks

Your wee wanderer is often functioning on auto-pilot while she's getting around. So she might not make the connection that the coffee table corner will thunk her head or the dog's leash will cause her to trip.

What to do when your toddler falls

Most of the time, all your toddler needs to bounce back from a bump or tumble are some reassuring words and a quick kiss. But if she's sustained a bruise or cut, common-sense first-aid tips can help.

Apply an ice pack or a bag of frozen veggies wrapped in a washcloth to the affected area to take down swelling, and offer acetaminophen if she's complaining of pain. (Avoid ibuprofen, which may increase bleeding.)

If she bumped her head and feels drowsy, it's generally okay to let her sleep. Just check with the doctor first, and keep an eye out for concerning symptoms like pale skin, trouble breathing, or a lack of responsiveness, all of which require medical care. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursFirst Aid: FallsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursFirst Aid: FallsSee All Sources

When to call a doctor

If your toddler's fall results in anything more than a light bump on the head, call her pediatrician. Depending on your child's symptoms, the doctor may recommend monitoring your sweetie at home, bringing her in for a visit, or taking her to the emergency room.

Signs from a head bump that warrant medical care include:

Extreme sleepiness or trouble waking up

Intense fussiness that can't be soothed

Vomiting

Complaining of head, neck, or back pain

Not being able to walk normally

Not being able to focus eyes normally

Call 911 for a head bump if your child:

Has sustained a serious injury to her head, neck, back, hipbone, or thigh

Is unconscious

Is having trouble breathing or isn't breathing

Is having a seizure

As for when you should reach out to the doctor about concerns that your cutie's balance simply isn't up to snuff? Again, it's normal for toddlers to have some trouble in the coordination department that leads to trips or falls.

But it's a good idea to talk with the pediatrician if your little one is showing signs of a possible balance disorder or vision problems. These can include: Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursBalance DisordersSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursBalance DisordersSee All Sources

Stumbling or tripping much more often than other kids her age

Regularly not noticing people or objects around her

Having unusual trouble standing up or turning corners

Walking with her legs unusually far apart

Having frequent ear pain or trouble hearing

Having involuntary eye movements

Feeling fatigued

Have more questions about your tot's development and how to handle all the phases? The What to Expect app has the info you need to get through the toddler years, including expert-backed advice and words of comfort from other parents.

How to prevent your toddler from tripping and falling

While you can't prevent every bump or scrape, there are things you can do to cut down on injuries without inhibiting your little explorer's natural curiosity: Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthToddler DevelopmentSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthToddler DevelopmentSee All Sources

Update safety measures at home. The last time you childproofed your house , it may have been with a crawling baby in mind. Now that your child is up and walking (and tripping), rethink the obstacles. For example, check for sharp corners, and remove any unstable chairs or tables. Get rid of or tape down dangling electric cords. Make an extra effort to keep drawers, doors, and appliances closed when your toddler is around. Stairs and bathrooms should continue to be off-limits for solo visits.

Provide toddler-friendly zones. Let your toddler satisfy her natural desire to climb on indoor and outdoor play gyms designed for kids her age — it'll bolster her confidence and improve her coordination and strength. DIY obstacle courses made from pillows and couch cushions are okay too, as long as the surrounding area is childproofed.

Set out a sturdy stool. A child-friendly step stool enables your tot to access out-of-reach toys or books without trying to climb on the furniture — and potentially falling.

Try to steer your toddler away from extra-hard surfaces. Avoid brick, tile, slate, and stone floors as much as possible, or take extra care to hold her hand while traversing them.

Focus on feet. Bare feet are the safest (and most comfortable) way to walk around at home. If your child must wear socks or slippers, they should have nonslip bottoms. If shoes are necessary, make sure they fit properly and have soles that provide traction.

Avoid overreacting. Making a fuss every time your child falls can discourage her from exploring and make her unnecessarily fearful, so stay calm when the inevitable tumble occurs.

Never leave your toddler unattended. Accidents can happen in an instant. If you need to do something where you can't keep an eye on your child, find someone else to supervise.

When do toddler balance problems improve?

Your toddler won't go from lumbering to graceful overnight, but her balance, coordination and vision should improve gradually. By age 3, she should be much better at steering clear of collisions. Until then, do your best to keep those tripping hazards out of the way and maintain a close eye on her movements.

Toddler tripping and clumsiness is a normal — and ultimately, short-lived — part of your child's development. In the meantime, keep your cutie safe, help her learn to be more aware of fall hazards, and be ready to comfort her when she takes the inevitable misstep.