Is Your Baby Measuring Big? Why Size Estimates Aren't Always Spot-On

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"I just came from my 32-week appointment, and my doctor says I measured 35 weeks. I'm afraid my baby will be too big to deliver vaginally."

Modern medicine can tell us a lot about how babies are doing before they're born and even what they look like. But guessing how big they are is just that — a big guess.

Key Takeaways

Measuring big doesn't always mean "too big." Your baby's due date, position, and fluid in the womb can impact your physician's calculations.

An ultrasound may not be exact. This device is awesome but size estimates, especially later in pregnancy, can be off by a pound or more (who knew?).

A vaginal birth is still possible. Even bigger babies can be delivered this way, so stick to your healthy lifestyle, follow your doc's advice, and trust your body.

In early pregnancy, you might be showing earlier for a few possible reasons, such as:

Muscle tone. A pregnant woman with looser abdominal muscles is more likely to produce a pronounced tummy than a mom-to-be with a very toned torso. That's also why expectant mothers who have previously given birth and whose abdominal muscles have already been stretched and loosened will tend to show earlier. Your body type might also be at play; some women carry their babies lower, which makes them appear to stick out more.

Miscalculated due date. Another common explanation for a seemingly supersized stomach is a miscalculation of the conception date. A 15- or 16-week tummy will certainly be larger than a 13-week one, so double-check your due date .

Bloating. Your big belly could also be caused by a bout of excess gas .

Twins. If you were earlier on in your pregnancy, there could be a chance you were carrying twins without yet knowing it: Many women who sport an impressive tummy in their first trimester later discover that they're having two babies. Before you start doubling up the layette, however, keep in mind that just as many women who popped early and became convinced they were carting around two babies turned out to be bearing just one. An ultrasound settles that question.

Later on in pregnancy, your baby is maxing out on the space available in your uterus, which makes his weight notoriously difficult to predict. A late-stage ultrasound estimate can be off by a pound or more — which makes a huge difference in a 5-pound baby!

What to Expect Community parent mermaidlife knows full well that these kinds of measurements aren't always an exact science. "I was told my baby would be huge, but he was born 7 lbs and 7 oz."

Typically at each prenatal visit, your practitioner checks your fundal height (the distance from your pubic bone to the top of your uterus) with a tape measure. That number in centimeters is approximately equal to the number of weeks along you are — but one or two centimeters in either direction is no cause for alarm.

If your measurements show a discrepancy of three weeks or more, as in your case, your practitioner will do a little investigating to try to learn why with an ultrasound. Most of the time, there's a harmless explanation.

Maybe your due date is off by a few days or a week (it's pretty common for doctors to change due dates ). Your baby could be in a funny position or sitting high in your uterus, and that's throwing the tape measure off. Or you may have a uterine fibroid or extra amniotic fluid (neither of which is necessarily a big deal).

Additionally, if you've been diagnosed with gestational diabetes (which is generally screened for between 24 and 28 weeks), you are at a greater risk for having a bigger baby. If that's the case, your practitioner will have already put you on a special pregnancy diet. Be sure to follow these instructions carefully to stay healthy and reduce the baby's risk of macrosomia (when babies are born weighing more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces).

Finally, some babies are simply larger than others due to genetics — much in the way some people are taller than others. Often, mothers who carry larger babies may find that they or their partner were a larger baby at birth.

Your best bet is to continue eating healthily (and plentifully) for the remainder of your pregnancy. Try not to worry about the scale or the measuring tape.

You've got this — and we've got you. The What to Expect app is your trusted guide for all the bump-to-baby milestones.

Even if your baby is on the bigger side, chances are still good that you'll deliver on schedule, vaginally, and without being induced. And whether your baby comes out at 6 pounds or 9, the day he arrives will be thrilling.

Here's to an easy delivery and a healthy baby!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Fetal Macrosomia , February 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How Does Gestational Diabetes (GD) Affect Your Pregnancy and Baby? , June 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How Big Is My Baby? How to Measure Fundal Height and Fetus Size , May 2022. Mayo Clinic, What Is a Fundal Height Measurement? Why Does it Matter? , March 2024. Tommy's, Am I Having a Big Baby? , October 2024.

Updates history

October 3, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Everyone Has an Opinion About Your Bump — Here's Why They're (Probably) Wrong Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

When Will Your Baby Bump Show? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

5 Surprisingly Common Reasons Your Due Date Might Change Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Why Doctors Start Measuring Your Belly at 20 Weeks Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Why Some Babies Are Just Born Big Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

10 Things to Know About Your Baby Bump Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

5 Reasons Your Ultrasound Might Not Look How You Expect Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Why You Might Lose a Little Weight at the End of Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Surprising Truth: Why 90% of Moms-to-Be Are Actually at Risk for Gestational Diabetes Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Can’t Seem to Gain Weight in Pregnancy? Here’s What You Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Why You Might Feel Bloated When You're Pregnant — and What You Can Do About It Medically Reviewed by Kameelah Phillips, M.D.

Here's How to Have a Healthy Pregnancy if You're Overweight Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnancy Weight Gain Calculator Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

When You'll Get Ultrasounds During Pregnancy and What They Can Tell You About Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Twin Pregnancy Myths, Busted: What’s Really True When You’re Expecting Two Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window