Is Your Child Ready for Preschool?

preschool

Ready, set…go? Take our quiz to find out if the timing is right for your tot to start preschool.

How can you predict whether it's time to load up your little one's backpack and pack him off to preschool? Skip the Magic 8 Balls and Ouija boards, and look no further than your child to clue you in. What your potential preschooler will be expected to know and be able to do before he's signed up will depend on the school you're considering as well as his age (preschool can start as early as age 2, or as late as age 4). But there are some general indications of readiness that can help you decide if preschool should be in your child's near future.

Grab a sheet of paper and a pen and take our yes-or-no quiz to find out if your tot has what it takes to make the grade — and pick up tips for upping his chances of preschool success.

Does your child know how to understand and follow simple directions? ∗Yes ∗No

Is your child able to cooperate and take turns? ∗Yes ∗No

Is your child potty-trained? ∗Yes ∗No

Does your child know how to understand and follow simple directions? ∗Yes ∗No

Is your child comfortable around other adults and kids? ∗Yes ∗No

Does your child know how to make decisions? ∗Yes ∗No

Is your child used to a structured schedule? ∗Yes ∗No

Does your child have basic self-care skills, such as using zippers and buttons, washing hands and eating lunch or a snack without help from you? ∗Yes ∗No

Finished? Then check out the answers to find out if your child is ready for school.

Zero to Three, Preschool Prep: How to Prepare Your Toddler for Preschool , February 2010. American Academy of Pediatrics, Healthychildren.org, Is Your Child Ready for School? November 2009. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, CDC’s Developmental Milestones , June 2018. Children’s Hospital of Orange County, Developmental Milestones: Dressing Skills . What to Expect the Second Year , Heidi Murkoff and Sharon Mazel. Whattoexpect.com, Tips on Starting Potty Training , June 2018.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

Bye-Bye, Diapers — How and When to Potty Train Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Teach Your Toddler the ABCs Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Tips for Handling the First Days of Preschool

Eager to Ditch the Diapers? 9 Signs Your Toddler Is Ready to Be Potty Trained Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Tell if Your Toddler Is Gifted Medically Reviewed by Florencia Segura, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Start Potty Training a Boy: Helpful Tips and More Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Moms Wish They’d Known Before Potty Training Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Toddlers Have Potty Training Accidents at Preschool — and What You Can Do to Help Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Potty Train Your Little Girl: Helpful Tips and More Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Potty Training Twins? Strategies to Help Both Kids Succeed Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Do Kids Start Coloring and Scribbling? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do if Your Toddler Refuses to Poop on the Potty Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Age-Appropriate Chores for Kids: Teaching Your Toddler Responsibility Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window