Is Zofran Safe During Pregnancy?

zofran during pregnancy, coils with colorful balls on them

Learn more about this medication prescribed for morning sickness and find out whether it's safe to take during pregnancy or not.

Morning sickness and pregnancy go hand in hand — about 70 to 80% of expectant women experience it. Fortunately, mild cases can often be handled with home remedies for nausea during pregnancy , but acute ones may require medication to ease severe symptoms.

One particular treatment for tough bouts of morning sickness is ondansetron, which is sold under the brand name Zofran.

Zofran prescriptions have become more common over the years, with about 1 in 4 women taking it. But as with any drug taken when you’re pregnant , whether prescribed or over-the-counter, it’s important to discuss its safety as well as side effects with your physician.

If you have a severe case of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, read on to learn more about Zofran as a possible remedy.

What is Zofran?

Zofran is an antiemetic, a medication that can prevent nausea and vomiting by blocking serotonin.

Zofran was originally designed to treat severe stomach sickness and queasiness caused by chemotherapy, radiation treatments and some surgeries. But more and more, the drug has become a go-to option for morning sickness during pregnancy.

Zofran comes as a tablet, a liquid, or a dissolving tablet or film. While Zofran isn’t approved by the Food & Drug Administration to treat morning sickness, “it’s been used in thousands of pregnant women” and is now a common treatment for nausea and vomiting, says Jennifer L. Wu. M.D. , an OB/GYN in New York City and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

Is Zofran safe to take for morning sickness during pregnancy?

Zofran is popular of late, though studies on its safety have been both small and also yielded somewhat inconclusive results. Specifically, “there are some reports of an increased risk of cleft lip and palate as well as heart defects associated with Zofran,” says Dr. Wu.

Indeed, one multi-study analysis noted a very small increase (less than 1%) in the risk of these conditions that could be due to Zofran in the first trimester.

Yet a study in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), didn’t find a higher risk. Trusted SourceThe Harvard GazetteStudy Sees Little Danger From Ondansetron During First Trimester of PregnancySee All Sources [1] In fact, simply having severe nausea can impact a person’s nutrition and metabolism, which may lead to these defects and malformations in a fetus.

Trusted SourceThe Harvard GazetteStudy Sees Little Danger From Ondansetron During First Trimester of PregnancySee All Sources

Whether to take Zofran is a topic that should be discussed with your doctor. A very serious case of morning sickness, which is known as hyperemesis gravidarum , can get in the way of daily life, impacting nutrition and even mood.

Suffering from continued vomiting and nausea may affect a woman’s mental health, upping her risk of anxiety and depressive symptoms, so in those situations, a practitioner may recommend Zofran because the risks of taking it may be lower than the risks associated with suffering through severe morning sickness.

What are the side effects of taking Zofran?

Nearly all drugs have a side effect or even several. The following are among those that may crop up when taking Zofran: Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline PlusOndansetronSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline PlusOndansetronSee All Sources

Constipation (this is common when taking Zofran, so your doctor may need to prescribe a stool softener)

General discomfort

Fatigue

Diarrhea

Weakness

Dizziness

Headache

Many of these are often mild or non-existent (and some happen during pregnancy anyway), but talk to your doctor if you’re on Zofran and concerned about how you’re feeling.

What dosage of Zofran is given during pregnancy?

The dosage for Zofran during pregnancy is 4 milligrams or 8 milligrams, according to Dr. Wu. As mentioned, it may be prescribed as a tablet that you swallow, a liquid, or a dissolvable pill or film.

When is Zofran typically taken during pregnancy?

Talk to your doctor about when to take Zofran to treat severe morning sickness. Nausea during pregnancy usually begins at week 6 for many women, though some notice the telltale queasiness between weeks 7 and 9. The worst nausea and vomiting tends to occur from weeks 10 to 16. Morning sickness often eases up after the first trimester.

Still, a few expectant mothers have morning sickness into the second trimester, and those carrying twins or triplets (or more!) may experience nausea the entire nine months.

What other remedies for morning sickness can you try instead of Zofran during pregnancy?

Other medications may be used to treat nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, such as Reglan; Phenergan, which is an antihistamine; and Diclegis , a combination of vitamin B6 and Unisom.

For most women, however, morning sickness symptoms are mild to moderate and can usually be treated with at-home remedies and easy lifestyle changes. Here are some to try:

Stick to simple foods. Skip heavy, fatty foods in favor of a bland diet, such as bananas, toast and applesauce. Ginger ale, ginger tea, or ginger candies may also help calm an upset stomach.

Eat frequently. A too-empty stomach can make queasiness worse, so aim to snack often on crackers (with peanut butter or cheese if you can stomach it) or another healthy option during the day and after waking up in the morning.

Skip certain smells . Can’t stand the aroma of coffee — or raw chicken? Avoid any odors that tend to bring on those waves of nausea.

Stay hydrated . Keep a water bottle nearby and drink from it regularly during the day.

Time your vitamin right . Prenatal vitamins can cause nausea because of the high iron content in many of them, and are sometimes better tolerated when taken with a snack. Speak with your doctor about other options if the one you’re on makes you queasy.

Consider alternative therapies. Your case of morning sickness may be relieved by acupressure bands on the wrist or a session with an acupuncturist . Some women have also been helped by hypnosis and aromatherapy using essential oils .

Generally speaking, lifestyle changes and natural remedies should be tried first to manage morning sickness, followed by Diclegis and then Reglan, as both of these are considered safer to take during pregnancy than Zofran.

When to call the doctor

If you experience any side effects of Zofran that go beyond the aforementioned mild varieties, get medical help right away.

Serious ones to look out for include blurred vision; a rash or hives; swelling of the face, throat, legs or hands; difficulty breathing; chest pain; an irregular heartbeat; fever; severe vomiting or nausea; and seizures.

Morning sickness can be debilitating for some women, so it’s important to talk to your doctor about all your options. If home remedies aren’t helping your case of nausea during pregnancy, Zofran might be recommended as your ticket back to feeling more like yourself again.