It’s Surprisingly Easy to Make a Diaper Cake — Here’s How

Changes to copy and sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

Diaper Cake

They may look challenging, but DIY diaper cakes aren't difficult to pull off with a little bit of patience and make a fun, practical baby shower decoration.

As any new parent knows, babies need a lot of diapers — newborns can go through eight or more diapers in a single day! Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBaby's First Days: Bowel Movements & UrinationSee All Sources [1] So, why not make this essential item the centerpiece of a baby shower or baby sprinkle?

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBaby's First Days: Bowel Movements & UrinationSee All Sources

Diaper cakes do just that. Although making a diaper cake may sound complicated, it's a lot easier to create this DIY baby shower gift you might think. Here, learn everything you need to know about creating a unique diaper cake centerpiece that any mom-to-be will love.

Key Takeaways

Diaper cakes are decorative, multi-tiered gifts made from rolled diapers and other baby items, perfect as practical baby shower centerpieces.

made from rolled diapers and other baby items, perfect as practical baby shower centerpieces.

You’ll need about 38 to 64 diapers for a diaper cake, plus supplies like cardboard, ribbon, rubber bands, and a paper towel tube to assemble it.

plus supplies like cardboard, ribbon, rubber bands, and a paper towel tube to assemble it.

To make one: roll diapers, build tiers around a center tube, secure with twine, and decorate with ribbons and themed baby shower items.

What is a diaper cake?

Unlike a real baby shower cake , a diaper cake isn't edible. It's a cake-shaped structure built out of diapers and covered in fun shower decorations like flowers or stuffed animals. It usually has two or three tiers that are wrapped in ribbon to resemble icing on a cake.

You can customize the design of a diaper cake to align with your baby shower theme . Although a straightforward cake is the most common shape, some baby shower hosts make diaper cakes that look like cars or animals. Unicorns and elephants are popular choices!

Why should you make a diaper cake?

Whether you are hosting or attending a baby shower, making a diaper cake is a thoughtful idea. Diaper cakes make for an adorable centerpiece during the event, but they're an incredibly practical gift, too.

“I got one for my baby shower last weekend,” says What to Expect Community user nutnutbuttercup. “It was so cute and the amount of diapers that came out of it, I was shocked.”

Most new parents spend around $945 to $1,500 a year on diapers for their child, according to research from the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, so sending the mom-to-be home with a diaper cake after the shower can help her save on diapering costs down the road. Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesDiaper Distribution Demonstration and Research Pilot (DDDRP) Fact SheetSee All Sources [2] Some baby shower guests might choose to incorporate additional supplies into the cake (such as baby wipes and diaper rash cream) to make the gift even more useful.

Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesDiaper Distribution Demonstration and Research Pilot (DDDRP) Fact SheetSee All Sources

“I got a diaper cake for my shower and loved it,” says What to Expect Community user Pebblesebx. “Mine had bibs and headbands and onesies and washcloths in it. All the diapers are a size 1 and since it looks like I'm having a big baby that's gonna work out for me. Depending on the size of the cake it usually takes at least a case of diapers.”

Looking for more more baby shower planning ideas? The What to Expect app is full of inspiration and tips, plus a Community of parents who have plenty of thoughts about planning baby showers too.

How many diapers do you need for a diaper cake?

This depends on the size and shape of the diaper cake you're creating, but you'll probably need anywhere from 38 to 64 diapers for a three-tier cake.

A good way to calculate the number you need: Decide how wide you want the bottom of the cake to be and estimate how many diapers it will take to build that base. From there, think about how many tiers you want.For each tier, divide the number of diapers in the tier below it by two to determine about how many diapers you will need for that layer.

For example, a three-tier cake might have a bottom layer made with 32 diapers, a middle layer made with 16 diapers and then a top layer made with eight diapers.

diaper cake

How to make a diaper cake

They may look complex, but do-it-yourself diaper cakes are surprisingly easy to make in a few simple steps (and a little bit of patience). You probably have most of the supplies you need at home, and you can customize your diaper cake with decorations of your choice.

Watch the tutorial below for a step-by-step guide:

Supplies

Cardboard

Double-sided tape

Rubber bands

Scissors

Twine

Washi tape

Paper towel tube

Scotch tape

Ribbon

Diapers

Decorations

Instructions

Tape the paper towel tube to a piece of circular cardboard.

Roll up diapers, and tie them with rubber bands.

Tie the diapers in rings around the tube.

Stack additional rings of diapers on top.

Wrap ribbon to hide the twine.

Put washi tape around the edge of the cardboard.

Stick letters onto the ribbon, or add any other decorations you'd like.

Sources

Baby's First Days: Bowel Movements & Urination

Show in the article

Diaper Distribution Demonstration and Research Pilot (DDDRP) Fact Sheet

Show in the article

How to Plan a Baby Shower

14 Ways to Save Money on Diapers

10 DIY Baby Shower Gifts Moms-to-Be Will Actually Use