Itchy but Not Risky: What to Know About Yeast Infections in Pregnancy

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting, and new medical review.

Closeup of a woman's underwear and a leaf

Yeast infections can be uncomfortable, but they’re a common part of pregnancy for many moms-to-be — and safe relief is readily available.

An itchy yeast infection probably isn't on the list of pregnancy discomforts you were expecting. But you're definitely not alone — nearly 75% of women will have at least one yeast infection in their lifetime, and thanks to soaring estrogen levels, pregnancy makes them even more likely.

The good news: While uncomfortable, yeast infections won't affect your pregnancy or your growing baby, and safe treatment options can make you feel better fast.

Key Takeaways:

Yeast infections are common in pregnancy . Thanks to higher estrogen levels, you may be more likely to experience one (or a few). While uncomfortable, yeast infections are typically mild, treatable, and not harmful to you or your baby.

Treatment is safe and effective . Your provider may recommend an antifungal cream or suppository. Always check in with your doctor before treating your condition, since other infections can look and feel similar but require different treatment.

Prevention is possible . Breathable cotton underwear, avoiding excess moisture, and practicing good hygiene can help reduce your risk. Probiotics and dietary adjustments may also play a role in keeping yeast infections at bay.

What is a yeast infection?

Vaginal yeast infections are caused by an overgrowth of a fungus called Candida . Although Candida normally lives in the vagina without causing issues, sometimes it grows faster than your body can keep in check, leading to symptoms of a yeast infection.

"Yeast infections are a common occurrence in pregnancy," says Shannon Smith, M.D. , board-certified OB/GYN, partner at Brigham Faulkner Ob/Gyn Associates in Boston, Massachusetts, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "In general, they are mild, easy to treat, and should not cause alarm for mom or baby."

You're more likely to get a yeast infection when hormones fluctuate — during pregnancy, while taking oral contraceptives, or when on estrogen therapy, for example. Certain antibiotics, diabetes , or a weakened immune system can also raise your risk.

Many moms-to-be experience yeast infections more than once during pregnancy. "I'm 17 weeks, and I've had three or four since I got pregnant," reports What to Expect Community mom brittanysf. "This is soo annoying!"

What are the symptoms of a yeast infection?

It's normal to experience an increase in vaginal discharge during pregnancy. In fact, the thin, milky, mild-smelling discharge you may notice when you're pregnant is so common it has a name: leukorrhea .

But yeast infections feel a little different. Signs include:

White, lumpy, odorless discharge

Itching and burning around your vulva (the outside area of your vagina)

Redness or swelling of the vulva

Stinging or burning when you pee

Pain or discomfort during sex

Since yeast infections can mimic other vaginal conditions (like bacterial vaginosis or some sexually transmitted diseases ), it's important to check in with your provider before assuming it's yeast.

What to Expect Community mom kve09 thought she had a yeast infection during her first pregnancy. "Turns out I had BV and needed a different medication."

How to treat a yeast infection when you're pregnant

Even if you've had yeast infections before, talk to your provider before treating one while pregnant. That way, you'll know you're using the right medication.

Your doctor may recommend an over-the-counter antifungal cream or vaginal suppository, such as:

Clotrimazole (Mycelex, Lotrimin AF)

Miconazole (Monistat 7)

Terconazole

Prescription oral antifungals like fluconazole (Diflucan) are sometimes used, but many providers avoid them during pregnancy, especially in the first trimester .

"In pregnancy we recommend treatment at the source (i.e., the vagina/vulva) rather than systemically to avoid any unnecessary exposures to baby," says Dr. Smith. "My standard treatment is seven nights of the vaginal suppository, Terconazole, with topical Clotrimazole as needed for external relief."

Keep in mind: Relief may take a few days, and it's important to finish the full course of treatment (which may be a week or more) even if you start feeling better.

Can a yeast infection during pregnancy affect your baby?

No need to worry — yeast infections aren't dangerous for your pregnancy or your little one.

There is one caveat: If you have an active yeast infection during a vaginal delivery , it's possible your baby could develop thrush , (a yeast infection in the mouth).

"If your newborn develops white patches in her mouth, reach out to your pediatrician," says Dr. Smith. Thrush in babies is easily treated with a mild antifungal medication.

How to prevent yeast infections during pregnancy

While you can't control your hormones, you can make yeast infections less likely with a few lifestyle tweaks:

Wear breathable cotton underwear. Excess moisture can make your vagina a more welcome environment for fungal growth.

Try sleeping without underwear or pajama bottoms at night to allow for increased air flow.

Take showers instead of baths (especially bubble baths, since they can be irritating).

Never douche or use vaginal sprays.

Avoid sitting around in a wet bathing suit.

After showering or swimming, make sure your genital area is completely dry before putting on your underwear and clothes.

Take antibiotics only when prescribed and exactly as directed.

"Switch to 100% cotton underwear and bottoms," advises What to Expect Community member BabesinMA. "I was really sensitive to pH changes/yeast with my first, and this really helped keep them at bay."

Your provider may also recommend diet adjustments, like cutting back on foods that feed yeast, such as sugar and baked goods made with refined flour. "This is most important in gestational diabetes patients, as elevated blood glucose levels increase the risk of developing a yeast infection," says Dr. Smith.

Track your symptoms, get health info, and follow your baby's development each week in the What to Expect app .

Some moms find probiotics help keep yeast in check. There are studies suggesting that eating yogurt with "live cultures" or taking Lactobacillus acidophilus capsules daily may help prevent infection. But more research is needed, according to the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services' Office on Women's Health . Ask your provider before taking any supplements while you're pregnant.

"If you find issues with recurrent infection, it is important to talk with your provider, as a weekly prophylactic treatment [for prevention] can be beneficial for some patients," says Dr. Smith.

The bottom line: Yeast infections are common — and annoying — during pregnancy, but they're not dangerous. With your provider's guidance, safe treatments can clear things up, and a few simple habits may help prevent them from coming back.