IVF Due Date Calculator

How do you calculate your baby’s due date with an IVF pregnancy? Use our IVF Due Date Calculator to find out when your baby will arrive with either a 3-day or 5-day IVF embryo transfer date.

How to Calculate IVF Due Date

What is an IVF pregnancy due date?

What other ways can you calculate your IVF due date?

How do you calculate your due date if you get pregnant without IVF?

What is an IVF pregnancy due date?

An IVF pregnancy due date is an estimated due date for your baby’s arrival if you conceived via in vitro fertilization (IVF) . It’s based on your IVF embryo transfer date.

Most embryo transfers happen either three days or five days after egg retrieval and fertilization, using your own fresh or frozen embryos. A frozen embryo transfer is also known as an FET.

3-day embryo transfer

If you had a three-day IVF embryo transfer, count or add 263 days from the transfer date to calculate your due date. You can also take your transfer date, add 266 days (38 weeks) to it and subtract three days. Or choose the “3-day transfer” option from our dropdown menu above.

5-day embryo transfer

If you had a five-day embryo transfer, count 261 days from that date to calculate your due date. Put another way, you can add 266 days to your transfer date and then subtract five days. Or pick “5-day transfer” in the tool above.

Want to find other parents going through an IVF pregnancy with the same birth month as you? Connect with them on the What to Expect app .

What other ways can you calculate your IVF due date?

You can calculate your due date if you have an embryo transfer date of more than five days – you just subtract that number of days from 266 and add that number to the transfer date. These calculations also apply if you undergo embryo transfer following egg donation or donor embryo cycles.

If you use a donor egg, there’s also a way to calculate your due date. With either a fresh donor egg or a donor embryo, count 266 days from the date of egg retrieval to get your estimated due date.

How do you calculate your due date if you get pregnant without IVF?

If you happen to get pregnant without IVF, you can calculate your due date using your last menstrual period (LMP), your date of conception if you know it, or the date of your first ultrasound scan if you have an early one.

Use our pregnancy due date calculator to find out more about all these methods of figuring out when baby will arrive, and try each one that’s applicable to you!

How accurate are IVF due dates, according to moms?

Moms from the What to Expect Community have had a range of experiences when it comes to whether their babies were born on their IVF due dates or not.

“With my first IVF pregnancy, my water broke at 8 p.m. on my due date!” says What to Expect parent cmnoel.

“My IVF baby came 5 days early,” says another What to Expect mom Annabelle621. “I think he just wanted out!”

“Mine was born one day before due date,” says What to Expect Community member frosty2k.

“I was induced at 41 weeks. She was very cozy in there!” says mom arcwv9.

The bottom line? While your IVF baby’s conception may have been scheduled, her arrival may be a little less predictable!

Other resources

Early Pregnancy Symptoms

Your Pregnancy, Week-by-Week

In Vitro Fertilization

Artificial Insemination

Baby Names

Chinese Gender Predictor

Baby Registry Builder

Infertility Basics

Fertility Basics

Donor Eggs

Top Fertility Treatments

Frequently Asked Questions

What week does an IVF transfer happen?

IVF transfers typically happen during the second week of pregnancy . You can add two weeks to the date of your transfer to find out how many weeks pregnant you are.

How many weeks pregnant are you after a five-day embryo transfer?

If your embryo transfer is a success, you would be 2 weeks and 5 days pregnant on the day of your transfer.

Is your due date different with IVF?

Your IVF pregnancy is still the same length as a natural pregnancy, but you can calculate your due date based on your transfer date, rather than on the first day of your last period or on your conception date.

How accurate is your due date with IVF?

An IVF due date is as accurate as any other estimated due date, but keep in mind that only 4 percent of babies are born on their actual due dates.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Methods for Estimating the Due Date , 2022. Stanford Children's Health, Calculating a Due Date , 2023. What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. What to Expect Before You're Expecting , 2nd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Pregnancy Due Date Calculator , February 2023. WhatToExpect.com , Pregnancy Week-by-Week , 2023. WhatToExpect.com , Why Your Doctor May Change Your Due Date , January 2023. WhatToExpect.com , How Many Weeks, Months and Trimesters in a Pregnancy? , May 2022. WhatToExpect.com , In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) , March 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Using a Donor Egg to Get Pregnant , December 2022. WhatToExpect.com , Birth Symbols by Month: Zodiac, Birthstone, Flower and Tree , September 2018. WhatToExpect.com , Your Guide to Prenatal Appointments , August 2022. WhatToExpect.com, The Top Fertility Treatments for Couples Who Need Help Conceiving , December 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How the Artificial Insemination Process Works , March 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, ART Success Rates , June 2022. Mayo Clinic, Prenatal Care: First Trimester Visits , August 2022.

Trending On What to Expect

Signs of Labor

Pregnancy Calculator

⚠️ You can't see this cool content because you have ad block enabled. Please whitelist our site to get all the best deals and offers from our partners.

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S.

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S.

Braxton Hicks Contractions and False Labor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window