Your child's birth flowers predict that your winter baby is sure to be resilient, oh so loving, and a tad bit rebellious.

January marks the start of a new year and if you're expecting a baby in this month, it's an exciting time to welcome a new bundle of joy. It's a fresh start, yes, but according to your baby's birth flowers , this month is sure to bring you a strong, caring and sometimes stubborn (aren't we all?) child.

What are the January birth flowers?

If you have a January baby, his birth flowers are the hardy carnation and the delicate snowdrop. These flowers may seem like polar opposites, but when it comes to predicting (or celebrating) your young one's personality, they offer a beautiful vision: a loving, loyal child who is able to see the bright side of any difficult situation.

Carnations: A slightly fiery symbol of warmth and love during the winter months

Carnations are not in season in January (in the USA), — but even so, you will always find this travel-hardy cut flower behind your florist's counter. Carnations' warm hues (often pinks and reds) and enchanting scent create the perfect burst of warmth to counter those long winter months. The carnation first arrived in the U.S. in the mid-1800's from France Trusted SourceHorticulture Document Library NCSUThe Carnation in Legend and FableSee All Sources [1]though they have been cultivated around the world for thousands of years and are a familiar theme among mediterranean art. Trusted SourceMetropolitan Museum of ArtOttoman ArtSee All Sources [2] Carnations' ability to last for long periods of time (nearly a few weeks in some cases) likely led to the flower's association with everlasting love and devotion.

Trusted SourceHorticulture Document Library NCSUThe Carnation in Legend and FableSee All Sources

Trusted SourceMetropolitan Museum of ArtOttoman ArtSee All Sources

You can expect your January baby to be as warm and loyal as the carnation's everlasting blooms. Trusted SourceB. B. Mussey and CompanyFlora's Interpreter and Fortuna FloraSee All Sources [3] But watch out: that sugar comes with spice! In some cultures, carnations are associated with rebelliousness — your young one may be up to shenanigans that you can hopefully enjoy together (or at least laugh about later).

Trusted SourceB. B. Mussey and CompanyFlora's Interpreter and Fortuna FloraSee All Sources

Snowdrops: A symbol of hope and resilience through it all

Snowdrops are best known as the first sign of spring — a quick burst of hope in comparison to the carnation's eternal blooms. They are one of the few flowers that bloom in winter (even in January in some regions). While delicate in appearance, snowdrops are able to withstand multiple snowfalls and semi-frozen soil.

Snowdrop children aren't fazed by a little icy weather: they are able to meet anything that life throws their way with resilience and grace. And as he continues to grow into his sunny disposition, you won't be surprised when your little one teaches you how to find hope in every situation.

Incorporating the carnation and snowdrop into your family's life

Including your child's birth flowers around the house can be a special way to honor their birth, their personality, and their spirit. If you're looking for inspiration, here are some ideas:

Grow them around the house or in your yard. Border carnations, which are smaller and easier to care for than the cut flower varieties, and snowdrops, are easy to grow in pots or in your yard. Both snowdrops and border carnations are perennials, too — which means that your child will be able to enjoy these plants for years to come.

Add fresh flowers around your home (or give them as gifts). Carnations' cheerful blooms are easily available year round and make beautiful bouquets. Some tips: carnation bouquets are all about volume. Make individual blooms as poofy as possible by stripping away the green casing where the blossom meets the stem. Create a super full pom-pom arrangement by cutting some carnations short enough to lean their blossoms on the rim of the vase, and layering them into a frilly hill from there.

Press 'Em. Carnations make great pressed flowers. For some one-of-kind nursery decor , arrange dried blooms in a clear floating frame. You can even make a few framed arrangements to create a gallery wall.

Create precious handprints. While snowdrops have six delicate petals, at 5 fingers, baby handprints come pretty close. Trace your child's hand on a piece of white paper, cut out green construction paper leaves and stems, and glue together to make this cute flower memento .

Try adding a rug. You may not have noticed before your January baby arrived that carnations are everywhere — especially in Turkish-inspired pottery and textiles (as a symbol of love, of course!). Nothing cozies up a nursery floor or makes tummy time more fun than a boho floral rug — many online shops have a wide selection with this pattern.

Get creative with a science experiment. If you're heading into the preschool years or beyond, spend a lovely morning with your child experimenting with capillary action (the process in which liquid moves up something solid, like a carnation stem!). All you need are some white carnations, food dye, and water.

When all else fails, try Etsy. From snowdrop embroidered pillows and wall hangings to floral signs customized with your child's name, there's endless snowdrop decor just a scroll away. Type in "snowdrop decor" and prepared to be overwhelmed (in a good way).