Jennifer Lano

Jennifer Lano, M.S., CCC-SLP

About Jennifer Lano, M.S., CCC-SLP

Jen Lano is a certified speech-language pathologist and co-owner of Speakology LLC, a practice located in the Farmington Valley region of Connecticut. She also has extensive training with feeding and swallowing disorders, tethered oral tissues (TOTs) and apraxia of speech. Lano has more than 15 years of experience working in both private and public schools, homes and clinical settings throughout the state of Connecticut.

Lano received her Bachelor of Arts in Developmental Psychology from Castleton State College in Castleton, Vermont, and her Masters of Science in Communication Disorders from Southern Connecticut State University in New Haven, Connecticut.

Board certifications

Lano is a member of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) and maintains her Certificate of Clinical Competence (CCC). She holds her Department of Public Health license from the state of Connecticut and her professional educator certificate from the Connecticut State Department of Education.

Other relevant positions

Lano is a Level 2 PROMPT trained speech-language pathologist, with additional trainings in the Kaufman Speech to Language Protocol, Dynamic Temporal and Tactile Cueing (DTTC), Beckman Oral Motor Protocol, Oral Placement Therapy, the Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS), It Takes Two to Talk (Hanen Trainings), SOS Approach to Feeding, LSVT Loud, LAMP and Social Thinking (Michelle Garcia Winner). She is also trained in the Lindamood Bell Talkies® Program for Oral Language Comprehension & Expression.

Awards

Lano has received multiple American Speech-Language-Hearing Association Awards for Continuing Education.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window