Jesil Pazhayampallil

Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

About Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Dr. Jesil Pazhayampallil, aka "Dr. Paz," is a board-certified pediatrician based in Long Island, New York. At Good Samaritan Hospital, Dr. Paz is a pediatric hospitalist and primarily works with newborns. Dr. Paz also practices pediatric urgent care medicine at PM Pediatrics, where she diagnoses and treats a wide range of illnesses and conditions, including injuries, infections, rashes and respiratory diseases.

After graduating with a degree in biochemistry from Stony Brook University, Dr. Paz studied medicine at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, New York.

She stayed in the Bronx to complete her pediatric residency at the Children’s Hospital at Montefiore.

Board certifications

Dr. Pazhayampallil is board-certified by the American Board of Pediatrics and is a Fellow of the American Academy of Pediatrics.

Other relevant positions

In addition to being a Fellow of the American Academy of Pediatrics, Dr. Paz is a past member of Doctors for Global Health.

She has done global health fellowships during medical school and residency, where she had the privilege of traveling to rural Uganda to care for patients at Kisoro District Hospital, a partner of Montefiore Medical Center and Doctors for Global Health.

Dr. Paz trained Village Health Workers (VHWs), and conducted observational research specific to local health concerns. As a resident, she was a junior attending physician on the pediatric ward and supervised medical students.

Dr. Paz is also the mother of a precocious toddler.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window