This month, your little one is destined to be loyal and ever so joyous.

June marks the start of summer, so you've got lots of warm, sunny days ahead! And the summer season isn't the only thing that will have you smiling this month: Your baby's birth flowers predict that you'll have a sweet-as-a-rose, loyal child, who brings the sunshine all year round.

What are the June birth flowers?

If you have a June baby, his birth flowers are the exquisite rose and diaphanous honeysuckle. These attractive flowers are perhaps the quintessential scents and sights of summer, and when they come to predicting (or celebrating) your little one's personality , they offer a lovely vision: an open-hearted and kind, natural-born leader who will stick by your side through thick and thin. A true delight.

Rose: A symbol of all that is love, sweetness, and beauty

While roses can bloom from late May through early fall, June is their best month by far. Trusted SourceBritannica RoseSee All Sources [1] These bright, lush blooms will fill the air with that special musky, raspberries 'n cream scent. Trusted SourcePerfume Society Rose See All Sources [2] Roses' silken petals of almost every color have long been admired for their elegance and beauty. Greeks considered roses "the queen of flowers," as they were prized by Chinese emperors (who kept the first cultivated roses in their gardens) and Elizabeth I (Shakespeare's queen) used them as her emblem. Every poet worth their snuff has immortalized their blooms in verse at least once. It's no wonder that these fragrant, romantic flowers have become well-known symbols of love, beauty and sweetness. Trusted SourceIowa State University A Brief History of the RoseSee All Sources [3]

Rose

Trusted SourcePerfume Society Rose See All Sources

Trusted SourceIowa State University A Brief History of the RoseSee All Sources

You can expect your June baby to be as sweet and loving as the rose's enchanting blooms. He'll be your favorite snuggle bug who's attentive and considerate of others' needs, and generous with his bright, joyous spirit. There's nobody better to be around than a June baby. And in addition to your little one's innate talents, he will inspire greatness in others — he's a natural-born leader.

Honeysuckle: A symbol of constancy and second chances

Like roses, honeysuckle are also best known for their delicious, nectarous smell that fills the summer dusk with waves of jasmine and vanilla. Honeysuckles have come to symbolize constancy with their trailing vine of dainty flowers and a strong grip (for any trellis, column, or unassuming vertical climb) that comes back year after year. Trusted SourceFlora's Interpreter and Fortuna FloraHoneysuckleSee All Sources [4] You can be sure that honeysuckles will be there, bright, fragrant and a foot or two taller every year.

Trusted SourceFlora's Interpreter and Fortuna FloraHoneysuckleSee All Sources

Honeysuckle children are always there for the ones they love, it's just as simple as that. Your child will develop and foster meaningful relationships with ease that will bring him joy and companionship his whole life. You won't be surprised when your little one teaches you a thing or two about forgiveness: open-hearted honeysuckles will always (judiciously) come back for a second chance.

Incorporating the rose and honeysuckle into your family's life

The ever-so beautiful blooms and yummy scent of both roses and honeysuckle make it easy to want to liven up your space with these two flowers. Here are some ways to do just that:

Spice up your yard. Roses and honeysuckle are widely available at local nurseries and home improvement stores. While horticulturalists try their hand at the more complicated rose varieties, those of us with less of a green thumb (or who might be putting their attention more towards child-rearing than roses), can head straight for the knock-out roses for low maintenance beauty. With honeysuckles, make sure to get a native variety and avoid the invasive ones .

Press em'. Roses in all their hues make great pressed flowers. Get a second life out of your flowers with this easy but impressive rose arrangement or follow this guide to pressing flowers . Display pressed flowers in clear acrylic floating frames that will look great on your child's nursery walls. The modest honeysuckle doesn't quite hold up on its own as pressed flower art, but will add some extra texture to a pressed rose arrangement.

Don't be afraid to DIY. Gigantic Etsy-found or DIY crepe roses make beautiful wall art that is inexpensive, long-lasting, and intriguing for your little one. As your child reaches the preschool years , this kid-friendly version made with crepe paper makes for a great rainy-day art project.

Snap some photos. Pictures of roses make great nursery art, but you know what's even cuter? A rose-themed newborn photo shoot !

Chalk it up. Looking for another DIY project? Tea rose chalk paint can bring new life and a little vintage glamor to dressers, nightstands or any other nursery furniture you might choose. No time for DIY? A quick Google search will reveal an abundance of light pink nursery furniture ready to ship to you! Check out this dusty-rose, vintage-themed nursery for design ideas.

Looking for more fun insights about your baby? Discover the astrological traits of your baby with our free Birth Chart Calculator .

Sources

Rose

Show in the article

Rose

Show in the article

Brief History of the Rose

Show in the article

Honeysuckle

Show in the article