Kameelah Phillips

Kameelah Phillips, M.D.

About Kameelah Phillips, M.D.

Dr. Kameelah Phillips is a board-certified OB/GYN and women’s health advocate in New York City.

Dr. Phillips is the founder of Calla Women’s Health, a boutique private practice on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, where she helps educate women and girls about their bodies. Her areas of specialty include health care disparities, lactation, and sexual and menopause medicine.

Since high school, she has been involved in local, national and international organizations aimed at advancing women’s health care issues through advocacy and direct patient care. Dr. Phillips graduated from Stanford University with a degree in human biology and an emphasis on women’s health and human sexuality.

After graduation, she worked as a research assistant for HIV vaccine studies in the AIDS office in San Francisco. Dr. Phillips relocated to Los Angeles and received her medical degree from the University of Southern California's Keck School of Medicine. She did her obstetrics and gynecology residency at the New York University School of Medicine.

During her residency, Dr. Phillips served on an emergency medical mission in Port-au-Prince, Haiti, to provide women’s health care during the 2010 earthquake there. She also traveled to Ghana, Cuba and Tanzania on health missions.

Board certifications

Dr. Phillips is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Phillips is affiliated with Lenox Hill Hospital in New York, New York.

Other relevant positions

For more than 10 years, Dr. Phillips has been a clinical assistant professor at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. She's a member of the International Board of Lactation Consultants.

Dr. Phillips is a frequent contributor to panels, magazines and podcasts. She's also a wife and the mother of three children.

Awards

Dr. Phillips is the recipient of several community service awards for her medical mission work overseas.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window