Katie Propst

Katie Propst, M.D.

About Katie Propst, M.D.

Dr. Katie Propst is a urogynecologist at the University of South Florida in Tampa, Florida. She is board-certified in obstetrics and gynecology and in female pelvic medicine and reconstructive surgery.

Dr. Propst serves as the division chief of female pelvic medicine and reconstructive surgery and the director of the female pelvic medicine and reconstructive surgery fellowship at the University of South Florida.

Board certification

Dr. Propst is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Propst is affiliated with Tampa General Hospital.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Propst is an assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine.

She is the founder and chair of the Childbirth and Pelvic Floor Disorders Special Interest Group of the American Urogynecologic Society, where she works collaboratively with other experts from across the United States. She also serves as the chair of the Advanced Practice Provider Education Committee for the American Urogynecologic Society.

Dr. Propst is actively involved in the education of medical students, residents and fellows.

Publications and research

Dr. Propst has published more than 30 peer-reviewed articles and regularly presents at scientific conferences.

Awards

Dr. Propst has received multiple awards throughout her career. She was awarded research grant funding from the American Association of Gynecologic Laparoscopists (AAGL) and the Cleveland Clinic Center for Populations Health Research. Dr. Propst has numerous teaching awards, including from the Council on Resident Education in Obstetrics and Gynecology.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window