Kecia Gaither

Kecia Gaither, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

About Kecia Gaither, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Dr. Gaither is a double-board-certified physician specializing in obstetrics/gynecology and maternal fetal medicine. She serves as the director of perinatal services and maternal fetal medicine at NYC Health+ Hospitals/Lincoln in the Bronx, New York.

Dr. Gaither received her B.A. in biology from Barnard College, and her M.D. from SUNY Health Science Center in Syracuse, New York. She did her OB/GYN residency at Riverside Regional Medical Center, a subsidiary of The Medical College of Virginia, and completed her maternal fetal medicine fellowship at The University of Medicine and Dentistry-Rutgers in Newark, New Jersey.

Dr. Gaither earned her MPH in health policy and management from Columbia University. She also has a dual MS/MBA degree in health care policy and research/health care leadership from Cornell SC Johnson School of Business.

A perinatal consultant and womens’ health expert, Dr. Gaither’s expertise is grounded in both research and in her professional experience caring for women with multiple medical or fetal conditions in pregnancy.

Board certifications

Dr. Gaither is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology in both maternal fetal medicine and obstetrics and gynecology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Gaither is affiliated with NYC Health+ Hospitals/Lincoln in the Bronx.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Gaither is an associate professor of clinical obstetrics and gynecology at Cornell Weill Medicine. She has been named a Fellow for the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM).

Awards

Dr. Gaither is on the medical advisory board of NATERA, PWN Health, Organic and Natural Association, GoodRx, and SAMSUNG. She has been appointed to the Board of Directors for the United Nations Association (Southern NY State Division).

Dr. Gaither additionally serves as a liaison to The Association of Black Cardiologists, addressing cardiac disease in pregnancy. She has been recently re-appointed by New York state Rep. George Latimer to the African American Advisory Board for Westchester County.

Dr. Gaither has been named by Castle Connolly as a Top Doctor in 2023, 2024, and 2025. She holds key committee positions in the Society of Maternal Fetal Medicine (SMFM), the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ABOG), and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) related to education for both patients and physicians.

Dr. Gaither was recently appointed by New York Gov. Kathy Holchul to the New York State Maternal Health Task Force.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window