Keeping Your Pregnancy Secret During the Holidays? Try This Decoy Drink Strategy

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

woman hiding behind disco ball

Keep your early pregnancy under wraps this holiday season with simple strategies for managing symptoms, skipping the drinks, and dodging questions — all while enjoying the festivities.

'Tis the season for holiday parties and, for whatever reason, you're not quite ready to share your pregnancy news. Don't stress. If you're too nauseated or exhausted to enjoy yourself, it's fine to skip. But if you'd like to attend, there are simple ways to handle not drinking alcohol (starting with mocktails) and avoiding certain foods.

Fortunately, it is possible to keep up with the parties on your calendar, keep your pregnancy under wraps, and feel your best. Here's how to make it from Thanksgiving through New Year's without anyone suspecting your secret.

"The holidays would be so fun to announce to family, but it just feels too early for us," says What to Expect Community member ftm13139696. "I just don't know how I'm going to keep this a secret without being suspicious!"

Key Takeaways

Skip an event if that's best for you . You don't have to push through first trimester symptoms during holiday events — it's okay to skip gatherings or leave early to prioritize your health and energy.

Take care of yourself . If you do attend, simple strategies like staying hydrated, eating bland foods, and managing stress can help ease nausea and fatigue.

Plan your strategy . Keeping your pregnancy under wraps is doable with a few low-key tactics, like carrying a mocktail, offering simple explanations for not drinking or eating certain foods, or hosting so you can control the setting.

How can I cope with first trimester symptoms during the holidays?

If you're dealing with first trimester symptoms and have a holiday event coming up, you have two options: give yourself permission to bow out, or, if you're feeling up to it, take steps to minimize your symptoms so you can attend and enjoy yourself.

Feeling nauseated and exhausted is one thing. Feeling that way and having a packed social calendar you feel obligated to keep is another. Your health comes first, even if that means skipping a party or two.

"It's definitely been hard for me to muster the energy to hang out with anyone right now," says Community mom R-and-Baby.

If you decide to sit one out, treat it as you would any other time you're under the weather. Make a simple excuse and stay home — no one needs to know the real reason is early pregnancy nausea or fatigue.

"So far my only symptom is exhaustion, but I've been working nonstop, so I'm just going to blame that — along with a teething 10-month-old," says Community mom lexNOTlexi.

Think you can make it? Stick with bland, easy-to-digest foods like crackers, stay hydrated, and consider vitamin B6 (which may help ease nausea). Rest up beforehand and try to keep stress in check (hello, meditation). These small steps can go a long way toward helping you feel better — while hiding your pregnancy. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicVitamin B-6See All Sources [1]

Vitamin B-6

Keep track of your pregnancy journey, get more expert advice, and connect with other moms who have similar concerns in the free What to Expect app .

How can I hide my pregnancy at an event with lots of drinking?

It's a common concern: How will I conceal the fact that I'm not drinking ? If you're with family and friends who will notice that you're not drinking (especially if you normally would), here are some mom-tested tactics for enjoying the party while avoiding suspicion:

Lean into a trend. Tell acquaintances you're doing a "Dry November" this year (not technically a lie!).

Carry a decoy drink. A glass of seltzer water with lime keeps you hydrated and helps avoid questions. At a bar, order a Moscow Mule without vodka — it'll look the same and the ginger may soothe your stomach. You can also pour ginger ale in a champagne flute to draw less attention during a toast. "I bought sparkling grape juice for my mimosa," says Community member ftm2023.

Take off early. Make an early appearance and leave before a party becomes more boisterous, if you like. A simple "long day" or "not feeling great" should do the trick.

Clue in a conspirator. If you can, quietly tell a bartender or server ahead of time so they serve you only non-alcoholic drinks throughout the evening. "At my husband's Christmas party, I told the server and she served me mocktails all night and just gave me a wink," says Community member CassandraFinch.

And remember, you don't owe anyone an explanation. Plenty of people skip alcohol for all sorts of reasons, from medications to wellness goals. Trusted SourceDiane GottsmanAuthor of Modern Etiquette for a Better Life and Founder of The Protocol School of Texas, San Antonio, TXSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceDiane GottsmanAuthor of Modern Etiquette for a Better Life and Founder of The Protocol School of Texas, San Antonio, TXSee All Sources

If someone presses you, keep it simple. Respond politely and assertively — you're taking a break this season or just not in the mood tonight. A lot of the time, people are pretty focused on their own enjoyment of the party (and drinks) and care less about your explanation than you might realize, so no need to overthink it.

How can I hide my pregnancy at a big group meal?

Don't worry if off-limit food (such as certain types of seafood or unpasteurized cheese) is being served at a big meal. Eat beforehand, because a full stomach can both help prevent nausea and keep you from feeling deprived. If someone asks, simply say that you're not in the mood for seafood or that you're cutting back on dairy. Then order something that works for you.

Even easier? Offer to host. When you're in charge, it's much simpler to keep everything pregnancy friendly without drawing attention. You can whip up your own drinks, choose your menu, and super easily fly under the radar.