Best Kegel Exercise Apps to Strengthen Your Pelvic Floor

Kegel exercise apps

Kegel exercises can help strengthen your pelvic floor during pregnancy and postpartum — and these free apps make it easy.

Pregnant women and new moms are no strangers to advice — but one suggestion that's given time and time again is this: do Kegels.

After all, whether you’re pregnant (and putting excess weight on the pelvic floor muscles that hold your uterus, bladder and rectum in place) or postpartum (and just pushed a baby through your pelvis — hi, stretched-out muscles!), your pelvic floor could likely use a little TLC.

When your pelvic floor muscles are strong and coordinated, this helps to prevent and treat urinary and even fecal incontinence . And experts often say that Kegel exercises — isolated exercises that contract then relax the pelvic floor — are one of the best ways to strengthen this group of muscles during pregnancy and postpartum.

What's more, some research has suggested that moms-to-be who do pelvic floor exercises might have a slightly shorter active phase of labor than those who don't. Resuming strength work postpartum also helps promote perineal healing, and helps you regain or maintain balder control.

Better yet, Kegels are free and don’t take much time. To do Kegel exercises, contract and then relax your pelvic floor muscles for short periods of time (you might start out by tightening the muscles for three to five seconds, then relaxing them for three to five seconds). You can aim for several short sets a few times a day, then work up to 10 or 15 repetitions daily.

The challenge? Since Kegels don’t always require you to sit down and dedicate serious time and attention to them, they can also be all-too-easy to skip. Enter: Kegel exercise apps.

What are Kegel exercise apps?

Kegel exercise apps are downloadable (often free!) programs that will walk you through different Kegel exercises and help you set goals, teach you proper form and track your progress. Some experts say that these types of apps can help you stay on track with the number of Kegel exercises you are doing.

Just remember: If you're experiencing pelvic pain, urgency of urination or fecal incontinence, speak with your OB/GYN or a pelvic floor physical therapist .

The best Kegel exercise apps

If you’re pregnant, recently gave birth or simply looking for ways to stay accountable while firming up your pelvic floor, a Kegel exercise app could help.

After giving birth to my daughter, I had to work on getting my pelvic floor strength back to where it once was. I tested three popular Kegel exercise apps to help meet my goals: Kegel Trainer PFM Exercises, Squeeze Time and Easy Kegel. Here, my thoughts on each of the apps.

Kegel Trainer PFM Exercises

Free; Apple Store , Google Play

PFEI — as it discreetly shows up on your phone’s home screen — is incredibly easy to use. It's so easy, in fact, that upon first downloading the app I wondered if it could actually be so simple. (Note: With mom brain and sleep deprivation at play, simple is much appreciated.)

When you open the app, all you really have to do is hit "start" and a countdown prompting you to squeeze then rest begins. While you work, a timer shows you how long you have left in your session (each one usually lasts about a minute). A reminder to rest and relax your pelvic floor muscles is also included.

This app is all about simple Kegel exercises, so if you’re looking for other ways to strengthen or want to change your tempo up, it might not be quite right for you.

The free version of the app helps you focus on the two different parts of your Kegels — squeeze and rest — and serves as a timer (which, on busy days, is useful). Only the first two “levels” of the app are free, but there is also a “pro” version with 750 different sessions for $9.99.

The paid version of the app also allows you to see reports on your time spent exercising and sends you notification texts for reminders to Kegel (again, this could be helpful for busy days). Ultimately, though, I think the free version is all you’d need unless you really want to track your progress or are super forgetful and could benefit from a nudge here and there.

In the end, I really appreciated the simplicity of this app and its take-the-effort-away ease (because, let’s be honest, sometimes even timing Kegels can seem like too much work).

Squeeze Time

Free; Apple Store

Squeeze Time is perfect for women who want some variety in their routine. Open the app and you’re instantly greeted with “workouts” to choose from — strength, endurance, speed or mountain climber (yep, Kegel mountain climbers are a thing).

Each workout contains a description telling you exactly what to expect. For example, with the speed workout, you’d squeeze with your max strength for three seconds and repeat as many times as you can. Each workout also tells you what it might help with, which I liked. For example, speed claims to help you hold tightly during sudden movements such as a cough or sneeze.

Once you start a workout, you’re prompted with directions, a countdown and instructions on when to squeeze and when to rest (slight vibrations help you know when to switch, too, though you can also turn the vibration feature off).

At the end of a session, you can leave notes about your workout (such as, "Got a bit distracted" or "Had a hard time holding at only half my strength"). The home screen of the app also tells you how many workouts you’ve done for the day and how many you’re aiming for (1/3, for example). Ultimately, I loved the option to choose the type of Kegel workout I wanted to do.

As with PFEI, Squeeze Time offers a premium version for $3.99 that sends notifications to remind you to Kegel, provides you with statistics, allows you to create your own workouts and drops the ads on the app.

Easy Kegel

Free; App Store , Google Play

The first thing you’ll notice about Easy Kegel (which shows up as KPFE on your home screen in case you don’t want the app to scream Kegels!) is your daily target, which is nice to always have on display.

Like PFEI, Easy Kegel is pretty self-explanatory: open the app and hit "start." However, I liked that after you begin a session, the timer doesn’t kick in right away; instead, you’re greeted with a message that reminds you how to do a Kegel (very important). After that, a timer fills the screen with pink while you’re working and white while you rest. You can easily turn vibration or sound notifications on and off.

The app runs you through a quick series of Kegel exercises. When you're done, you can rate your session as too easy, just right or a little tough. The app also provides you with an option to change the workout for the next time you use it. At first, I wasn’t 100 percent sure exactly what to change to make my sessions easier or harder, but after a few uses, changing the workouts became a little easier and it was nice to have the flexibility to do so. I also enjoyed being able to see my progress on the app’s main screen, as well as how much time I had left toward my daily goal.

Easy Kegel also lets you change your daily goals, create reminders (a feature you sometimes have to pay for with other apps) and customize your exercises (for example, “quick” might be five reps of a one-second squeeze and a one-second rest, or six reps with a two-second squeeze and a two-second rest). The flexibility makes this app a good pick for someone who wants more control over their workouts.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com. Kegel Exercises: How, When and Why to Do Your Kegels During and After Pregnancy , November 2019. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Kegel Exercises - Self Care , January 2019. Mayo Clinic, Kegel Exercises: A How-To Guide for Women , September 2020. Tanaka Dune, M.D., a urogynecologist at Weill Cornell Medicine and New York-Presbyterian. Anna Ribaudo, P.T., D.P.T., the clinical supervisor at the Integrative Care Center at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Pelvic Floor Muscle Training Versus No Treatment, or Inactive Control Treatments, for Urinary Incontinence in Women , May 2014.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Postpartum Pelvic Floor Exercises Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Kegel Exercises: Worth Adding to Your Pregnancy and Postpartum Routine Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Working With a Pelvic Floor Physical Therapist Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

The Blueberry Trick: Simple Exercises to Prep Your Pelvic Floor for Birth Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

How Pelvic Floor Therapy Saved My Sex Life By Lauren Levinson

What I Wish Someone Told Me About Pelvic Floor Recovery Before I Gave Birth Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Pelvic Floor Dysfunction (PFD) Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Postpartum Pelvic Pain Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

What Is a Pelvic Wand? Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

7 Pregnancy Arm Exercises That Will Have You Feeling Super Strong Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Controlling Your Bladder During Pregnancy (Urinary Incontinence) Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

How to Do Pelvic Tilt Exercises When You're Pregnant and How They Can Help Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises That Keep You (and Baby!) Feeling Great Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Perineal Massage Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

These Pregnancy-Safe Leg and Booty Moves Boost Stability And Ease Aches Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window