Labor Shakes, Explained

shakes during labor

Uncontrollably shaking during labor can be uncomfortable. Here's what OB/GYNS say about it.

I knew labor would be uncomfortable. What I wasn't expecting? To literally shake for more than an hour during the birth of my first son.

My shaking began with my teeth chattering, similar to what I experience when I hop out of a heated pool. Within minutes, it progressed to full-body convulsions.

It turns out that many moms shake before, during, and after labor, including those in the What to Expect Community and on TikTok .

"With both my labors, I shook badly," says What to Expect mom msantt . "I just gave birth on Wednesday, and I shook for hours! It started before I pushed and lasted a while after.”

And another, aychillcov , was surprised to start shaking with her third baby right before she headed to the hospital as contractions were starting, explaining, "I'm 38 +3 days and last week, baby’s head was engaged and I was 50% effaced [at my last appointment]. Tonight, I have the shakes/jitters really bad."

When I asked my care team about it, they told me it’s normal. So why don't we hear about it more? I spoke with two OB/GYNs and, it turns out, there’s a logical answer.

“While the topic of shakes in labor and postpartum is all over the internet, there is very little in OB/GYN medical literature about it,” explains Steven Goldberg , M.D., the chairman of the Old Bridge Medical Center/Raritan Bay Medical Center’s Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology in New Jersey.

Still, Dr. Goldberg describes labor (and even postpartum) shakes as “very normal” — here’s what to know about them.

Key Takeaways

Shaking before, during, and after labor happens to a lot of women, and the good news is that it's typically normal.

There's not a whole lot you can do to predict whether it's going to happen to you, but stress, hormones, and getting an epidural may increase the chances.

The shaking usually stops within one or two hours after delivery, but always talk with your provider if you have a fever too, or the shaking doesn't subside.

Why you might shake during labor

Labor shakes are involuntary and uncontrollable shakes, chills, shivering, and teeth chattering that some women experience before, during, or after active labor. In fact, some reports suggest that almost half of women shake during labor, and while there’s no definitive cause, experts do have some theories:

You’re experiencing a shift in hormones

During labor, oxytocin causes contractions (either naturally from a mom’s body or taken via Pitocin when you're induced). These fluctuations might trigger shaking, and it most commonly happens as the body shifts into active labor and immediately after delivery, explains Sherry Ross, M.D ., a California-based OB/GYN at Providence Saint John’s Health Center. Stress hormones, such as adrenaline and cortisol, also surge during labor and immediately after delivery — and cause the body to shake as well, she adds.

You got an epidural

The anesthesia from an epidural — regardless of whether you have a C-section or vaginal delivery — can also cause some shaking, says Dr. Goldberg.

“The anesthetic blocks nerve signals from the waist down,” he says. “This causes the blood vessels in the lower half of your body to relax and widen — a process called vasodilation.” Warm blood will rush from the core to your legs and pool there, away from other vital organs, causing your temperature to drop (even if your legs feel warm to you), he explains.

“Once your brain… registers the drop in core temperature, it triggers a powerful, involuntary shivering response to generate heat and warm you up quickly,” Dr. Goldberg says. “This is why the shaking can be so intense and uncontrollable.” Ultimately, the shaking expends energy, creating warmth in your body, he adds.

You're simply cold or stressed

Dr. Goldberg also notes that labor shakes may have other causes, too, including changes in your hospital room's temperature, fluid loss from dehydration, or stress.

The truth is, though, these are just theories, and it is not known for sure if these are the reasons labor shaking happens, says Dr. Ross.

The shakes are typically temporary, but not preventable or treatable

Right now, experts don't know why some women shake and some don't. And it’s not possible to avoid this phenomenon or stop it once it starts.

“There is no medical treatment recommended, other than reassurance that it is nothing serious,” says Dr. Goldberg. “The shaking usually lasts anywhere from a few minutes to an hour and typically resolves on its own within an hour of delivery."

That said, there are times when shaking during labor might suggest something more serious, says Dr. Goldberg, and further testing or treatment might be needed. “Shaking accompanied by a fever — a temperature of 100.4°F or 38°C or higher — is a red flag, as this could be a sign of an infection.”

You should always let your nurse or doctor know if:

You have a fever

The shaking lasts for more than an hour or two after you deliver

You feel generally very unwell, not just shaky The shaking usually lasts anywhere from a few minutes to an hour and typically resolves on its own within an hour of delivery. Steven Goldberg, M.D., OB/GYN

Otherwise? The best way to treat labor shakes is to work with your care team and support person to make yourself more comfortable until they go away. Although there is nothing specific that has proven to prevent or stop them completely, these things can help:

Piling on warm blankets during labor or right after delivery.

Doing skin-to-skin with your baby as soon as you are able, since this can help regulate your body temperature (this stopped my shaking right after my second C-section).

Sipping on something warm, like tea or hot water.

Looking back, I know how overwhelming it can feel to have uncontrollable shaking during labor and after delivery. But please remember: labor shakes are very common, almost always normal, and nothing to fear. Birth brings surprises, yes — but also some of the most magical moments you’ll ever experience.

Steven Goldberg , M.D., the chairman of the Old Bridge Medical Center/Raritan Bay Medical Center’s Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology. Sherry Ross, M.D ., a California-based board-certified OB/GYN at Providence Saint John’s Health Center. National Institutes of Health, 1991, Observations on the postpartum shivering phenomenon .

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Back Labor Explained: Why It Happens — and How to Find Relief Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

15 Moms on What Labor Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Preterm Labor Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Diarrhea Before Labor (Prelabor Diarrhea) Medically Reviewed by Lisa Hickman, M.D.

The 3 Stages of Labor: What Happens and When Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

7 Exercises to 'Induce' Labor Medically Reviewed by Kristin Cohen, DNP, CNM, WHNP-BC

16 Signs of Labor — Here’s What to Expect When It’s Go-Time Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

If You Suddenly Feel Like You’re Waddling (And Constantly Peeing), Your Baby Might Have Dropped Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

From Dilation to Delivery: Your Guide to Pushing Baby Out Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

What Do Labor Contractions Feel Like? How to Tell Them Apart From Braxton Hicks Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Dealing With Childbirth Fear? Here's How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS) During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Beth McAvey, M.D.

Anxiety During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

What Are Braxton Hicks Contractions and Are They the Same as False Labor? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window