A new What to Expect survey shows that moms who face debt after giving birth owe an average of nearly $3,000.

Bringing a baby into the world is exciting, emotional, and incredibly joyous, but it’s also royally expensive — even when you’re insured. So much so that one in four moms say they have gone into debt because of labor and delivery costs, according to a recent What to Expect survey.

How much medical debt are parents staring down right after birth? Nearly $3,000 on average for those unable to pay off their bills by the initial due date, the survey reveals. Add this daunting figure to the high cost of baby gear, diapers, formula, and child care — the stress of figuring out how to pay it down can be paralyzing.

Even with insurance, birth is sending parents into debt

Nearly half of moms (48%) with self-purchased insurance plans say they’ve gone into debt because of labor and delivery costs, while 32% of moms with employer-provided plans say the same, according to What to Expect’s survey.

“When I saw that my hospital bill was over $40,000, I couldn’t even believe it, because that’s like a down payment on a house,” Genesis, a new mom who delivered her baby girl in July tells What to Expect. Genesis was fortunate to have robust employer-provided insurance coverage, but she was still left to pay almost $1,400 out of pocket. “It just seems ridiculous, because although I was medically induced, I had a relatively smooth, unmedicated, vaginal birth.”

By contrast, only 18% of moms on Medicaid say out-of-pocket expenses for their labor and delivery put them into debt. This is because Medicaid is designed for low-income individuals or families, so it’s structured in a way that avoids pushing its users into debt or further hardship, says Maria Montecillo M.P.A., the principal and managing director of MedCost Ally .

Medicaid coverage is also known to include all medically necessary services — such as hospital stays, physician visits, and prescription medication — without premiums, deductibles, or co-pays, whereas those with employer-provided or self-purchased plans are responsible for those costly charges, she explains.

Of moms who’ve gone into debt to deliver their babies, $2,813 is the average amount

Clearly, it’s no secret that giving birth is expensive, but according to our survey, 41% of women say their prenatal and labor and delivery costs were higher than they expected them to be, and nearly one in five moms say they have gone into debt by more than $5,000.

“My out-of-pocket charges for the birth of my daughter came close to $5,000 once we added up the bills for my 4-night hospital stay and medically-necessary C-section under general anesthesia,” says Melissa, 36, who delivered her baby in May 2024. “I’m still paying off parts of it with a zero-interest monthly payment plan, but I recently got a letter last week from collections because someone misfiled something on the hospital's side.”

So, on top of dealing with the stress and exhaustion of giving birth and caring for an infant, many moms are now plagued by a flurry of invoices and an overwhelming amount of debt. “At this point, I’m drowning in medical bills, and I don’t have anyone to help negotiate or give advice,” says What to Expect Community member crampuc . “We are extremely overwhelmed, and I don’t know what to do.”

Have medical debt because you had a baby? Try these tips from a patient advocate and financial advisor

Medical debt after having a baby can be overwhelming, but Montecillo and Dan Pallesen , Psy.D., a certified financial advisor and financial psychologist, say these strategies can help you keep your head above water.

Create an organization system for bills.

Medical bills tend to trickle in piecemeal: One week you’ll get a bill from anesthesiology, then three weeks later you’ll open up a different one from your OB/GYN.

The key: Stay organized. It’s easy to turn a blind eye at the stack of medical bills, but it’s crucial to know exactly what you’re dealing with, Pallesen says. If you’re unsure you have everything, you can request a meeting with the hospital's finance team to account for anything missing or outstanding, he adds.

Once you know the full amount you need to pay down, you’ll be in a better position to figure out how to manage that (more on this later!).

Keep a record of any communication with the hospital billing department — or if it comes down to it, debt collectors — even if you speak with the same person multiple times. You also want to get everything in writing, Pallesen adds. Written agreements ensure a verifiable record and prevent future misunderstandings.

Look for billing errors and, if applicable, cross-check your insurance coverage.

Once all bills, receipts, and paperwork are together, it’s time to read the details and verify the debt. Mistakes happen (think: an accidental charge for an extra night in the hospital you didn’t wind up using), so Pallesen recommends thoroughly reviewing your bills and combing through each balance to ensure you weren't overcharged, double-charged, or charged for a service you didn’t receive. If something looks off, ask the billing department for an itemized receipt. To help you recognize potential errors more easily, resources like the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) allow you to look up the definition of various medical billing codes.

If you have insurance, Pallesen also suggests calling your insurance company and speaking with an agent who can help explain what is/is not covered. (This is where having the exact billing codes for what you were charged for will definitely come in handy.) From there, the agent can help verify that you weren’t incorrectly billed for anything.

Ask if you qualify for financial assistance.

To find financial assistance for medical bills, Pallesen recommends contacting your hospital's billing department and asking about their financial assistance policy (FAP). Based on your income, insurance status, and household size, a member of the billing department can explain your options and eligibility for free or discounted medical care.

You can also try tapping the Consumer Assistance Program for your state through the CMS . Designed to offer impartial advice on your coverage (as opposed to your insurance company, which is not always impartial), representatives can help you navigate what your coverage actually entails, help settle disputes, and perhaps even point you toward a plan that may benefit you more in the future.

Consider a payment plan.

Many medical providers offer payment plans, or an agreement to pay off existing debt in installments over an extended period of time, instead of paying the full amount all at once. The monthly payments you make will depend on the bill amount and the terms you negotiate, but you generally break the bill into equal payments over multiple months (or years) until the total is covered, Pallesen says.

In some cases, there may be additional fees associated with a payment plan, so always make sure you understand and agree to the terms before enrolling. And keep in mind that if you pay any medical costs with your credit card, it converts it into consumer debt, which may have high interest charges and ultimately impact your credit score, Montecillo says. Make sure you can actually afford the payment plan you commit to.

Don’t be afraid to negotiate.

Even if your bill seems accurate, you may be able to reduce the cost by negotiating with a billing agent at the hospital, especially if you don’t have insurance, Pallesen says.

For example, if you originally signed up for a payment plan but can now pay the entirety of the bill up front, you may be able to negotiate a lump sum discount, he explains.

You can also explain your financial situation to the hospital’s billing agent and outright ask if they are willing to negotiate or “write off” the total amount owed, Montecillo says. Even if you are insured, she recommends asking a billing agent about discounts for paying the entire bill “out-of-pocket,” since there is usually a different rate they charge insurance companies compared to those who are uninsured. You don’t have to offer a specific number you can pay upfront, but it’s best to have a clear idea of what you can and cannot afford before negotiating, so you can communicate your situation clearly and concisely.

The process will likely require a lot of patience and multiple phone calls, but that’s okay (and normal) — be kind and respectful, yet firm. It never hurts to ask.

Methodology

The What to Expect 2025 Maternal Health Study was conducted between June 26 and July 10, 2025. We surveyed 3,285 women ages 18 to 49 who are trying to conceive, are expecting, or have a child ages 0 to 11 months old.

The What to Expect 2025 Maternal Health Study, 2025. Dan Pallesen, Psy.D., certified financial advisor, financial planner, and financial psychologist. Maria Montecillo, M.P.A., principal and managing director of MedCost Ally.