Lisa Greaves Taylor

Lisa Greaves Taylor

About Lisa Greaves Taylor

Lisa Greaves Taylor is the founder of Birth Matters NYC and has been working with New York City-area birthing families since 2010 as a childbirth educator and birth doula.

She is certified with Lamaze International , Childbirth Education Association of Metropolitan New York (CEA/MNY) and DONA International .

Ms. Greaves Taylor is devoted to helping equip birthing people with best current evidence, strategic and coping tools, and self-advocacy strategies toward safer, more empowering and positive journeys into parenthood.

She is particularly passionate about advocating for positive change in birthing and postpartum outcomes for Black, BIPOC, LGBTQ+, and underserved or marginalized populations.

Other relevant positions

Ms. Greaves Taylor served on CEA/MNY's board of directors for five years. She's also an Evidence Based Birth instructor and a certified lactation support counselor.

During the pandemic, she stepped into the role of owner/director of Astoria Doula Collective with the goal of providing a more comprehensive offering of support to birthing families.

In 2018, she created the Birth Matters COMPLETE COURSE (an online, self-paced childbirth class) and then in 2019, she created and launched the BIRTH MATTERS podcast, which shares mostly New York City-based birth and fertility journey stories along with childbirth education commentary.

Awards

Ms. Greaves Taylor received the Childbirth Education Association's Ellen Chuse Childbirth Educator of the Year award in 2017.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window