Lisa C Hickman

Lisa C. Hickman, M.D.

About Lisa C. Hickman, M.D.

Dr. Lisa Caronia Hickman is a urogynecologist and OB/GYN at the Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center in Columbus, Ohio. She specializes in the care of women with pelvic floor disorders, with a focus on the impact of childbirth on the pelvic floor.

After attending medical school at the Ohio State University College of Medicine, Dr. Hickman did her residency in obstetrics and gynecology at the Cleveland Clinic, where she served as chief resident. She then completed a fellowship at the Cleveland Clinic in female pelvic medicine and reconstructive surgery.

During her fellowship at the Cleveland Clinic, Dr. Hickman and her mentor Dr. Katie Propst started a multidisciplinary sub-specialty clinic for women with advanced tears during childbirth and pelvic floor disorders in pregnancy and the postpartum period. Dr. Hickman is continuing her work with women suffering from pelvic floor disorders at the Ohio State University.

Board certification

Dr. Hickman is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology, and is a Fellow of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Hickman is affiliated with Wexner Medical Center in Columbus.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Hickman is an assistant professor in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at the Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center.

She and Dr. Propst oversee a special interest group of thought leaders in the field of pelvic floor disorders for the American Urogynecologic Society.

Dr. Hickman is also the mother of two boys.

Publications and research

Dr. Hickman has authored numerous journal articles and book chapters in the field of urogynecology, and is a peer reviewer for prominent journals in obstetrics and gynecology.

Awards

Dr. Hickman is a member of the Alpha Omega Alpha Honor Society and the Gold Humanism Honor Society. She has been awarded grant funding for her research and received multiple accolades for her work with trainees.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window