Lorene Temming

Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

About Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Dr. Lorene Temming is a board-certified OB/GYN and maternal fetal medicine specialist working at Atrium Health Carolinas Medical Center Women's Institute in Charlotte, North Carolina.

Dr. Temming received her medical degree from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and completed a residency at Atrium Health Carolinas Medical Center. She completed her maternal fetal medicine fellowship at Washington University in St. Louis, where she also earned a Master of Science in Clinical Investigation.

Board certifications

Dr. Temming is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology in both Obstetrics and Gynecology and Maternal-Fetal Medicine.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Temming is the medical director of Labor and Delivery at Atrium Health Carolinas Medical Center in Charlotte, North Carolina.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Temming is also adjunct faculty of the Wake Forest School of Medicine and the UNC School of Medicine.

She is engaged throughout Atrium Health in advancing obstetric care through clinical protocols, research, and quality improvement in labor and delivery. Dr. Temming specializes in preterm birth prevention, infectious diseases, cervical insufficiency, fetal loss, recurrent pregnancy losses, birth traumas, pregnancies after infertility, gestational diabetes, maternal hypertensive disorders and LGBTQIA+ pregnancy care.

She suffered multiple losses, infertility and a high-risk pregnancy on her journey to parenthood, and she is especially interested in supporting others along their journeys.

Dr. Temming loves spending time outside of work with her husband and their child. Her hobbies include traveling, reading and musical theater.

Publications and research

Dr. Temming’s research has been published in JAMA Pediatrics , Obstetrics & Gynecology and the American Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology , among others. She received a Society of Maternal Fetal Medicine Health Policy grant, and the subsequent research won the Society of Maternal Fetal Medicine Disparities Award for best research on disparities in health outcomes.

Awards

Dr. Temming has received several additional awards, including Top Doctor by Charlotte magazine and SouthPark magazine, the Most Innovative Quality Improvement Research Award and the Resident Education Award from the Atrium Health Center for Faculty Excellence, and the Excellence in Teaching Award from the UNC Academy of Educators. Additionally, she was a nominee for the Atrium Health Physician Advanced Practice Provider Leader of the Year Award.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window