Losing a Pet — How to Help Your Toddler Deal With Death

toddler feeding dog

You know all dogs go to heaven, but how do you comfort your toddler about the death of a pet? Here's how to help your little one cope with the loss.

Losing a pet is hard for anyone, but it’s an especially difficult concept for a toddler to grasp. That can make it pretty hard for you to help your darling deal with the death of a pet. First of all, how do you break the news? It might seem easier to work up a little white lie (“Lulu ran away, but she’ll find her way back soon!”), but experts advise being honest and upfront with your children (so you don’t have to keep fibbing when Lulu never returns). Here’s what to say and do about losing a pet.

Stick to the facts. Skip the TV-sitcom scenario (you know, the one in which the parents secretly replace the old pet with a look-alike), and instead give your child an age-appropriate explanation of what happened. Simply state the facts: Lulu was struck by a car, or had cancer and had to be euthanized, or died of old age. You don’t need to share the details, just tell your tot what she needs to know: “Lulu died. We’re very sad that we won’t see her anymore.” An older toddler or preschooler may want to know more, so you might explain that when animals get very old or very sick their bodies stop working. You could also read children’s books that help cope with losing a pet, such as Dog Heaven and Cat Heaven by Cynthia Rylant and I’ll Always Love You by Hans Wilhelm.

Don’t use euphemisms like “put to sleep” or “went away.” Those terms can confuse or scare your little one. You certainly don’t want her to be afraid to sleep or leave the house — or imagine that you won’t wake up should you catch a nap. Explain gently, and repeatedly if necessary, that Lulu died and she’s not coming back.

Encourage your tot to talk about her feelings. It’s okay to be sad or mad about the death of a pet, and make sure your child knows that. But don’t be surprised if your little one isn’t as upset as you are, especially if she’s very young. She’s probably not really grasping the concept of death or never being able to play with her pet again. Or she may not have the same emotional investment in your furry (or feathered) family member that you or your older child have.

Say goodbye. If you’ve made the difficult decision to euthanize your pet, be honest. Consider it a teachable moment for talking about suffering (books can help here, too). Then let your little one say her good-byes, and make sure she understands that Lulu won’t be coming back home.

Share your grief about the death of a pet. Learning how to deal with sad feelings is an important lesson for toddlers, so let her see that you’re sad. (After all, teaching your little one about compassion and empathy is one of the benefits of having a pet at all.) You can even cry a bit, but don’t lose control in front of her. If you feel the need to really weep, do so in private so she doesn’t get frightened on top of being sad.

Memorialize her pet. Sometimes it’s helpful for a toddler to say good-bye after losing a pet, perhaps by holding a simple ceremony to honor her pet’s life or by drawing a picture. Encourage this — and help her remember good times with the family pet , either by looking at photos or telling stories about the pet’s antics.

After losing a pet, take a break before getting a new one. Give your household time to grieve before bringing another animal into your lives. If and when you do decide to get another pet , let your tot know that it’s okay to still feel sad about the old one and be excited about her new four-legged friend.

One more thing to keep in mind when losing a pet: Expect all sorts of behavior — toddlers tend to hate any kind of change, especially sudden ones. Your tot might act out, be extra cranky, or have trouble sleeping when her much-loved kitty or pooch dies. Or she might get super-clingy — after all, if a pet can die, so can the people she loves. Help her adjust by being extra patient and reassuring.

Nemours, KidsHealth, When a Pet Dies , June 2018. American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, Death of Pets: Talking to Children . The Humane Society of the United States, Coping with the Death of Your Pet . American Veterinary Medical Association, Coping With the Loss of a Pet . American Academy of Pediatrics, Healthychildren.org, How Children Understand Death & What You Should Say , September 2014. What to Expect the Second Year , Heidi Murkoff and Sharon Mazel. Whattoexpect.com, The Benefits of Pets for Kids , June 2017.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

How to Help Your Child Prepare for Your New Baby By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Crying at Drop-Off — Perfecting the Preschool Separation

Tips for Handling the First Days of Preschool

Divorce With Young Children By Heidi Murkoff

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Explaining a New Baby to a Toddler Is Hard — These TV Episodes Make It Much Easier Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Help Your Toddler Learn to Share and Take Turns Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Separation Anxiety in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Is Your Toddler Afraid of the Dark? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Handle Toddler Tantrums When Leaving the Playground Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Avoid Spoiling Your Child Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How and When to Wean Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

4 Signs Your Toddler May Be Stressed Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Introduce Your Dog to Your Newborn Baby Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window