Love Seafood? A Smart Guide to Eating Fish When You're Trying to Get Pregnant

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

plate of fish

Fish is packed with nutrients that support a healthy pre-pregnancy diet, but mercury levels mean some choices are better than others.

Seafood and fish are filled with protein, vitamins, and heart-healthy omega-3 fatty acids — essential nutrients when you're on a pre-pregnancy diet.

But when you're trying to conceive, it's important to keep a keen eye on the fish you eat, because some contain high levels of the heavy metal mercury, a toxin that can damage the nervous system. Here's what you need to know about eating fish safely before you get pregnant.

Key Takeaways

Fish is not only safe when you’re trying to conceive — it’s encouraged. The FDA and EPA recommend 8 to 12 ounces of low-mercury fish per week to fuel your body with protein and brain-boosting omega-3s.

Most fish are fair game, but mercury matters. Stick with low-mercury options like salmon, shrimp, and canned light tuna, and steer clear of high-mercury fish such as swordfish, shark, and king mackerel.

Not a seafood fan? You still have options. Prenatal vitamins, fish oil supplements, algae-based DHA, or even DHA-fortified eggs can help you get the omega-3s your body needs before pregnancy.

Is it safe to eat fish when you're trying to conceive?

In short: absolutely. Fish is considered one of the best foods for women who are trying to get pregnant.

In fact, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) jointly recommend that women who are pregnant or working on getting pregnant eat 8 to 12 ounces of low-mercury fish per week because it contains lots of healthy protein, plus brain-boosting DHA. Trusted SourceEnvironmental Protection AgencyEPA-FDA Advice about Eating Fish and ShellfishSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceEnvironmental Protection AgencyEPA-FDA Advice about Eating Fish and ShellfishSee All Sources

That's two to three 4-ounce servings of, say, canned light tuna, or one and a half servings of a typical fish steak or filet — in other words, about two to three meals per week.

What are the best types of fish to eat if you're trying to get pregnant?

As beneficial as seafood is for future moms-to-be, it's important to know your fish. The FDA and EPA say that 90% of the fish you'll buy in the U.S. is considered a great choice to eat at two to three servings per week. Great choices include (but are not limited to): Trusted SourceFood & Drug AdministrationAdvice About Eating Fish for Those Who Might Become or Are Pregnant or Breastfeeding and Children Ages 1 - 11 YearsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceFood & Drug AdministrationAdvice About Eating Fish for Those Who Might Become or Are Pregnant or Breastfeeding and Children Ages 1 - 11 YearsSee All Sources

Anchovy

Canned light tuna

Catfish

Cod

Crab

Flounder

Freshwater trout

Haddock

Hake

Herring

Lobster

Pollack

Salmon

Sardine

Shrimp

Sole

Tilapia

A few fish, however, are best to avoid if you're trying to get pregnant since they have high levels of mercury. These include (but are not limited to):

Bigeye tuna

King mackerel

Marlin

Orange roughy

Shark

Swordfish

Tilefish from the Gulf of Mexico

A number of other fish are safe to eat once per week, including Chilean sea bass, yellowfin tuna, striped ocean bass, mahi mahi, and halibut. See the full FDA and EPA list here .

Many What to Expect Community moms-to-be say they try to stick to these guidelines as much as possible. “I’ve laid off bigger saltwater fish (tuna, grouper, swordfish, seabass). But I eat salmon, shrimp, or scallops at least three or four times a week,” says pmm4204.

Having trouble remembering what's tame and what's toxic? In addition to the FDA and EPA's fish chart, the Monterey Bay Aquarium's Seafood Watch offers a handy, printable pocket-size list of fish and seafood that are good choices, good alternatives — or good to avoid (for a variety of reasons, including overfishing, damaged habitats, and pollutant levels).

What if you're trying to get pregnant but you don't eat fish?

You may want to consider supplements. The omega-3 fatty acids found in fish and seafood are good not only for your heart, they're also great to prepare your body to grow healthy babies too. Studies show the oily omegas prevent preterm labor and preeclampsia while improving a baby's visual and cognitive functions.

Some experts also believe that there's a connection between low DHA (omega-3's) and postpartum depression. But if you're not a fan of the fishy taste, you may be able to take fish oil capsules or a prenatal vitamin with omega-3's instead.

So if you're planning to conceive anytime soon, ask your healthcare provider for recommendations. Some prenatal vitamins now get their omega-3's from algae, an all-natural plant source of DHA, which makes them a great option for vegetarians. Another good option: DHA eggs, which are fortified with omega-3's from flaxseed fed to laying hens.

From TTC nutrition to daily support, the What to Expect app has you covered. Download it and start prepping for baby.