There Has Been a Major Change to Costco's Kirkland Diapers: Here's What Parents Need to Know

Kirkland costco dipaers

Costco has now switched diaper manufacturers and parents are noticing some big differences.

While pregnant, I was reluctant to register for diapers because I wasn't sure what sizes we would need and which brands would work best for our new baby. The options seemed overwhelming until I discovered Costco's Kirkland brand.

I'm not the only one who loves Kirkland diapers, which is why the news of the beloved brand switching manufacturers has shocked parents on social media. In fact, one in six parents use Kirkland diapers, according to a 2023 study of 2,000 parents done by What to Expect's parent company, Everyday Health Group.

Late last year, the news leaked about the Kirkland diaper change, and now, these new diapers are officially on shelves at the store.

So what has happened exactly? Here’s what to know so far about the new supplier and how it will impact your baby’s diaper changes going forward.

Key Takeaways

Costco's Kirkland diapers have switched from the Huggies manufacturer to the Cuties manufacturer .

According to parents, the new diapers aren't as absorbent.

If you loved Kirkland Signature diapers, you'll want to try out the new version to see if they still work for your baby. If not, you may want to change brands.

What has changed about Costco's Kirkland’s diapers?

Starting January 2025, Kirkland Signature diapers are now manufactured by First Quality, the company behind Cuties diapers, according to a Bloomberg report. Trusted SourceBloombergCostco%u2019s Popular Kirkland Baby Diapers Are Shifting SuppliersSee All Sources [1] This is a move away from the previous manufacturer Kimberly-Clark Corporation, who also makes the Huggies brand of diapers.

Trusted SourceBloombergCostco%u2019s Popular Kirkland Baby Diapers Are Shifting SuppliersSee All Sources

The change is due to Kimberly-Clark Corporation moving away from low-margin private label contracts in an effort to restore their own profit margins, according to Bloomberg. The company is "focusing more on higher-priced premium items under its own brand names." First Quality is prepared to ramp up their production capacity (the amount they're able to make) because of the switch, also according to the Bloomberg report.

Both First Quality and Kimberly-Clark are equally capable of providing the necessary mix of absorbent materials to meet capacity targets, explains Natalia Richer, personal hygiene products expert and the director of business development at Diaper Testing International. "I am not concerned that First Quality would be unable to meet Costco's absorbent core needs," she adds.

At the date of publication, Richer and her team have not tested the new diapers.

Do the new diapers cost more?

The original Kirkland diapers were high quality, but also affordable — costing $44.99 for a box of 222 size 3 diapers (although depending on where you live, prices may vary slightly). The new version of Costco's diapers seem to be the same price — costing $44.99 for a box of 222 diapers still (depending on the size). This compares to $58 for a box of 192 Huggies diapers and about $32 for a box of 200 Cuties diapers.

Costco did not comment on the cost of the diapers and whether the price will change at some point, but this piece will be updated if more information is released.

What are parents saying about the new Kirkland diapers?

One of the reasons we originally liked the Kirkland diapers so much for our daughter is because they never leaked. So far, many What to Expect moms and other moms on social media are expressing disappointment with the changes.

One WTE mom who bought the new diapers wrote in the Community that they "are now half the thickness." She adds that she's bummed she renewed her Costco membership (which she got just for the diapers!). Another Community mom responded that they also purchased the new diapers but, "so far almost every poop has leaked out the sides."

On social media, lifewithh_mel , says "the old one is so much thicker and the new one is so thin, I feel like my kids are going to pee right through these." She also explains that the inside of the old Kirkland diapers are bendy and stretchy, while the new ones don't have that feeling at all. Mel admits she is likely going to return them to the store.

Another mom, yabishtiff1 , also describes the new diaper as "flatter and not as padded as the old one." She explains that they might be okay for daytime, but definitely not for overnight wear, like the old ones were.

What to do if you loved the original Kirkland diapers

The new diapers are officially on shelves in Costco warehouses across the country as of earlier this month. Some stores may still have the older version for a little while longer as they work to sell off the old inventory. If you're worried about the new Kirkland diapers not stacking up to the ones you currently use, you can always try them and switch brands if they're not working for your baby.

In general, the most important thing about a diaper, says Richer, is how well it's working for your baby. Richer suggests considering three important things that lead to good diapers: how quickly they absorb, how dry the diaper feels while your baby is wearing it and how much the diaper can hold. So whether you're looking to continue with Kirkland, or try a new brand, if your diapers are holding everything in and your baby seems comfortable, you've probably picked the right one. In case you need it, here's the What to Expect diaper guide so you can find the option that you (and your baby!) love best.

Sources

Costco%u2019s Popular Kirkland Baby Diapers Are Shifting Suppliers

Show in the article

Natalia Richer