Making the Most of an Aquarium Visit

toddler outing aquarium

It's great to give your tadpole a glimpse of the underwater world with an aquarium visit, but first check out these strategies for success.

From drinking fountains to rain puddles, children are fascinated by water. So imagine how enthralled your little landlubber will be when he checks out an aquarium for children. The place seems to be specially made for him, with windows low to the ground so he can peer in on marine life.

Besides all the fun your tot will have fish-watching, he’ll also get the chance to learn as you point out colors (“the seahorse is black and white”) and coach him in some basic biology (“that baby fish is small now, but he’ll grow just like you have!”). Still, an aquarium visit can be a washout without some prep work. Here are tips to get the most out of the experience.

Before You Visit an Aquarium

Give your toddler the scoop on the scene… If your toddler is scared of the dark , make sure you tell him that the aquarium is dark and cool because it helps keep the fish healthy.

...and the people in it. Scuba divers, with their big goggles and bulky gear, may spook a toddler. Give your guppy a heads-up about them (“They wear special clothes in the water when they help the fish”).

Plan out a schedule for your aquarium visit. A toddler will probably have had his fill of fish after an hour-and-a-half or two hours, so make sure you leave time for kids’ favorite attractions, like live demos and touch tanks.

Scope out the stroller policy. Some children's aquariums make you park your stroller at the entrance because of narrow paths between tanks. If your wee one’s not much of a walker (or if you haven't found an easy, lightweight stroller for your toddler ), you may want to hold off on the aquarium visit for a while.

During the Aquarium Visit

Have some fishy fun. These aquarium-friendly toddler activities can up the fun and learning quotient at the same time.

Swing by the touch tank. Kids love getting their hands on anything they can, so naturally, touch tanks are a big hit. But you’ll need to run down the rules first: Tell your toddler he’ll have to roll up his sleeves (short-sleeves are an even better option), use two fingers to touch gently, and keep the creatures in the water. Ask your 2-year-old (younger tots probably won’t be able to restrain themselves from grabbing) what he feels and offer some vocab help if he’s stumped: “Does the starfish feel bumpy?” “Is the horseshoe crab’s shell hard?” Check the touch tank hours when you first arrive — it’s not necessarily open the whole time the aquarium is.

Select shows smartly. A 15-minute sea lion feeding may hold your toddler’s attention, while a talk about shark conservation efforts definitely won’t. So get the info on the exhibit before you settle in. Aim for informal gatherings where you can slip out easily if your darling’s not digging it, and skip seated demos in quiet rooms.

Troubleshooting Tips

Be ready to retreat. Many modern aquariums have tanks over, under and all around you. This can be overwhelming to a toddler, who’s still figuring out how the world works (so fish above his head and below his feet can be confusing). If your child seems scared or overstimulated, head somewhere low-key, like the café, to take a break. If necessary, abort this toddler outing and try again in a couple of months.

Avoid the big bang. Tiny fish fans may bang on the glass (it’s so exciting, they can’t help themselves!), but that’s a no-no. Tell your tot that he can clap, point and get really close to the tank, but glass-tapping (or pounding) can scare the fish, so it’s not allowed. If he just can’t resist, he’ll need to fish-watch from your arms.

Devise a gift-shop strategy. In an aquarium for children, all roads lead to the gift shop: You may literally have to walk through it to get to the aquarium exit. Decide beforehand what your gift policy will be. If you’re not going to buy, don’t browse. Just keep your critter close to you and break out the heavy-duty distractions as you speed-walk through (present a special toy from home when the “gimmes” start). If you do end up with a meltdown, take comfort in knowing that it certainly isn’t the first tantrum the gift-shop staffers have seen.

What to Expect the Second Year , Heidi Murkoff and Sharon Mazel. WhatToExpect.com, What to Look for in a light Baby Stroller , April 2018. Caring for Your Baby and Young Child, 6th Edition: Birth to Age 5 , American Academy of Pediatrics, 2014.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

Making Bathtime Fun for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Swim Lessons for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

My Child Is Afraid of Swimming: What Parents Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Benefits of Water Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The Best Crafts for Toddlers Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Handle Toddler Tantrums When Leaving the Playground Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Best Activities for 15-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Bathe Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

When Your Toddler Tags Along on Your Doctor's Visit By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

Tips for Handling the First Days of Preschool

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window