Manicures and Pedicures During Pregnancy: Simple Do’s, Don’ts, and Smart Picks

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

woman getting nails done

Nail care during pregnancy is safe, especially if you follow a few easy safety tips. So go ahead and treat yourself!

Feeling pitiful without a pedicure? Morose without a manicure? Relax — it’s generally considered safe to polish your nails while pregnant (and take advantage of it now, since it’s likely that your nails are growing faster and stronger than ever thanks to pregnancy hormones).

For more about safe manicures and pedicures, including what to look for in a nail polish and which treatments to avoid during pregnancy, read on. Here’s to gorgeous nails for the next nine months!

Key Takeaways

Manis & pedis are generally safe during pregnancy. Risks of nail polish exposure during pregnancy are very low. But it’s still a good idea to keep sessions in a well-ventilated spot, like near an open window, to minimize fumes.

Pick pregnancy-smart products and services. Choose water-based, non-toxic polishes (avoid formaldehyde, toluene, and phthalates). And if you opt for gels or acrylics, be mindful of odors and infection risk, and wear gloves for UV lamps.

Nail care counts. File in one direction, moisturize cuticles (push back, don’t cut), and bring your own tools.

Ask for help, if in doubt. Call your doctor or a dermatologist if you experience pain, signs of infection, discoloration, detachment, or ingrown nails.

Is it safe to get a manicure or pedicure during pregnancy?

Yes, it’s generally considered safe to get manicures and pedicures during pregnancy.

Nail polish and artificial nails are made up of chemical compounds, and there just isn’t much in the way of research or controlled studies assessing their use during pregnancy. Still, it’s unlikely you or your unborn baby will be impacted, since your exposure to these ingredients in nail products is so minimal.

“I’ve been doing gel manis throughout my pregnancy. My doc said there was no issue as long as you go to a clean, well-ventilated salon!” says What to Expect Community member GabriellaBK.

To help you decide which manicure and pedicure options are safe during pregnancy, here’s a breakdown of some common options:

Nail polish. Some nail polishes contain formaldehyde, which has been linked to miscarriage and cancer in salon workers and others with high work exposures to the chemical. Others contain toluene, which produces strong fumes that can cause headache and nausea. Phthalates are another concern, as they may harm the endocrine system. Your best bet: Read polish labels and seek brands that are water-based and non-toxic.

Acrylics and gels. As for acrylics and gel treatments, their chemicals have not been found to be harmful to you or your baby. However, acrylic nail treatments can give off a strong smell that you may find irritating, and there may be a higher risk of infection with this treatment. It's also a good idea to wear gloves to protect your hands from UV light.

Before you make an appointment to get your nails done in a salon, make sure it’s a well-ventilated one (at the very least, the fumes might make you queasy). Better still, ask if you can get a manicure near an open window or even outside.

“If they use an electric tool to buff or grind your nails, you may want to wear a mask during that part, so you don’t inhale the dust,” suggests What to Expect Community member LoLoPOP. “Make sure it’s a reputable salon and observe that they sterilize tools like cuticle scissors between clients.”

Download the What to Expect app to get feel-good self-care tips — right when you need them

What nail treatments should you avoid during pregnancy?

Along with the above-mentioned chemicals found in various nail polishes and treatments, if you apply acetone to remove nail or toe polish, wash your hands or feet after, as this solvent may irritate the skin.

What should you look for in a pregnancy-safe nail polish?

When it comes to pregnancy-safe nail polish, look for products that are water-based, non-flammable, and hypoallergenic. And when considering which treatment to select on a pedicure menu, you can safely choose ones that involve gentle scrubbing and gentle massage. These can work wonders in the last trimester, soothing sore feet, increasing circulation, and reducing swelling.

If your hormones didn’t get the memo and your nails become weak or brittle, try a clear nail hardener and reapply often (plus make sure you’re getting enough calcium in your diet ).

How to take care of your nails during pregnancy

Here’s how to care for your nails, hands, and feet during pregnancy:

Nix biting. Give up this bad habit once and for all (your nails and cuticles will thank you).

File the right way. For smoother tips and healthier nail beds, direct your nail file in one direction only, rather than sawing back and forth.

Slather on lotion. Use a rich cream on your hands, feet, and cuticles at bedtime.

Push back cuticles. Cutting cuticles may invite infection, so gently push them back instead.

Bring your own clippers. Reduce your infection risk by bringing your own nail implements (clippers, file) to the salon.

Try a DIY treatment. Mix equal parts brown sugar and olive oil, then scoop up a handful and massage your feet and legs.

Save ingrown nails for the doc. Let a dermatologist deal with this icky, painful mess.

When to call your doctor about nail changes during pregnancy

Check in with your doctor if you notice any nail changes during pregnancy that indicate infection, or if you experience pain in your nail beds or cuticles. And if you spot nail discoloration, the detachment of your nail from the finger, or an ingrown nail, make an appointment with a dermatologist right away.