Your spring baby's birth flowers predict they'll be optimistic, self-confident and ever so bright.

March marks the official start of spring and if this is your baby's birth month, think of every new flower bloom as a celebration of your adorable little one. As this month usually has you shedding layers and basking in the beautiful sunshine, your baby's birth flowers also point to a self-assured, bright child with an equally sunny personality.

What are the March birth flowers?

If you have a March baby, her birth flowers are the sunny daffodil and the laughing jonquil. These bright yellow flowers are some of the first signs of spring and let's just admit it: the color yellow sparks happiness all around (in fact, it's often considered one of the most bright and energizing colors by color theorists). And according to what your baby’s birth flowers symbolize, this month predicts a joyful, confident child with a creative flare.

Daffodils: A symbol of being our best selves

Daffodils’ trumpet-shaped flowers announce the coming of spring with their special vanilla-spice scent. These easy-to-grow perennials are native to Northern Europe, but are happy to grow just about anywhere. Trusted SourceNC State University https://plants.ces.ncsu.edu/plants/narcissus-pseudonarcissus/See All Sources [1] Daffodils, or narcissus in Latin, are featured in a famous Greek myth: The nymph Narcissus spent so much time admiring his reflection in a pond that he grew roots and turned into a flower. While the Greek story humorously warns of the dangers of vanity, the true meaning of the daffodil’s self-love is about learning how to be our best selves.

Trusted SourceNC State University https://plants.ces.ncsu.edu/plants/narcissus-pseudonarcissus/See All Sources

You can expect your March baby to be grounded and self-assured with plenty of extra love to share with others. Daffodils are also associated with creativity , so for better or worse you’ve got a very confident inventor on your hands. Time to hide the power tools! Soon she’ll be very excited to share everything she imagines and discovers with you.

Jonquils: Ahead of the Curve

Technically, jonquils are just a type of daffodil, but they get special recognition because they are the earliest of the daffodil family to bloom. Jonquil babies are sure to be bright and always two steps ahead. Which is both impressive and a little terrifying when you catch your little one, who should still be learning how to crawl , running ahead of you down the hall.

Incorporating the daffodil and jonquil into your family’s life

The color yellow is sure to brighten anyone's day. Including your child's glowing birth flowers around your home can help honor their birthday , plus their cheery and very witty personality. Add a pop of daffodil or jonquil to your life with these simple ideas:

Grow a bed of daffodils. Daffodils (and the earliest blooming variety: jonquils) are super easy to grow from bulbs and readily available for purchase most anywhere you typically find plants or flowers. Seeing these cheery flowers as you arrive home every day is sure to make you smile for years to come, since they'll grow back year after year.

Grow jonquils in a pot. Don’t have outdoor space? You can also grow jonquils indoors. Here's a quick video that will teach you how.

Create a sunny bouquet. Daffodils don’t need much primping to make a beautiful, bright bouquet . Just make sure to keep them in a vase of their own: daffodils secrete a sap that will wilt other flowers in a mixed bouquet.

Try your hand at felted, crocheted or tufted crafts. Whether you love a good DIY project or a deep dive into Etsy, there are so many whimsical ways to bring sunny daffodils — that won't wilt at the end of spring — into your child’s nursery decor . A garland of crocheted or paper daffodils can be strung on the wall above a crib; this DIY daffodil wreath will brighten up any room (and keep your newborn intrigued with colors and patterns); or just add a small vase of felted daffodils to a bookshelf for a pop of color.

Stencil a spray of ‘dils. Speaking of a pop of color, grab a daffodil stencil and some acrylic paint to add a spray of daffodils in an unexpected spot in your babe's nursery — along a floorboard or peeping out from the top of the crib. Your child will love finding this special treasure.

Catch the wind with bright blooms. Hang a daffodil wind chime from your front porch to announce the arrival of your special daffodil baby. It’s bound to brighten up any blustery day, and your little one will love exploring how the breeze makes things move as they grow.

Entertain your daffodil…with daffodils! Hitting the preschool years? These daffodil pinwheels are an easy art project to make with your kiddo — and a great homemade toy for them to enjoy afterwards.

Sources

Narcissus pseudonarcissus

Show in the article

1. NC State University, Narcissus pseudonarcissus , 2024. | Show in the article

NC State University, Narcissus pseudonarcissus , 2024. | Show in the article