Mark Payson

Mark Payson, M.D.

About Mark Payson, M.D.

Dr. Mark Payson is a board-certified OB/GYN, reproductive endocrinolgist and fertility specialist who is the practice director of the Colorado Center for Reproductive Medicine (CCRM)'s Northern Virginia location.

Colorado Center for Reproductive Medicine (CCRM)'s Northern Virginia location.

He served as director of the IVF Program at Walter Reed Bethesda in Maryland until 2012, when he completed his military career as a Navy Commander. Dr. Payson then worked in private practice in the Washington, D.C., area before founding CCRM Northern Virginia with Dr. William Schoolcraft.

Dr. Payson studied astrophysics before ultimately receiving his undergraduate degree in film and literature from Harvard University. He spent several years living overseas in Italy and the Czech Republic. After returning to the United States, Dr. Payson earned his medical degree from Brown University, completed his residency with the U.S. Navy at Walter Reed Bethesda in Maryland, and did his fellowship training at the National Institutes of Health (NIH).

He has extensive experience with many different treatments and IVF protocols, including Natural Cycle IVF.

Board certifications

Dr. Payson is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology in Obstetrics and Gynecology and its sub-specialty Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Payson is affiliated with Inova Alexandria Hospital , Inova Fairfax Hospital and Inova Fair Oaks Hospital in Northern Virginia.

Other relevant positions

He teaches medical students and residents through didactic lectures, teaches and trains residents at CCRM, and has received best teacher awards, as well as accolades from his patients.

Publications and research

Dr. Payson has published multiple academic articles in the field of fertility and conducted IVF research.

Awards

Dr. Payson was named a 2018 Castle Connolly Top Doctor and a 2019 Washingtonian Top Doctor.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window