Maternal Mental Health

It’s normal to have mixed feelings about being a parent. You may be excited to get to know your baby, but also feel sad, anxious or overwhelmed. For more information about perinatal mood and anxiety disorders, read on.

IN THIS TOPIC

Resources if You Need Help

If you think you might have postpartum depression or another perinatal mood or anxiety disorder, or if you simply don't feel like yourself, know that you're not alone and help is available.

The National Maternal Mental Health Hotline is a free, 24/7 hotline with real-time, confidential support. Call or text 1-833-TLC-MAMA (1-833-852-6262) to speak to a professional counselor.

If you are having thoughts of suicide, call or text 988 or visit the confidential National Suicide Prevention Lifeline website right away.

The What to Expect Postpartum Depression group is another great resource for moms seeking support.

This top 10 list of online therapy services can narrow down a crowded field of virtual therapy options so you can get help without leaving your house.

PPD Screening Test

This depression screening test, which is based off of the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS), may help you determine whether you’re experiencing symptoms of PPD. The test is free and your results are confidential. This is not an official diagnosis, and regardless of your score, you should call your health care provider if something doesn’t seem right.

Finding a Therapist

If you suspect you have postpartum depression or another perinatal mood or anxiety disorder, you might be wondering exactly how to ask for — and get — the help you need. These tips can help you navigate your search for a therapist.

Perinatal Mood and Anxiety Disorders, Explained

There are a variety of conditions that can develop during pregnancy and in the postpartum period. Some, like the "baby blues" and postpartum depression, are well known, but there are other mood and anxiety disorders that new parents may not be as familiar with.

There are a variety of conditions that can develop during pregnancy and in the postpartum period. Some, like

postpartum depression, are well known, but there are other mood and anxiety disorders that new parents may not be as familiar with.

Managing Maternal Burnout

Feeling burned out means that you're doing too much — way too much. Here's how to identify burnout and get the support you need.

Living With Mental Health Challenges

If you have a mental health condition or simply don't feel like yourself, know that you're not alone: Here, real moms and dads open up about some of the challenges they've faced as new or expecting parents.

Go to Your Baby's Age

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window