Terminating a Pregnancy for Medical Reasons

Updated language to reflect the Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization decision.

terminating a pregnancy for health reasons, paper dolls with hearts cut out

Learn more about a different kind of pregnancy loss, when a pregnancy is terminated for medical reasons because of the baby's health or risks to the mother's health.

Pregnancy losses are always incredibly difficult to deal with. But they can be even harder when you’re forced to consider ending your pregnancy because of your baby’s health or risks to your own.

Some women make the heartbreaking choice to terminate a pregnancy when they’re faced with a serious complication or a major birth defect .

Coming to this decision can be devastating, and it’s normal to question over and over whether you’re really doing what’s best.

Ultimately, terminating a pregnancy for health reasons is intensely personal — and no one else can tell you what the right thing to do is. But if you’re looking for guidance to help you weigh your options, here’s some information that may be helpful.

What is termination of pregnancy?

When a woman decides that she isn’t able to carry a fetus to term, she’ll opt to end or terminate her pregnancy. Ending a pregnancy involves undergoing an abortion, where pregnancy tissue and products of conception, or the fetus and placenta, are taken out of the uterus.

In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the fundamental right to an abortion as established by Roe v. Wade nearly 50 years ago. That means that it's now up to each individual state to decide whether abortion is legal in that state. So depending on where you live, you may not have the option to medically terminate a pregnancy.

Why do some parents decide to terminate a pregnancy?

The reasons for choosing to end a pregnancy are highly personal. In some cases, they may be health-related. Parents might decide to terminate a pregnancy if they learn that their baby would be born with a serious birth disorder or defect.

Another reason might be if a woman’s health care provider determines that she’s at high risk of serious or life-threatening pregnancy complications.

What is termination of pregnancy because of fetal health problems?

Parents might make the decision to terminate a pregnancy if they learn that the fetus will be born with a major defect, disorder or deformity. Often the problems are so serious that the fetus would be stillborn or unlikely to survive long after birth.

These can include certain fetal infections, umbilical cord or placental defects, or instances where the fetus is missing all or part of a vital organ.

What is termination of pregnancy because of health risks to the mother?

In other cases, parents might decide it’s best to end a pregnancy if continuing on or giving birth would be extremely dangerous for the mother.

Often this choice is made in the face of very serious complications like premature rupture of membranes , preeclampsia, placental abruption or placenta accreta (where the placenta grows too deeply into the wall of the uterus).

All these complications could put a woman at risk for life-threatening problems like extensive blood loss, stroke or septic shock.

How do you decide to terminate a pregnancy for health reasons?

Choosing to terminate a pregnancy can be incredibly difficult.

If you’re faced with a complication or defect that could be serious or life-threatening to you or the fetus, have a conversation with your health care provider first. He or she can help you understand the risks and provide a realistic picture of what might happen if you choose to continue on with the pregnancy.

Once you understand the medical facts, weigh the health information with your personal beliefs and goals to figure out what’s best for you. In addition to talking with your partner if you have one, you might also consider opening up to close family members or friends, a spiritual advisor or a counselor.

The path you choose to take is personal, so seek advice or support from whatever sources feel most helpful to you.

In the end, the decision to end a pregnancy for health reasons is yours and yours alone. No matter what, you need to go with what feels right for you.

How late can you end a pregnancy?

The vast majority of pregnancies are terminated before 16 weeks, but in some medical cases you may be able to end a pregnancy when you’re farther along.

Still, the ultimate cutoff of when it’s possible to terminate a pregnancy, or whether you're able to end a pregnancy at all, depends on your state laws as well as the providers or clinics available in your area.

If you’re thinking about ending your pregnancy because of health reasons, it’s best to start the conversation with your provider sooner rather than later.

How is a pregnancy terminated when the health of the fetus or the mother are at stake?

Pregnancies are terminated in different ways depending on how far along they are.

If you choose to end your pregnancy during the first trimester, you’ll undergo a first-trimester abortion, which can be performed by taking medication or by undergoing a procedure called suction curettage.

Pregnancies that are ended in the second trimester are usually terminated with a different kind of abortion procedure called dilation and evacuation. Your health care provider can help you determine which procedure is right for you.

Choosing to end a pregnancy for medical reasons is never easy. If you’re faced with a serious complication or health problem, start by talking with your provider to get a clear sense of the risks and what your options are.

Together, you and your partner can weigh that information with your beliefs to make the right decision for you.