Metal Mouth During Pregnancy? Here's Where That Metallic Taste Comes From

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

metallic taste

If everything suddenly tastes like spare change, you’re not alone. That metallic flavor — known as dysgeusia — is a surprisingly common early pregnancy symptom. Here’s what causes it and simple ways to make it more manageable.

Pregnancy can affect almost every part of your body, and your mouth and taste buds are no exception. Many expectant women notice a metallic or sour taste as one of their pregnancy symptoms . This change in taste, known medically as dysgeusia, can persist even when you're not eating. Fun!

"I was expecting to wake up and it be gone, but nope. It feels like I have chipmunk cheeks full of handrail rust," says What to Expect Community member MominTheNorthCountry.]

Key Takeaways

That weird metallic taste is totally normal and super common. If your mouth suddenly tastes like you’ve been sucking on spare change, you’re not imagining it. Up to 93% of pregnant women report changes in taste, especially in the first trimester.

Blame your hormones. Rising and fluctuating estrogen levels can mess with your taste buds. And since taste and smell are closely linked, pregnancy’s heightened sense of smell can make that metallic or sour flavor even more noticeable.

You can’t prevent it, but you can tame it a bit. Sour foods like citrus and pickles, rinsing with a saltwater or baking soda solution, brushing your tongue, and even switching prenatal vitamins may help dial down the metallic mouth.

The good news? As your hormones settle down (usually in the second trimester), the strange taste should ease up.

When does the metallic taste start during pregnancy?

A metallic taste is most common in the first trimester. One study found that a whopping 93% of pregnant women reported some change in taste during pregnancy, so you're in very good company if you're experiencing it. Trusted SourceChemical SensesA Longitudinal Descriptive Study of Self-Reported Abnormal Smell and Taste Perception in Pregnant WomenSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceChemical SensesA Longitudinal Descriptive Study of Self-Reported Abnormal Smell and Taste Perception in Pregnant WomenSee All Sources

What does it feel like? Some moms have compared it to sucking on spare change or drinking from a metal cup. Others describe it as a constant sour flavor that won't go away. It can be hard to put into words, but if you're experiencing it, you'll know.

"This morning I woke up with the metallic taste in my mouth," says What to Expect Community mom MargoWilliams at 5 weeks and 4 days into her pregnancy. "Literally felt like I had sucked on a penny all night long."

"I had it daily through the first trimester, and now it comes and goes at 18 weeks ," says What to Expect Community member akflyr.

What causes a metallic taste during pregnancy?

Dysgeusia is triggered by pregnancy hormones . Estrogen in particular plays a role in regulating your sense of taste. During pregnancy, estrogen levels fluctuate widely, and your taste buds respond accordingly.

Plus, your sense of taste and sense of smell are closely connected. Because pregnancy often heightens your sense of smell, that increased sensitivity can make changes in taste even more noticeable.

The good news: This strange symptom is a sign your hormones are hard at work. As they begin to stabilize — usually in the second trimester — the metallic taste typically fades.

Experiencing strange symptoms like this one and want to keep track? Record what you're going through each trimester with the My Journal tool in the What to Expect app , and check in with your healthcare practitioner if you have any questions or concerns.

What can I do about having a metallic taste when I'm pregnant?

For something we don't hear much about, dysgeusia is surprisingly common in pregnancy. Here's are some ways to make it more manageable:

Lean into sour flavors

Citrus juices, lemonade, and vinegar-based foods (hello, pickles) can help cut through the metallic taste. Sour foods also boost saliva production, which may help wash the flavor away — as long as your stomach tolerates them.

"Cold water with lemon helps me," says What to Expect Community member Devyyyyyyn.

"Popsicles! Tootsie pops, mints, gum and lemonade also helped me," says What to Expect Community mom twogoodpups.

Talk to your practitioner about changing your prenatal vitamin

Some prenatal vitamins seem to contribute to that metallic taste, so it's worth asking about a switch.

Rinse and refresh

Try swishing with a mild salt solution (1 teaspoon of salt in 8 ounces of water) or a baking soda solution (1/4 teaspoon baking soda in 8 ounces of water) a few times a day to neutralize pH levels in your mouth. When you brush your teeth, gently brush your tongue too.

"I randomly grabbed a different tube of toothpaste that I don't usually use (it was left over from a trip) and was shocked that it mostly took the bad taste away," says What to Expect Community mom ChambrayMama2024. "So it might be worth buying some travel sizes of different toothpastes to see if something helps!"

Can I prevent a metallic taste while I'm pregnant?

You can't prevent the metallic taste during pregnancy. But knowing it's a common and harmless symptom can make it easier to handle.

When will the metallic taste go away?

Like morning sickness , dysgeusia usually improves (or, if you're lucky, disappears altogether) in the second trimester when those hormones begin to settle down a bit. If not, it should go away after your baby's birth.

Hang in there — this odd symptom won't last forever!