Michael Carson

Michael Carson, M.D., F.A.C.P.

About Michael Carson, M.D., F.A.C.P.

Dr. Carson is recognized internationally as an educator and researcher regarding medical disorders in pregnancy. He is the director of research at an internal medicine residency and works in private practice in Manasquan, New Jersey.

A Philadelphia native, Dr. Carson earned his medical degree from Temple University after receiving his bachelor’s degree from Lafayette College. He did his internal medicine residency at Brown University/Rhode Island Hospital, where he was selected to serve as chief medical resident. He completed a fellowship in obstetric and consultative medicine at Women & Infants Hospital of Rhode Island at Brown University.

Dr. Carson and his wife Miriam, a labor and delivery nurse, live in Long Branch, New Jersey, and have two adult children.

Board certifications

Dr. Carson has been board-certified with the American Board of Internal Medicine since 1995, and is a Fellow of the American College of Physicians.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Carson is affiliated with Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune, New Jersey, and Community Medical Center in Toms River, New Jersey.

Other relevant positions

He is a professor of medicine and obstetrics/gynecology at the Hackensack Meridian School of Medicine, and is on the faculty for a National OB/GYN Board Review Course.

Dr. Carson is the a past president of the North American Society of Obstetric Medicine, a published researcher focusing on women's health and gestational diabetes, and a co-editor of Sex and Gender-Based Women's Health: A Practical Guide for Primary Care .

Awards

Dr. Carson received the Teaching Award in the Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology at Brown University. He is the recepient of the Louis F. Albright Award for Excellence in Clinical Education at the Internal Medicine Residency Program of Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune, New Jersey. Dr. Carson is also a Monmouth County, New Jersey, Top Doctor.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window