Michelle Kelman

Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

About Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Dr. Michelle Kelman is a pediatric dentist in Los Angeles, California, dedicated to providing exceptional oral health care in a caring, positive and educational environment.

Dr. Kelman founded the Pediatric Dental Center at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles in 2008, and is a member of the medical surgical staff at Cedars-Sinai.

A native Californian, Dr. Kelman received her Bachelor of Science degree from the University of California, Los Angeles and her Doctor of Dental Surgery degree from the University of Southern California.

She then completed residency specialty training in Pediatrics at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City, in association with the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Kelman is affiliated with Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Kelman serves as a lecturer at the UCLA School of Dentistry in the Department of Pediatrics, where she attends, supervises and teaches residents.

She is also a lecturer in the Department of Pediatrics at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.

Dr. Kelman has lectured internationally on topics ranging from advancements in pediatric dentistry to behavior management techniques. She has led educational workshops for colleagues and parent groups on topics that include infant oral health, pacifier and bottle weaning, oral health care for children and adults with special needs, and teenage oral health and wellness.

She is a member of the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, American Dental Association, California Dental Association, California Society of Pediatric Dentistry, and Alpha Omega International Dental Fraternity.

Awards

While studying at USC, Dr. Kelman received the USC Behavioral Dentistry Award for Outstanding Humanistic Qualities in the Treatment of Patients and the Award for Outstanding Achievement in Pediatric Dentistry.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window