Miscarriage Quotes to Help Bring You Comfort

flowers coming out of an envelope

“A life need not be long-lived for it to be meaningful.” Plus more words of wisdom and support for those going through a pregnancy loss.

Experiencing a pregnancy loss is devastating. If you're coping with a miscarriage , stillbirth, medical loss or losing a child after birth, you are probably in need of comfort and reassurance that you're not alone.

While no healing journey is the same, it may help to hear phrases of wisdom, guidance and support from others who know what you’re going through, and who have experienced the same type of grief themselves.

Here are some quotes about grief and loss that may help bring you some comfort.

"If there ever comes a day when we can't be together, keep me in your heart; I'll stay there forever." — Winnie the Pooh

“I held you every second of your life.” — Stephanie Paige Cole

“A life need not be long-lived for it to be meaningful.” — Unknown

“I don’t think of all the misery, but of all the beauty that remains.” — Anne Frank

“How very softly you tiptoed into our world, almost silently, only a moment you stayed. But what an imprint your footsteps have left upon our hearts.” — Dorothy Ferguson

“There is no greater agony than bearing an untold story inside you.” — Maya Angelou

“You never arrived in my arms, but you will never leave my heart.” — Zoe Clark-Coates

“You are near, even if I don’t see you. You are with me, even if you are far away. You are in my heart, in my thoughts, in my life, always.” — Unknown

“What we have once enjoyed deeply we can never lose. All that we love deeply becomes a part of us.” — Helen Keller

“There is no right way to grieve; there is only your way to grieve, and that is different for everyone.” — Nathalie Himmelrich

“Grief is the last act of love we can give to those we loved. Where there is deep grief, there was great love.” — Unknown

“There is a unique pain that comes from preparing a place in your heart for a child who never comes.” – David Platt

“Even those who never fully blossom bring beauty into the world.” — Unknown

“It hurts because it matters.” — John Green

“Grief is like the ocean; it comes in waves ebbing and flowing. Sometimes the water is calm, and sometimes it is overwhelming. All we can do is learn to swim.” — Vicki Harrison

"Babies lost in the womb were never touched by fear. They were never cold, never hungry, never alone and importantly always knew love." — Zoe Clark-Coates

“A life may last just for a moment, but memory can make that moment last forever.” — Unknown

"You will survive and you will find purpose in the chaos. Moving on doesn't mean letting go." — Mary VanHaute

Your Next Read

When Birth Doesn’t Go as Planned, It’s Okay to Grieve — Here's How to Heal Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The Best Quotes About Twins and Multiples — From Laugh-Out-Loud Funny to Super Sweet Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Times Moms Were Devastated by a Gender Reveal Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

21 Moms Share the Most Ridiculous Reasons They Cried When They Were Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Let’s Get Real: You Can Be Grateful for Your Baby and Still Not Love Being Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Stuck on What to Say? 50 Pregnancy Announcement Captions for Every Kind of Reveal Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Want a Good Laugh? Moms Share 17 Hilarious (and Slightly Cringey) Pregnancy Moments Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

10 Things I Wish Someone Had Told Me About the Third Trimester of Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Pregnancy Can Be Triggering if You’ve Experienced Sexual Trauma. Here’s How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

What to Do and How to Cope When Your Preemie's in the NICU Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Losing a Pet — How to Help Your Toddler Deal With Death

5 Things I Wish Other Moms Told Me About Postpartum Body Image Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window