I Tested the Mockingbird High Chair With My Baby — Here's My Honest Review

Mockingbird High Chair Review: Various photos of baby using mockingbird high chair and the mockingbird high chair solo

From setup to snack time, here’s what I learned after a month of testing the Mockingbird High Chair with my baby.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Mockingbird High Chair Review

The Mockingbird High Chair is widely regarded as one of the best high chairs on the market.

Parents love its stylish design and easy-to-clean surfaces.

Thoughtful features — such as strap holders — make mealtime more convenient.

It takes up considerable space, making it less ideal for small homes.

At $249, many parents consider it worth the investment, especially since it can be used into a child’s tween years.

As a mom of three, I have opinions when it comes to high chairs. Between those that my family owns and ones we’ve tried during various trips and visits to friends’ houses, I’ve tested about 10 different high chairs over the past five years — and have thoughts on them all. So when I started seeing all of the buzz in my mom groups about the Mockingbird High Chair , I had to see if it lived up to the hype.

Mockingbird is known for making a great single-to-double stroller that feels high-end, but is much more affordable than its competitors. Similarly, Mockingbird’s high chair has a lot of the same great features as other popular high chairs , including a chic design, an adjustable footrest and the ability to convert it into a big-kid chair.

Mockingbird also added some extra functionality, like an easy-to-clean design and the ability to adjust the footrest without disassembling the high chair. And while it’s not cheap, at the price point of $249, the Mockingbird High Chair is significantly less than others that cost upwards of $300.

Best Convertible High Chair

I was lucky enough to test the Mockingbird high chair with my 10-month-old son (full disclosure: I was sent one for free for testing purposes, but the opinions here are my own). After trying it out for about a month, here’s my unfiltered review.

Mockingbird High Chair Review: At a Glance

Dimensions: ‎24 x 16.5 x 35.5 inches in high chair mode; 24 x 16.5 x 28.5 inches in child chair mode

Weight: 16.5 lbs. in high chair mode; 12.5 lbs. in child chair mode

Weight Limit: Up to 35 lbs. in high chair mode; up to 150 lbs. in child chair mode

Foldable: No

What's Included: Baby seat, Footrest that becomes child chair seat, adjustable tray, removable tray liner, removable magnetic strap harness

Price: $249

Why I Love the Mockingbird High Chair

I can definitely see why moms and moms-to-be are so excited about the Mockingbird High Chair — there’s a lot to love. Here are some of my favorite features.

It looks great

Honestly, I think this might be the best-looking high chair you can buy right now. The design is really modern and fun, and it looks equally chic as a high chair or as a big-kid chair.

Mockingbird High Chair

It’s super-easy to clean

One thing you’ll notice instantly after you build the Mockingbird High Chair is that there are very few corners or crevices — and that’s intentional! The curved seat is made from a non-toxic, BPA-free plastic that’s super-easy to wipe down after meals. Same for the back and footrest, and the solid beechwood legs also have very few nooks and crannies where crumbs can get stuck.

The tray is also removable for easy cleaning, and it actually comes with a detachable surface that you can throw in the dishwasher. Even the straps (which have an easy-to-use magnetic closure!) are coated in silicone so they can be easily wiped clean.

mockingbird high chair tray in dishwasher

It grows with your baby

The footrest can be moved between four different positions as your baby gets older — and you don’t have to disassemble the high chair to move it between the different positions.

The tray itself can also be moved in tighter to the chair to get the right fit for your baby (or you can skip the tray and pull the high chair right up to the table).

Once your child is old enough to use a big-kid chair, you can remove the baby seat entirely and use it as a big-kid seat.

Mockingbird High Chair set up as a big kid chair

It has other thoughtful features designed to make your life easier

Mockingbird has added some other nice touches, too, like the fact that suction bowls and plates really do stick onto the tray (although once your baby gets stronger, they will still be able to pull these off if they really want to) and attachments on the back of the seat that hold the straps out of the way when you’re putting your baby into the high chair or cleaning it.

back view of Mockingbird High Chair

Drawbacks of the Mockingbird High Chair

The curved seat makes it hard for babies to sit upright

The curved design of the seat makes for easy cleaning, but it’s not ideal for sitting when you’re a baby still working on your motor skills. Both my 10-month-old and my neighbor’s baby have a tendency to flop around a little bit in the chair. I tried pushing the tray in as far as possible, and while this helps a bit, it doesn’t totally solve the problem.

baby in Mockingbird High Chair

For smaller babies like mine, the footrest is also hard to use. That’s because it’s designed to be both a footrest for babies and the actual seat of the chair for big kids, but it doesn’t come out quite far enough for some babies to be able to use it.

close up shot of baby legs in Mockingbird High Chair

Because of these factors, it’s hard for babies to sit in the ideal 90-90-90 position (a 90-degree angle at the hips, knees and ankles) while eating. Experts generally recommend this position when introducing solids to babies to make meal and snack times as safe as possible, and also to make eating more comfortable (because if your baby isn't comfortable, they can’t eat well).

The Mockingbird High Chair takes up a lot of space.

No one warns you about how often you’ll stub your toes on various baby gear! Unfortunately, because the way the legs of this high chair are angled, it’s very easy to stub your toes on it. If you know you’ll be able to store the high chair away or keep it in a low traffic area, this might be a non-issue for you. But if you’ll be using the chair in a high-traffic area, this is definitely something to watch out for.

Mockingbird High Chair vs Stokke Tripp Trapp

Mockingbird High Chair vs. Stokke Tripp Trapp

A lot of the conversations I’ve seen online are about how the Mockingbird High Chair compares to the Stokke Tripp Trapp (which we've also reviewed) . I’ve owned the Tripp Trapp since my first son was born in 2018. While I was given that one for testing purposes, I actually loved it so much that I bought our family another Tripp Trapp when I had my second son in 2020. It was definitely my favorite high chair before I tested out the Mockingbird. If you’re debating between the Tripp Trapp and the Mockingbird High Chair, here are some key differences to note between the two.

Stokke Tripp Trapp and Mockingbird side by side

The Mockingbird is easier to clean and is a better value

Many of the features of the Mockingbird seem like they were designed to address issues with the Stokke Tripp Trapp — namely, that the Stokke can be hard to clean. All of the surfaces of the Mockingbird are easy to wipe down, and it has multiple pieces that can be thrown in the dishwasher.

The Stokke , meanwhile, is made of wood finished with non-toxic paint, and it has several crevices and nooks and crannies where food can get stuck. The worst aspect of this is the notches in the legs. The surface of them is a little rough, which makes them much more difficult to clean. And since there are 14 of them (to make the chair super-customizable) cleanup can be a real pain.

close up shot of Stokke Tripp Trapp legs

The Mockingbird is also $249, compared to the Stokke Tripp Trapp with the baby seat, which is $35. It’s also worth noting that the Mockingbird comes with the tray, whereas it’s an extra $69 if you want a tray for the Tripp Trapp.

The Stokke Tripp Trapp is more ergonomic and has a smaller footprint

As I mentioned above, it can be hard for babies to maintain good posture in the Mockingbird High Chair. I’ve never had this issue with the Tripp Trapp — all three of my kids have been able to sit in the 90-90-90 position that experts recommend while using it.

baby in Stokke Tripp Trapp

Because of the way the legs are positioned, the Tripp Trapp takes up less space, which is helpful if you’re working with a small space, or if your chair will be in a high-traffic area where you or other family members might trip over it (unfortunately, I speak from personal experience on this).

How to decide

Admittedly, I find myself using the Stokke Tripp Trapp more often than the Mockingbird High Chair. Even though the Mockingbird is much easier to clean, my son has had some issues with staying on his growth curve, so it’s important to me that I do everything possible to make mealtimes comfortable for him.

If you’re not as worried about your baby’s posture while eating, then the Mockingbird High Chair is probably the better option for you, thanks to its better price point and parent-friendly features.

Is the Mockingbird High Chair Worth It?

Overall, I would say yes! While it does have some real downsides — namely that it can be hard for some babies to sit fully upright in, and that its legs stick out more than would be ideal — it’s a great-looking high chair with tons of thoughtful details at a good price.

Where to Buy the Mockingbird High Chair

Interested in the best convertible high chair ? You can buy the Mockingbird High Chair at Mockingbird's website.

Mockingbird High Chair FAQ

Is the Mockingbird High Chair good for small kitchens or tight spaces?

Between its size (24 x 16.5 x 35.5 inches) and the angle of its legs, the Mockingbird High Chair isn’t ideal for small kitchens or tight spaces. In fact, I stubbed my toe on it more than once!

Can I use the Mockingbird High Chair beyond toddlerhood?

Deemed one of the best convertible high chairs, the Mockingbird High Chair grows with your child. Use it in high chair mode until they reach 35 pounds, then switch to child chair mode, which works from age 3 all the way to adulthood.

How do you clean the Mockingbird High Chair?

One of the easiest-to-clean high chairs, the Mockingbird High Chair is crevice-free design means food can’t hide, and the non-toxic, BPA-free material wipes down in seconds. The tray? Just wipe it or pop it in the dishwasher.

Are the Mockingbird High Chair's silicone straps safe and easy to clean?

Unlike other high chairs with fabric straps, the Mockingbird High Chair’s straps are coated in silicone, making them quick and easy to wipe clean.

Your Next Read

Is the Stokke Tripp Trapp Worth It? One Mom's Honest Review Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

How to Find the Best Stroller for Your Family: A Comprehensive Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is the Doona Car Seat & Stroller Worth the $550 Price Tag? Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

I Chose the Nuna Travel System Over the Doona — Here’s Why I’d Do It Again By Elizabeth Buxton, Director of Commerce Content Strategy

Is the Artipoppe Zeitgeist Baby Carrier Worth the Steep Price Tag? One Mom's Candid Opinion By Kelsey Haywood Lucas

The 9 Best Baby Floor Seats, According to Parents and Experts Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Best Convertible and All-in-One Car Seats, Tested and Reviewed by Real Parents Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

How to Buy a Baby Stroller By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

The Best Stroller Travel Systems That Parents Say Make Life Easier Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

I’d Pay Double for This $24 Travel Toy By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window