Moms Reveal the Moves That Helped Them Make New Friends

Updates to copy and formatting.

Making mom friends, two moms sitting on the floor of a child's bedroom with children in their laps

78% of parents say they feel like they're missing a village.

Becoming a parent can be surprisingly lonely. Suddenly your whole world revolves around nap schedules, cleaning up blowouts, and figuring out how to get out of the house before noon (if you leave the house at all!). Having a circle of mom friends who get it — and support you through it — can make all the difference.

If you're still struggling to find your people, you're not alone. In fact, 78% of parents say they don't have enough of a village, according to a What to Expect poll.

Just how do you build that village? It can be intimidating to put yourself out there, but with some patience and willingness to step outside your comfort zone, you can do it. Here are some tips for where to meet mom friends and how to take those first steps toward friendship.

Key Takeaways

Look for connections in everyday places, like daycare, baby classes, parks, libraries, online groups, and existing relationships.

Small talk can lead to meaningful friendships — sometimes all it takes is asking for a number or offering to bring coffee.

You don't need a perfect house, schedule, or life to make friends. Showing up imperfectly still counts.

Where to meet people

There are plenty of ways to find other parents near you and deepen the connections you already have.

Look at the relationships you already have

Your village might be closer than you think, whether it's the neighbor you always wave to, the coworker you swap mom-hacks with, a fellow parent at your place of worship, or an old friend who's ready and waiting to show up for you.

It takes a little effort, but you can turn an acquaintance into a friend. Here are some thoughts from moms in the What to Expect Community :

"We started to make friends when my oldest was in daycare — through her friends! She’s now 5.5 and her daycare friends are in different school districts, but we still manage to get together four to six times a year." — Julie-J

"I definitely felt like I had more mom friends when I was actively in church. The church is very intentional about cultivating community." — ElaraSage

Get online

Leaving the house can feel like an Olympic sport some days, but an online community is just a few taps away.

"What I found most impactful in my own life — living thousands of miles away from family and some of my dearest friends — is the virtual village," shares Britany Williams , a fitness trainer, content creator, and mom. "Sometimes what you need isn’t someone literally with you; what you need is emotional support. I found myself texting other mom friends in different time zones or who were also in the newborn phase while I was in the quiet darkness of 3 a.m. pumping sessions."

Need to get some advice from a fellow parent, celebrate a tiny win, or indulge in a midnight vent sesh? The internet has what you're looking for — here are some apps you can try:

Facebook. "Join a local mom group! That’s how I met some new friends. We’d meet for big play dates in the park, or group walks around the lake with our carriers and strollers." — ftm2722

Peanut. Moms in the What to Expect Community describe it as Tinder for mom friends — you create a profile and swipe to connect with other moms in your area. "I started using it when I moved to a new state a couple of years ago, and it’s actually how I met my closest friend here." — saraaa123

The What to Expect Community. It's full of conversations with moms and moms-to-be sharing advice, asking questions, and seeking camaraderie — like this one by member Quellabae05: "I’m starting a group chat for anyone who wants more mom friends. Being a mom can get lonely at times, so let’s build a little village — somewhere we can chat, share advice, and just connect." Download the What to Expect app to join groups for moms who are due in the same month and connect with local parents in your area.

Join local activity groups

Eager to get back out in the world, but don't know where to start? Local mom groups, community events, and parent-and-baby activities can make it a little easier to strike up conversations naturally — after all, the mom standing next to you at the park might be starved for connection, too.

Here are some baby-friendly places to find friends:

The library. Check the calendar for story times, mommy-and-me groups, and other community events. "I found some baby yoga classes at local libraries where I met some moms! I have no social media, so it was an adventure finding mom-raderie with my first!" — honeycreeper

The park. "I just try to spark up conversations at story time or the park. If it feels like a good fit, I’ll ask for their number." — Elle183

Mommy-and-me classes. Look for classes or activities, such as music, art, swimming, or gymnastics, hosted by your local community center, gym, or place of worship. "I’ve made some really sweet mom friends by going to music class with my daughter and other types of mommy-and-me classes." — linsdance

How to make it happen

Knowing where to meet moms is one thing — actually making new friends is another. The good news is taking the first steps toward friendship isn't complicated, even if it can feel a little scary.

Make the first move

If you want to make friends, you have to put yourself out there, and you might even have to be the one to say hi first. Not great at making small talk or starting conversations? Here are some topics to get you going:

I love your stroller/your baby's outfit/your shoes. Where did you get it?

Do you know of any other fun spots or baby-friendly activities in town?

What’s your baby’s name? How did you come up with that?

And some more tips from Community moms who get it:

"I am also not one to strike up a conversation with strangers, but if you commit to going to something several times a week, you will start to see the same people over and over again. It’s awkward to exchange numbers at first, but then a friendship will grow from there. Now I have several friends with kids the same age as mine. You got this!!" — novembermama23

"Whenever I don't know what to say, I just start asking questions about that person: where are you from, how old is your kid, have you been here before, etc... Sometimes, if I know who I'm meeting, say a woman or two from a moms group, I will have questions already prepared in my mind in advance. This helps with my social anxiety." — lexh82

Start now — don't wait for the "right" moment

A deep friendship doesn't happen in the perfect moments — showing up imperfectly is better than not showing up at all.

"I think we’re often met with this assumption that other moms have everything figured out, that they have an amazing network of people and are too busy for someone like you to enter their life," Williams says. "But what I’ve found time and time again is the exact feelings I’m feeling as a new mom — lonely, tired, intimidated, in need of help — are the exact feelings they are feeling, too. No new mom has it all figured out, and once you take that first step to talk to a fellow new mom, you’ll find there’s this built-in camaraderie, this built-in understanding that we have for one another."

Making new friends doesn't happen overnight, and it rarely happens without a little vulnerability first. But every text you send and every library storytime you show up to is one more step toward finding your people.

Methodology

The EHGPP Snap Poll was conducted by Everyday Health Group – Pregnancy and Parenting on May 14-15, 2026. We surveyed 404 EHGPP users who have a child under 18.

Updates history

May 29, 2026

Editor: Melissa Bykofsky

Updates to copy and formatting.

Your Next Read

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Why Pregnancy Changes Your Friendships — and How to Stay Connected Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Pregnant and Single? Here’s How to Get the Support You Need Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

18 Self-Care Ideas for Moms That Aren't Just 'Take a Shower' Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Breastfeeding Support Groups Can Be the Resource New Moms Need Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Promote a Baby’s Social and Emotional Development Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Motherhood Almost Broke My Marriage — Here's What Actually Helped Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

When My Babies Arrived, the Blissful Connection Didn't. Here's the Truth No One Talks About Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

As a New Mom, My Son's Need for Contact Naps Almost Broke Me By Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

Moms Reveal Exactly How They Decided Whether to Have Another Baby — or Not Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window