paid leave package

Moms Lose an Average of $9,500 When They Take Maternity Leave

add

Eight in 10 families say their finances were impacted in some way, a new What to Expect survey finds.

Key takeaways

More than half of parents take unpaid time off to recover and bond with their baby after birth, pausing their paychecks to care for their newborns.

On average, moms say they lost about $9,480 of their family's income due to their parental leave. More than a quarter reported struggling to pay bills.

To cope, families are cutting back on non-essential purchasing (43%) and dipping into their savings (37%). This financial pressure can add to new parents' stress and anxiety while navigating the challenges of caring for a newborn.

It's no secret that having a baby is expensive; the out-of-pocket cost associated with pregnancy and childbirth hovers around $3,000. Trusted Source Kaiser Family FoundationWomen Who Give Birth Incur Nearly $19,000 in Additional Health Costs, Including $2,854 More that They Pay Out of PocketSee All Sources [1] That number is especially tough to swallow when you consider that many families get these bills right when their paychecks stop rolling in.

Trusted Source Kaiser Family FoundationWomen Who Give Birth Incur Nearly $19,000 in Additional Health Costs, Including $2,854 More that They Pay Out of PocketSee All Sources

More than half of parents (51%) take some form of unpaid leave to care for their babies, a new What To Expect survey found.

The 2,275 moms surveyed report missing out on $9,480, on average, by taking parental leave. This financial fallout forced nearly half (43%) of these families to cut back on non-essential purchases and 37% to dip into their savings.

"I am using all of my savings to cover my expenses while I'm out of work," one survey respondent said. "In an economy that generally requires two incomes to afford housing, maternity leave and childcare are two very challenging obstacles to navigate."

Parents are already taking less leave than they need

The women in our survey reported taking nearly 11 weeks of maternity leave on average, and a concerning number (25%) took six weeks or less. (Fully recovering from childbirth can take months, according to the American Academy of Family Physicians.) Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Family PhysiciansRecovering from Delivery (Postpartum Recovery)See All Sources [2] Partners had even less time to bond with their babies, typically getting less than five weeks off — 29% took just a few days or no time at all.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Family PhysiciansRecovering from Delivery (Postpartum Recovery)See All Sources

Most moms (74%) agree this isn't enough, but many feel they have no choice but to go back to work before they're ready.

"I would just love to have more time to recover and bond with my baby," one respondent shared. "Six to eight weeks are not enough, and I do not have a choice to stay home due to the fact that it would not financially work for my family."

Taking this insufficient amount of leave is still costing parents close to $10,000

Despite the fact that many parents head back to work sooner than they'd like, they're still suffering major financial consequences. On average, new parents are losing $9,480 in income — that's one sixth of the average American worker's annual salary, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). Trusted SourceU.S. Bureau of Labor StatisticsTotal Private Average Hourly Earnings and Weekly Hours and Earnings by StateSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceU.S. Bureau of Labor StatisticsTotal Private Average Hourly Earnings and Weekly Hours and Earnings by StateSee All Sources

To accommodate for this nearly five-figure loss, 43% of families cut back on non-essential spending, 37% made budget cuts and 37% dipped into their savings. Nearly a quarter (24%) relied more on credit cards, and 1 in 10 stopped contributing to a retirement account.

I am using all of my savings to cover my expenses while I am out of work.

What to Expect Community Member

Some parents try to minimize the financial impact by taking steps before their babies arrive. They stock up on essential household and baby products (53%), take advantage of coupons and discounts (51%) and proactively save money before the birth (44%).

"I sold off a lot of collectibles to save up money for my maternity leave," one respondent said. "I wish I had paid time off for my maternity leave and didn't have to."

The U.S. needs a federal paid leave policy so this doesn't happen

The U.S. is one of six countries in the world without a national paid maternity leave policy, forcing moms to cobble together time through their employers and states that's often unpaid. Trusted SourceWorld Policy Analysis CenterIs Paid Leave Available to Mothers of Infants, Including Maternity and Parental?See All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceWorld Policy Analysis CenterIs Paid Leave Available to Mothers of Infants, Including Maternity and Parental?See All Sources

"The parental leave policy in the USA is insufficient and incomparable to other countries' policies," one respondent said. "I needed more than 12 to 16 weeks to bond with my baby and prepare to return to work."

Most moms we surveyed (86%) agree that they would support a federal paid leave policy.

If you're among them, visit the What to Expect Project to contact your representatives and let them know why passing a law to guarantee paid family leave is so important to you and your community.

Methodology

The What to Expect Leave Survey was conducted by Everyday Health Group from June 24 to July 12, 2024. We surveyed 2,275 women ages 18 to 54 who are currently pregnant or have at least one child up to 5 years old.

Sources

Women Who Give Birth Incur Nearly $19,000 in Additional Health Costs, Including $2,854 More that They Pay Out of Pocket

Show in the article

Recovering from Delivery (Postpartum Recovery)

Show in the article

Total Private Average Hourly Earnings and Weekly Hours and Earnings by State

Show in the article

Is Paid Leave Available to Mothers of Infants, Including Maternity and Parental?

Show in the article

Family and Medical Leave Act

What Data Does the BLS Publish on Family Leave?