More Than 45,000 Popular "Magic" Sleepsuits Recalled for Choking Hazard

Halo Dream Magic Sleepsuit recall

Your Halo Magic sleepsuit (formerly known as Baby Merlin's Magic Sleepsuit) may not be safe. Here's what to know.

Baby sleep product company Halo Dream is recalling some of its Magic Sleepsuits because of a potential choking hazard . The zipper heads on some of the sleepsuits can fall off, creating a risk for choking.

"Out of an abundance of caution, we are voluntarily recalling isolated batches of the Halo Magic Sleepsuit to ensure safety," Halo Dream said in a statement. "No injuries have been reported."

Halo Dream "has received 15 reports of the zipper head detaching from the garment," according to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CSPC)'s recall announcement. Trusted SourceU.S. Consumer Product Safety CommissionHALO Dream Recalls Magic Sleepsuits Due to Choking HazardSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceU.S. Consumer Product Safety CommissionHALO Dream Recalls Magic Sleepsuits Due to Choking HazardSee All Sources

Key Takeaways

The CSPC has recalled about 45,000 Halo Dream Magic Sleepsuits because the zipper head can fall off, creating a choking hazard.

To find out whether your baby's sleepsuit has been recalled and register for a replacement or store credit, visit www.sleepsuitrecall.com, call 833-791-0420, or email customerservice@sleepsuitrecall.com.

No injuries related to this recall have been reported.

Which sleepsuits are recalled?

About 45,000 Halo Dream Magic Sleepsuits — formerly known as Baby Merlin's Magic Sleepsuit — have been recalled.

The sleepsuits come in sizes small and large, are sold in a number of colors, and have the words "HALO Magic Sleepsuit" printed on the front. They have two zippers running down each side.

Your baby's sleepsuit is recalled if it meets all of the following criteria:

You bought it between September 2025 and February 2026.

You bought it online from Amazon, Walmart, Target, or directly on Halo Dream's website for about $50.

The sleepsuit's tag says it was made in India.

The sleepsuit's tag has one of these batch numbers: PO30592, PO30641, or PO30685. You can find the batch number on the fourth line of the tag, below the company's name and website. (The "PO" might not be on the tag, so just look for the numbers.)

If you bought a Halo Dream Magic Sleepsuit or a Baby Merlin's Magic Sleepsuit before September 2025, your baby's sleepsuit is still safe to wear.

Halo Dream Inc. acquired the Baby Merlin brand in March 2025.

What should you do if you have a recalled sleepsuit?

If you own a recalled sleepsuit, the CSPC advises to stop using it immediately. You're also eligible for a coupon code for a replacement sleepsuit or a $50 store credit to buy something else from Halo Dream's website.

There are a few ways you can register for the recall and get a coupon code:

Call toll-free at 833-791-0420 during business hours, 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Eastern time from Monday through Friday.

Email customerservice@sleepsuitrecall.com .

Visit https://www.sleepsuitrecall.com .

You'll need the information from the tag of your sleep suit and proof of purchase to request a refund or coupon code.

Sources

HALO Dream Recalls Magic Sleepsuits Due to Choking Hazard

Show in the article

Transom Capital-Backed HALO Dream Inc. Completes Acquisition of Baby Merlin