More Than 20,000 Amazon Baby Loungers Recalled Due to Risk of Serious Injury or Death

Baby lounger recall

Here's how to tell if your lounger is affected, plus what to do if it is.

The popular baby URMYWO baby lounger sold on Amazon has been recalled for serious safety issues that could lead to injury or even death.

The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) called out three major problems with the loungers:

The sides are shorter than the minimum side height requirement to secure an infant.

The pad itself is too thick, creating a suffocation risk.

The lounger doesn't have a stand, creating a fall hazard.

Here’s what you need to know about the recall.

Key Takeaways

More than 20,000 URMYWO baby loungers sold by Pomona on Amazon have been recalled.

If you own a lounger with model number UMCZC01AE, stop using it immediately. Contact urmyworecall@yundnetwork.com for a full refund, plus instructions on how to throw it away.

If you have a different baby lounger that hasn’t been recalled, make sure to follow the manufacturer’s directions, never leave your baby unattended, and avoid using the lounger for sleep

Which baby loungers are being recalled?

The recall was issued for 23,000 URMYWO baby loungers in the specific "grey feather" style. These loungers were sold on Amazon between January 2024 and April 2025, and while there haven't been any reported injuries so far, the CPSC has evaluated the lounger and found it does not meet their strict guidance on infant sleep products .

All of the recalled loungers, which retail anywhere from $30 to $50, have the same model number of UMCZC01AE. This number can be found on a tag attached to the lounger: Just look for the tag that says "Tracking Label" and your lounger's model number should be listed right under that.

What to do if you have a recalled baby lounger

If you have one of the recalled loungers, the CPSC says to stop using it immediately and contact the official retailer, Pomona, for a full refund at urmyworecall@yundnetwork.com . You'll need to remove the sleeping pad, cut up the sides of the lounger and sleeping pad, and email them the photo to get the refund.

baby lounger recall

Any baby lounger sold in the U.S. must meet CPSC safety standards to lower the risk of babies being harmed while using the gear. If you have a lounger, be sure you always keep an eye on your baby while you’re using it, and never let them sleep in the lounger. Find out more about how to safely use baby loungers.

WhatToExpect.com, New Safety Guidelines Issued for Infant Support Cushions; Here's What to Know , May 2023. CPSC, URMYWO Baby Loungers Recalled Due to Risk of Serious Injury or Death from Suffocation and Fall Hazard; Violates Mandatory Standard for Infant Sleep Products; Sold on Amazon by Pomona , September 2025.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Inclined Sleepers Are Dangerous For Babies — Here's Why Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The FDA Just Issued a Warning About Certain SNOO Sleep Sacks Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Safe vs. Unsafe Baby Sleep Environments: The Ultimate Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Make Sure Your Baby's Crib Is Safe Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Aftermarket Car Seat Accessories Are So Unsafe Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Are Baby Walkers Safe? Here's What the Experts Say Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Swaddle Your Baby Safely — A Step-by-Step Guide Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Here's When Babies Can Start Sleeping With a Blanket Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

7 Best Convertible and All-in-One Car Seats, Tested and Reviewed by Real Parents Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

The 9 Best Baby Floor Seats, According to Parents and Experts Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is It Safe to Buy Used Baby Gear? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Winter Car Seat Safety Gear to Keep Baby Warm By Korin Miller, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window