How to Soothe Mother’s Thumb

mother's thumb, mother holding baby son

Got a sore thumb? Try these tips for easing this common post-pregnancy strain.

Once you gave birth, many of the discomforts of pregnancy likely ceased (hurray!), but now that you’ve got a sweet baby in tow, other annoying aches may have replaced them. New pains can sprout in your back , shoulders, arms, wrists — and yes, even your thumb. Who knew this big digit could hurt so much?

This particular wrist and thumb condition often goes by "mother’s thumb," and it tends to develop thanks to all the tot toting — and stroller pushing and diaper-bag lugging — you do. Read on for more about mommy’s thumb, including the symptoms, treatment and when to see the doctor.

What is mother’s thumb?

Mother’s thumb has several other names, such as mommy thumb, baby wrist, cradle thumb and de Quervain’s tenosynovitis or de Quervain’s tendonitis. But the pain is the same, no matter the name — and it affects the tendons on the thumb side of your wrist.

Many new moms note discomfort on the inner part of their wrists, which worsens when picking up a baby under her arms. Frequent, repetitive motions like these can cause swelling and irritation of the tendons and the thin layer of tissue around them, leading to a case of mother's thumb.

Mother's thumb differs from carpal tunnel syndrome , which is pressure on the nerve that runs from the forearm into your palm. You may have felt carpal tunnel symptoms during pregnancy, which include uncomfortable tingling, pain, burning and numbness in the wrists, hands and fingers. If you have a case of de Quervain’s, it’ll hurt to turn and flex the wrist, make a fist or hold objects.

What are symptoms of mother’s thumb?

Some common symptoms you may experience with a case of mother’s thumb include:

Wrist pain over the entire thumb side of the hand, which may be gradual or acute

Swelling on the thumb side, sometimes accompanied by a fluid-filled cyst

A funny "snapping" or "popping" feeling when moving the thumb

Numbness in the thumb and index finger

Difficulty pinching or grasping things with the thumb

What causes mother’s thumb?

Chronic overuse is the main cause of mother’s thumb, whether you’re straining to hold your breast in a certain position while nursing, lifting your baby repeatedly in and out of the crib (and stroller and car seat) or engaging in another activity that uses the thumb muscles over and over.

You might also experience de Quervain’s tendonitis if you’ve injured your wrist or the tendon near it, as scar tissue can interfere with movement. And if you have a joint condition, such as rheumatoid arthritis, you're possibly at a greater risk for mother’s thumb.

Good ol’ hormonal changes and swelling during pregnancy can also lead to a case of mommy’s thumb. In fact, one study reported that higher levels of estrogen might worsen a case of de Quervain’s.

And while "mother" is part of this injury’s colloquial name, dads, grandparents and other caregivers can also have mommy thumb since they too lift that cute chubby baby many times a day.

How do you treat mother’s thumb?

There are several ways to handle this condition and ease the strain and pain:

Rest. As you would with a sore knee or aching back, give the affected hand a rest for a few days.

Adjustments. Try a different breastfeeding position , and use arm rests and pillows during your sessions for better support. You might also switch arms regularly when carrying the baby, or wear a sling or baby carrier .

Splint. A thumb and wrist brace can immobilize the area and ease the pressure you’re feeling.

Heat and ice. Soothe soreness with a heating pad, or ice the area for 20 minutes each hour.

Medication. OTC pain relievers such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), naproxen (Aleve) and acetaminophen (Tylenol) can also help, but check with your doctor as to the dose and frequency.

Therapy. Once the pain has subsided, simple exercises can help strengthen your flexibility and grip. One to try: Hold and gently squeeze a tennis ball for a few seconds several times a day.

Injections. Your doctor may also suggest a corticosteroid injection at the site of the pain (the tendon sheath) to reduce swelling and discomfort. And if you start early, one shot may be enough.

Surgery. For more severe cases, outpatient surgery could be the best option. This simple procedure involves opening the sheath around the tendon to relieve the pressure.

How long does mommy’s thumb take to heal?

Time is the ultimate healer when it comes to a case of mommy’s thumb, along with a focus on reducing inflammation and working to preserve movement in the thumb and wrist. With early and consistent treatment, symptoms should get better within four to six weeks.

When to see a doctor

If your mother’s thumb pain doesn’t resolve itself with rest or the pain is worsening, check in with your doctor. You should also make a call if your wrist becomes stiffer, you have worsening numbness or tingling in the wrist or fingers, or if you notice your digits or wrist turning pale, blue or white.

Try not to sweat a case of mother’s thumb! While it no doubt hurts, there’s definitely a silver lining: It means you’re working hard to care for your baby. Very often, mommy’s thumb heals with enough rest and a few simple interventions — and soon you’ll be good as new.