Moves to Help Flip a Sunny-Side Up Baby Before Delivery Day

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

sunny-side up baby

If your baby is positioned to enter the world face up, don't worry. Learn what the sunny-side up position means, how it can affect delivery, and how to get your baby into the ideal position for labor.

A baby in the "sunny-side up" position is head down but facing your belly, unlike most babies, who are head down with the backs of their heads leading the way during delivery. This position is also called occiput posterior (OP). Some sunny-side up babies come into the world vaginally, while others — if labor becomes more challenging — are delivered by C-section. If your baby is sunny-side up, it's possible to change position before labor, though.

Here's what to know about face-up babies, including how their position may affect labor and delivery, as well as the other positions your little one may take before entering the world.

Key Takeaways

Sunny-side up means baby is head down but facing your belly. This occiput posterior (OP) position is less common than the typical face-down (occiput anterior) position, though it's normal and often temporary, as babies can change position frequently.

Most babies turn on their own, but a small percentage stay face-up. While many babies change position at the last minute (and even during labor), about 5% to 8% remain sunny-side-up at delivery.

It can make labor longer or more intense, but healthy outcomes are still the norm. Sunny-side-up positioning is linked to longer labor, back labor, and a higher chance of interventions like assisted delivery or C-section. But sunny-side-up babies are routinely safely born vaginally or via C-section.

What does it mean if your baby is sunny-side-up?

A sunny-side up baby is positioned head-first in your pelvis, but her face is looking towards your belly instead of your spine — meaning you and your baby are spine to spine. This is known as the occiput posterior (OP) position, because your baby's head (occipital bone) rests against your pelvis.

In addition to occiput posterior, your baby may be in several other positions as labor nears:

Occiput anterior (OA): The most common position. Your baby is head down with the chin tucked and the back of the head facing the front of your body.

Frank breech: About 3% of babies are breech (bottom down). Frank breech is the most common, which means both hips are flexed, the legs are straight, and the feet are near the head.

Complete breech: Your baby is bottom down with legs folded under the body.

Footling breech: One or both feet are positioned to come out first.

Transverse lie: Your baby is lying sideways across the uterus at a 90-degree angle to the spine.

Keep track of your pregnancy journey, get more expert advice, and connect with other pregnant moms in our free What to Expect app .

What causes a baby to be in sunny-side up?

There's often no clear reason a baby is in the OP position, but certain factors may increase the likelihood:

Preterm labor , when the baby may not have had time to rotate

Placental issues, such as placenta previa or placental abruption

Carrying twins or multiples , which limits space

Pelvic shape (such as a narrower, more angular pelvis)

Uterine fibroids

First pregnancy

Macrosomia (a baby weighing more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces)

Excessive gestational weight gain

Premature rupture of membranes (PROM)

A previous OP delivery

About a one-third of babies are sunny-side up at the start of labor, but most turn on their own before birth. Only about 5% to 8% of infants remain in the face-up position at delivery.

"Both of my kids were sunny-side up," says What to Expect Community mom AshleeP10. "Both eventually turned on their own in labor. But not until labor!"

How might a sunny-side up baby impact labor and delivery?

Rest assured that you can have a safe delivery with a baby in the occiput posterior position. That said, this position can sometimes make labor more challenging.

When a baby is in OP position, the largest diameter of their head doesn't line up with the largest diameter of your pelvis — like it would be if baby was in the anterior position. This can increase the likelihood of:

Longer labor, especially during the pushing stage

Back labor (though back labor isn't always associated with OP)

Labor augmentation

Assisted delivery ( forceps or vacuum extraction )

C-section

Episiotomy and perineal tears

Still, many babies rotate during labor — and even if they don't, vaginal delivery is still possible. Here's what some What to Expect Community moms have to say about the experience:

"Both my girls were sunny-side up," says Zuzeuelle. "I had back labor with both, but it wasn't as bad as I thought it would be. I was also born sunny-side up, so it's probably just payback!"

"My first was born sunny-side up without any interventions. Forty minutes of pushing and he was out," says mes95.

"Mine was sunny-side up," says Jesss0000000. "I got an epidural, but after two hours of pushing, the baby's head would come down then retract back up. I ended up needing a C-section."

Can you turn a sunny-side up baby?

Maybe. Many moms and childbirth practitioners advocate doing specific exercises and movements to encourage an OP baby to turn. And if your baby is still sunny-side up when it's time to deliver, your practitioner may be able to turn your baby manually.

There's no scientific evidence that specific movements will nudge a baby into a better position before delivery, but some moms report success with certain postures or exercises. Your practitioner may suggest you try some of these before or during labor:

Pelvic rocks

Hands-and-knees positions

Knee-to-chest position

Some parents also explore programs like Spinning Babies, which prepares moms for birth with exercises and practices.

To help a baby shift into position, Spinning Babies uses techniques such as forward-leaning inversions, side-lying releases, and rebozo “sifting” (basically jiggling with a long scarf) to create more space for your baby to move. There's some evidence that these postures and maneuvers might be helpful.

These interventions, as well as exercises you might try on your own, are generally safe for most pregnancies. Just check with your practitioner before trying them.

If your baby is still in OP position during the final stages of labor, your practitioner may attempt a manual rotation. To do this, your practitioner will reach into your vagina and use their hand to gently try to rotate your baby's head. Sometimes a practitioner will use ultrasound to help them guide the manual rotation. It takes some skill, and manual rotation doesn't always work, but when it does it can greatly increase the chances of a successful vaginal birth.

Try not to worry too much about your baby's position. Again, it's common for babies to shift positions late in pregnancy, even during labor. And while some sunny-side-up babies are born vaginally and others by C-section, both lead to safe deliveries.

Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica , Associations Between Fetal Position at Delivery and Duration of Active Phase of Labor: A Historical Cohort Study , July 2024. Acta Obstetrica et Gynecologica Scandinavica, Babies in Occiput Posterior Position are Significantly More Likely to Require an Emergency Cesarean Birth Compared With Babies in Occiput Transverse Position in the Second Stage of Labor: A Prospective Observational Study , October 2019. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, First and Second Stage Labor Management, Clinical Practice Guideline Number 8, January 2024. Cleveland Clinic, Fetal Positions , March 2024. Cochrane Library, Maternal Postures for Fetal Malposition in Late Pregnancy for Improving the Health of Mothers and Their Infants , February 2024. Cochrane Library, Prophylactic Manual Rotation of the Fetal Head (Manual Rotation Alone) to Reduce Operative Delivery and Complications for Mother and Babies , July 2025. European Journal of Midwifery, Rebozo and Advanced Maternal Postures: A Promising Set of Intrapartum Interventions to Reduce Persistent Occiput Posterior Position of the Fetal Head , October 2024. European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Risk Factors for Severe Perineal Trauma During Childbirth: An Updated Meta-Analysis , April 2020. Gynecologie, Obstetrique, Fertilitie & Senologie. Pathophysiology, Diagnosis and Management of Occiput Posterior Presentation During Labor , February 2019. Journal of Clinical Ultrasound, Sonographic evaluation of the Fetal Spine Position and Success Rate of Manual Rotation of the Fetus in Occiput Posterior Position: A Randomized Controlled Trial, April 2017. Journal of Family and Reproductive Health, The Impact of Maternal Position in Labor on Occiput-Posterior Position of Fetus and Pregnancy Outcomes in Pregnant Women Without Epidural Analgesia, June 2023. Mayo Clinic, Fetal Presentation Before Birth , April 2023. Merck Manual, Fetal Presentation, Position, and Lie (Including Breech Presentation), March 2024. PLOS One, Neonatal and Maternal Outcomes of Successful Manual Rotation to Correct Malposition of the Fetal Head; A Retrospective and Prospective Observational Study , May 2017. Springer Nature Link , Persistent Occiput Posterior Position — OUTcomes Following Manual Rotation (POP — OUT): Study Protocol for a Randomised Controlled Trial , March 2015. Trials, The Impact of Manual Rotation of the Occiput Posterior Position on Spontaneous Vaginal Delivery Rate: Study Protocol for a Randomized Clinical Trial (RMOS ), February 2018. Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology, Prospective Multicenter Study of Ultrasound-Based Measurements of Fetal Head Station and Position Throughout Labor , February 2015. WhatToExpect.com, Breech Baby: What It Means, Why It Happens, and Your Options Before Delivery, February 2026. What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Preterm Labor , July 2024.

Updates history

April 30, 2026

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Editors: Karen Miles/Rebekah Wahlberg

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Breech Baby: What It Means, Why It Happens, and Your Options Before Delivery Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Labor Positions That May Make Childbirth Easier Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Butt, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

What Are the Possible Fetal Positions When You're Pregnant With Twins? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Here’s How to Shift Your Side-Sleeping Baby to His Back and Deliver Him Safely to Dreamland Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Vaginal Birth or C-Section? What to Know When You’re Expecting Twins Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

When the Uterus Turns Inside Out: A Guide to Uterine Inversion, a Rare Delivery Complication Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

How to Find a Comfy Sleep Position During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Can Your Placenta Give You a Sneak Peek into Your Baby's Gender? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Best Pregnancy Sex Positions Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How Can I Get My Baby to Move in Utero? Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

Could You Have a Tilted Uterus? How to Know and What It Means If You Do Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Did You Give Birth to a Conehead Baby? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Flat Head Syndrome (Plagiocephaly) in Babies Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Is It Safe for Babies to Sleep on Their Stomachs? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Is the Newborn Scrunch? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window