Mumps During Pregnancy

mumps

Widespread immunization has made this once-common childhood illness increasingly rare.

Chances are, you — like most adults in the United States — are already immune to mumps, a type of viral illness. That's because children, since the 1980s, have received a two-dose MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) vaccination, which helps protect against the illness.

Still, even though the number of mumps cases have plummeted by more than 99 percent since the late 1980s, it's possible to contract the illness, especially if there's an outbreak in your town. Here's what you should know about mumps, including what to do if you catch the virus during pregnancy.

What is mumps?

Mumps is a contagious illness that's caused by paramyxovirus and spread via airborne droplets of infected saliva.

How common is mumps?

Mumps is extremely rare since most people are vaccinated against it as part of the MMR vaccine . However, people who haven't gotten the vaccine can transmit the virus to others, as can travelers, who can bring it back from other countries.

Usually only a few hundred people in the U.S. get mumps each year, but it is possible for an outbreak to occur, even among people who have had the MMR vaccine. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the two-dose vaccine is 88 percent effective at preventing mumps. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionMeasles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR) Vaccination: What Everyone Should KnowSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionMeasles, Mumps, and Rubella (MMR) Vaccination: What Everyone Should KnowSee All Sources

In 2019, for example, more than 3,700 people contracted the mumps in the U.S. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionMumps Cases and OutbreaksSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionMumps Cases and OutbreaksSee All Sources

What are the symptoms of mumps?

Not everyone who gets mumps will show symptoms — and even among people who do, the signs tend to be vague and nonspecific. The most common symptoms include:

Swelling of the cheeks and jaw, which is caused by inflammation in the salivary glands

Fever

Headache

Muscle aches

Fatigue

Loss of appetite

Who is most at risk for mumps?

Most women of childbearing age either have had the disease or have been immunized against it as a child.

However, since mumps is contagious (though not as contagious as chickenpox or measles ), a nonimmune person is at risk of getting the illness if she comes into contact with someone who is infected.

What are the risks of mumps during pregnancy?

Luckily, if you get mumps during your pregnancy, it's likely to be a relatively mild case.

Pregnant women aren't any more likely to have a severe case of mumps than women who aren't pregnant. Plus, if you've gotten your MMR vaccine, you're less likely to have severe symptoms or complications.

How is mumps diagnosed in pregnancy?

If your doctor suspects you might have mumps, he or she will most likely check for swollen salivary glands, which is one of the hallmark symptoms of the illness. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionMumpsSee All Sources [3] The doctor may also order a blood test to confirm that you have the virus.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionMumpsSee All Sources

What are potential complications of mumps during pregnancy?

Fortunately, mumps infection during pregnancy has not been associated with an increased risk of premature delivery or birth defects. While some studies have shown that having mumps during the first trimester may increase the risk of miscarriage, other research hasn't indicated that to be the case.

It is possible for mumps to cause inflammation in the ovaries, but this hasn't been shown to lead to infertility.

How is mumps treated during pregnancy?

There's no treatment for mumps, but you can manage your symptoms with over-the-counter pain medication such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) — just check with your doctor first before taking any medication to make sure it's safe during pregnancy.

Self-quarantine for five days after your salivary glands begin to swell (i.e. the time when you're considered most infectious), to avoid giving the virus to other people. You should get plenty of rest, and drink lots of fluids. Soups are particularly good, since it may hurt to chew solid foods.

The best way to treat mumps is to prevent it in the first place — specifically, with a vaccine. However, if you're pregnant, you shouldn't get the MMR vaccine until after you give birth.

What should you do if you are diagnosed with mumps during pregnancy?

Call your doctor if you think you have mumps. Luckily, mumps tends to be mild, even in pregnant women, so chances are, you'll be feeling better in a couple of weeks.