Musical Play for Babies and Toddlers

musical play

What kind of music is good for babies, how do you introduce it and what effect, if any, does it have on their cognitive development?

Squirming, swaying or dancing to songs they like, smiling when a favorite ditty is playing in the background, and of course, banging on toys (or pots and pans) to make their own jams. It’s no secret that babies and toddlers love music — and playing tunes as well as dancing and listening to them are an important part of early child development.

What are the benefits of musical play for babies and toddlers?

Besides sheer glee at the sounds he's producing, there are several benefits to letting your child drum (rattle, shake, clap, bang…) to his own beat. Making music helps the body and mind work together, stimulates thinking and expressive skills, and enhances creativity; it also encourages socialization and builds self-esteem when your baby hears what he can do (and the applause that follows!).

Music-making may also improve neuroplasticity (the brain’s ability to form new pathways as a result of “experiences,” or learning, through influences such as sound, sensation, movement and attention). Music may also enhance synaptic connections between brain cells, possibly improving language as well as cognitive and social development.

Getting musical boosts a child’s physical development, too. Dancing to the rhythm is a form of active play that strengthens your sweetie’s growing arm, leg and trunk muscles. Instruments and finger-plays promote fine motor development , prepping your cutie’s fingers and hands for activities like writing and drawing. Singing a favorite song even gives your child’s mouth and lip muscles a workout!

And of course, just like music can affect your mental state, it can have the same kind of impact on your little listener. Songs have the power to lift a baby or toddler’s spirits or calm and soothe them — which can set the stage for self-regulation. Music that focuses on feelings, in particular, can help toddlers make sense of their own emotions, too.

When is the best time to start encouraging musical play?

You can — and should! — start introducing music to your baby as soon as you bring him home. While newborns aren’t ready to bang on pots and pans or dance like a funky chicken quite yet, even the youngest infants love being sung to or gently rocked to the beat while held. And these early song sessions can be a sweet bonding experience for you, too.

Musical play activities for babies and toddlers

Ready to start boppin’ and groovin’? Here are some fun, easy ways to bring out your baby or toddler’s inner maestro.

How to encourage musical play: 0-12 months

Music is music to your baby’s ears, so start singing, listening and dancing together as soon as you bring your little bundle home. He’ll quickly get more involved in the jam sessions as he grows bigger and stronger. And before long, he’ll have moved on to making music on his own!

Sing and sway. Sing or play your favorite songs while holding your baby and sway to the beat, moving slow for slow songs and picking up the pace for faster ones. Don’t be afraid to cue up the same songs over and over — babies love repetition!

Hang a musical mobile. Mobiles that play music stimulate your baby’s vision and hearing at the same time. Hang the mobile about 12 inches (and far away enough that the child cannot reach or grab it and become entangled) from your baby’s face so he can clearly see it. Remove it by month 5, or once he shows signs of being able to grab it or starts to push up.

Offer musical toys. Simple instruments like egg shakes, maracas and chimes allow babies to learn about cause and effect. Musical toys that provide visual stimulation and offer fine motor skill practice, like a brightly colored toy that plays a sound when squeezed or push, offer three types of fun.

Instrument call-and-response. You shake a rattle and show him how to shake one in return. Then you tap a drum two or three times and encourage him to answer. (It may take a while for your child to get the idea, but once he does, you'll be the one responding to his "music.")

DIY drum set. For older babies, use an empty ice-cream carton (rinsed and dried) as a makeshift drum, or different-sized plastic containers (so he can hear different sounds). The drumstick: a wooden spoon, of course!

How to encourage musical play: 12-24 months

Dance parties, sing-alongs and some serious composition! Now that your toddler is entering into the world of walking and talking, he’s ready to take musical play to a whole new level.

Bring on the instruments. Your young toddler will delight in making his own melodies and beats. Opt for music-makers like drums, tambourines, maracas, horns, xylophones and simple keyboards over music boxes or music toys that only require the push of a button. Of course, a pot and a wooden spoon work, too!

Sing interactive songs. Try tunes with hand movements (“Open, Shut Them”) as well as ones that encourage your toddler to move his body (“Hokey Pokey”) to allow him to take charge of the musical experience.

Freeze dance. Play music and encourage your toddler to dance, then have him freeze when you stop the music. It’s fun and silly — and it helps your little one learn about self-regulation.

Host a musical parade. Gather up some friends and give each child an instrument; have them walk and play parade-style through the playground or park.

Have dedicated activity songs. Sing or play a specific song when it’s time to do things like clean up toys, brush teeth or get ready for bed. Your toddler will quickly come to associate the music with the activity — and maybe be a little more eager to participate!

How to encourage musical play: 24-36 months

As your older toddler’s language and communication skills improve, you can start introducing more complex ideas into musical play.

Play what you feel. Provide your toddler with instruments and encourage him to make music that matches different feelings. Ask him to play a happy or excited tune, followed by a sad one, for instance.

Dance match. Play songs with different tempos and have your toddler try to match his moves to the beat. Join in the fun!

Complete the lyrics. Sing a song “with” your toddler but stop halfway through a line and encourage him to finish it.

Name that tune. Whistle or hum a familiar song instead of singing it and encourage your toddler to guess what it is.

Scarf dance. Put a small scarf or tissue on top of your child’s head, crank up the tunes and start dancing. Tell your toddler he can do any dance moves he can dream up — as long as he keeps the scarf or tissue on his head!

What kind of music is good for babies and toddlers?

There’s no need to stick to a certain genre. Experts contend that just as babies don’t discriminate between languages until around 6 months of age, they also aren’t picky about music.

Newer research has questioned the “Mozart Effect," the theory that babies in the womb who listen to classical music end up smarter . But while this may not be the case (perhaps even disrupting sleep), listening to classical music with your newborn may have some benefits, like helping cultivate an appreciation for it later in life and setting it up as a good soothing mechanism.

No matter what you play, just keep the volume in check. Children and babies should not be exposed to loud music for long periods of time, as little ears are ultra sensitive because their ear canals are smaller than an adult’s, which increases pressure and can make them more susceptible to hearing damage very early on. An easy rule of thumb is that if you can’t talk over the music, then the sound is definitely too loud for your baby.

Should you take your baby to music classes?

The short answer is yes! Music classes are a great way for your little one to participate in making music and in turn benefit his cognitive development — and they can start as early as 6 months.

During the first years of life, the brain is forming the network pathways that later impact language. Music classes help babies and toddlers learn to synchronize a beat, which has been shown to improve executive function — a set of mental skills associated with attention, focus, memory and organization.

When it comes to choosing music classes, here are some tips to consider:

Choose smaller classes. The smaller the class, the less chaotic and more focused it is on making music. In a big class, you’re more likely to be chasing your little one around than watching him participate.

Keep it short. Think 45 minutes or an hour tops in terms of timing or you’ll be more likely to hear your tot wailing than you will any musical beats.

Get your groove on. Classes should incorporate lots of movement because babies and toddlers just can’t sit still . What’s more, you should have an easy out just in case your little angel starts to melt down.

Keep it fun. The focus should always be on having fun rather than playing the perfect concerto.

No matter how you choose to incorporate music into your child's life, be sure that making music is part of his playtime and listening to it is part of his regular ritual — not because you want to make your child the smartest in the class but because it's soothing, fun and a great way to bond. The fact that it also may give his cognitive development a little boost is an added bonus.