My Child Is Afraid of Swimming: What Parents Need to Know

child being held by mom in swimming pool, what to do if your child is afraid of swimming

No matter how much your sweetie loves to splash in the bath, she may not be all that keen on the swimming pool, ocean or lake. Here's how to help a child who's afraid of water get into the "swim" of things.

Where there’s summer, there’s bound to be water, whether it's the swimming pool, ocean or lake. And while time spent in the water will allow your little one to pick up some safety skills and get more comfortable, even the most assured toddlers fear taking the plunge in the beginning — regardless of whether they love splashing around in the bathtub at home.

The sheer prevalence of water in children's lives starting from when they're babies is why the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) now supports swimming lessons for all kids over the age of 1 who show signs of physical and emotional readiness. These updates came as a result of a few studies that suggest swimming lessons may reduce a child’s risk of drowning .

Why is my toddler afraid of swimming?

Just like any other childhood fear, being afraid of the water is perfectly normal. To your little one, the water is a scary unknown — a strange place that she may feel trapped in, with no way out. After all, she's a small, slippery fish in a big pond. But rest assured, there are plenty of solutions for helping her adjust and feel comfortable wading into deeper waters.

How can I help my child get over the fear of swimming?

Perhaps the most important thing to keep in mind is to be patient. While her fear of the water is normal, you may never know exactly what triggered it — whether it was the sound of the drain in the bathtub or the time she saw Fido frantically doggy paddling his way out of the pool.

Here are a few things to keep in mind and some tips to follow when helping your child overcome the fear of swimming.

Don’t push it. Let your child know that it’s okay to be scared. If she's taking swimming lessons and sees other kids jumping in without hesitation, she may feel embarrassed, which will only compound her not-so-positive perspective on the pool. Make sure the swim instructor is on board with that approach and will be okay with letting her sit on the sidelines until she’s ready to get her feet wet.

Give your child the right equipment. Water wings, floaties and life jackets can help a hesitant swimmer get comfortable in the pool . Wearing them just a few times might be enough to inspire the confidence she needs to become less afraid of the water. But just remember that those devices sometimes provide a false sense of security to parents and are in no way a good substitute for actually being able to swim — so keep your little one at arm's length whether she's wearing a flotation aid or not.

Let your toddler test the waters. If your tot’s typical bath time tends to be a quick lather-and-rinse affair, set aside time for a longer soak. Focus on helping her get comfy with some basic swim skills that she can practice in the tub, such as putting her face in the water and even flipping onto her tummy and kicking. Bait your little fish with plenty of encouragement: “Wow, you’re so good at getting your face wet that I just know you’re going to be a great swimmer by the end of the summer.”

Get your own feet wet. If it’s practical (you have time and it fits with your budget), consider swim lessons at your local Y or pool. Your little one is likely to overcome her water wariness more quickly if you’re in the pool with her. Even if she’s still afraid of swimming solo, splashing in the pool with you will give her the basics she’ll need to be safer in the water no matter where she is.

When should I enroll my child in swimming lessons?

The AAP now gives parents the green light to put their children in swimming classes for babies as early as age 1, but cautions that swim lessons cannot drown-proof any child; constant supervision and barriers are still essential. Also talk to your pediatrician about swim lessons, as he or she can give you an idea of whether or not your little one is developmentally ready, help determine how often you’re going to be in or near the water, and make a recommendation for a suitable program near you.

Keep in mind that the AAP does not recommend swimming lessons or classes for babies under the age of 1. There's no proof that they help reduce drowning risk, and babies that young can't yet raise their heads out of the water well enough to breathe. Water play classes, however, are often offered to help younger babies get used to the water and can be a fun way for you to bond.

Just remember that your child's fear of swimming will pass if you take the right steps and help her get more comfortable in the water without forcing it. Before you know it, your tot will be splashing around like a natural. So be patient and have fun!