I Never Thought I'd Be a Single Parent — Now I Can't Imagine Doing It Any Other Way

My husband left me after baby was born — but it made me a stronger, better parent

I didn't know my husband would leave me after our son was born, but it made me stronger.

Like many women, I went into super mom-to-be mode as soon as I learned that I was pregnant. My husband and I had experienced a miscarriage in the early weeks of our first-ever pregnancy a year before, and I’d endured a couple of operations that were related to that heartbreaking setback. But we tried again, and it was with a mixture of hope, trepidation and excitement that I forged ahead as we prepared for our baby.

With each passing week and every check-up and sonogram, I breathed a little easier, knowing that our baby was growing bigger and stronger. I devoured information about how to have a healthy pregnancy and a healthy baby, scouring websites and bookstore shelves in search of information on the latest research, advice and tips. I hit health foods stores and filled my cart with organic and nutritious foods to make sure my growing baby would get the very best nourishment to help him grow healthy and strong. I went into nesting mode — just like the experts said I would! — and decorated my son’s room with the highest safety-rated furniture and necessities, and made sure I would have everything ready for his arrival.

I didn’t care about the stretch marks that were etching themselves over my belly, legs and breasts. I shrugged off the swelling and water retention that ballooned my hands and feet to the point that rings were no longer possible and I had to shop for shoes at least a size larger than normal. When I was ordered by my doctor to stay in bed for the last month of pregnancy, I did as I was told, and relished the idea of having more time to read more about how to take care of my baby and be the best parent I could be for him. I was blissfully happy, and said to my husband, “I’d like to have several more babies, and line them up in a row; I hope they’re as cute as you are.”

When my baby boy finally arrived, it was so much more, well, everything. So much more joy than I’d imagined. So much more love than I’d anticipated, although I’d already fallen in love with him from the sonogram profiles that I’d been gazing at for months. And so much more exhaustion and work than I’d ever envisioned — and I’d been a parenting writer who’d written about parenting and pregnancy and babies for years! I realized that being a mom, especially a mom of an infant, was the kind of experience you have to actually live through in order to really know what it’s like, no matter how much you think you may know about it intellectually.

And although I wasn’t aware of it at the time, I was about to embark upon another journey that you can only really know if you experience it first-hand: single motherhood.

Unbeknownst to me, things were already in motion that culminated in my husband literally walking out on us one day when my son was just starting to walk, at around 11 months old. I learned about it on the phone, when I called him as he was commuting to work to ask why he’d stormed out that morning, why he’d seemed so distant since the later months of my pregnancy, why it seemed to be getting worse, why he seemed so angry and contemptuous of anything I said or did. He said he never wanted to come back to our apartment again, that he could no longer stand the sound of my voice and that I was not good enough for him. He said he would never change his mind. He said some other things that were seared into my soul but that I’ve since put away and made peace with.

I remember having to sit down right there on the floor, and vaguely feeling like I was leaving my body. I can still recall staring at my baby in his high chair as he waited for more spoonfuls of the veggies and fruit I’d cooked and pureed for him and thinking, “This cannot be happening.”

I begged my husband to come back home, now if he could, or later that night, so that we could talk. I asked him what was happening, why he was so unhappy with me. I kept repeating, “But we’ve never even had a fight.”

We’d been together for 12 years, and we’d been inseparable. He was my first boyfriend, and I loved our story — that he’d had a crush on me and chased me even though I hadn’t noticed him at work, that he’d finally won me over, that I was so glad that I found my soul mate and my love without ever having to look at or date any frogs. Every weekend was something fun, every place we went was home.

This was a man who ordered the same dish from the same restaurant, who wore the same brand of socks and underwear that he’d worn in college, who’d said that he’d never look at another woman because he doesn’t like things to be different. In short, I had definitely never even imagined that I’d have to learn to be divorced, much less a single mother.

The years of being a parent alone have been tough (an understatement if ever there was one), and it’s changed me in an indelible way, making me stronger and more confident than I ever could have imagined.

While I wasn’t exactly a shrinking violet or someone who couldn’t handle a problem confidently by myself, I’d gotten used to having someone else there to share both the good and the bad before I became someone without a partner. I no longer had someone to laugh with while watching late night talk shows or hold my hand when my mom went through a health crisis. There was no one to share the millions of adorable things my baby did constantly throughout the day. While my parents and brother and friends were amazing and supportive, at the end of the day, there was no one to hold me during one of the saddest and scariest times of my life because my grief and my fear stemmed from the fact that I no longer had my partner to hold me.

Being a new parent is a frequently-isolating experience. Even before my husband left our home, sitting on the sofa at 4 a.m. pumping my painfully engorged breasts or nursing, changing and rocking my intoxicatingly beautiful-smelling and sweet little baby in the wee hours made me feel like I was on some solo journey, set apart from most of the slumbering people in my part of the world. After my husband was gone, I no longer felt just set apart — I felt unbearably lonely.

I became a superstar at reaching out. I signed us up for baby-and-mommy music classes. We made friends in the playground. I set up playdates, which, eventually, became just as much for my son as they were for me to connect with other moms and babysitters in my neighborhood.

Slowly, the weeks after my husband left turned into months and years, and then impossibly, somehow became more than a decade. And miraculously, I stopped counting how long it was since that day when my world changed because my focus was on my wonderful (albeit exhausting) present and future with my beautiful boy.

Having to shoulder one of life’s biggest challenges — that of parenting a baby and young child — alone, and doing it well, taught me that I am tough, resilient and hard to take down. And learning to let go and forgive for the sake of everyone, especially my child, is also something I can look back on with pride. And watching my son do the same — focus on the good things in life and appreciate the good things in yourself and the people in your life over the bad — is one of the most important things I am grateful to have been able to help make happen.

Now, when I look at my towering teen, who, like his friends are somehow well-adjusted, polite, happy and likeable young people, it seems impossible that there was so much anguish around us when he was a baby. But that’s the thing — there was overwhelming emotional pain, but I focused on what I knew even then was precious and fleeting, which was time with my beautiful baby. If I had to cry, I did it when he was napping in his stroller on our walks. If I felt stressed, I looked into his trusting face and knew that I had to put it aside for playtime. And in trying to be the best parent I could, my son actually helped me heal by giving me something immeasurably important and wonderful to give my attention to.

It’s the ultimate cliché, the saying that time heals all wounds. That’s partly right — I have indeed healed. I’m not the same as I was before, but in many ways, I’m better and stronger.

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

Your Next Read

I Didn’t Vaccinate Any of My 6 Children — Then I Changed My Mind Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Motherhood Almost Broke My Marriage — Here's What Actually Helped Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

When My Babies Arrived, the Blissful Connection Didn't. Here's the Truth No One Talks About Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

I Was Laid Off on Maternity Leave — Twice By

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

From One Child to Two: 23 Secrets of Second-Time Parents Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Hope, Heartbreak … Then Joy: The Emotional Moments IVF Moms Will Never Forget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

My Husband and I Have 2 Kids and Live on 1 Income — Here's How We Make It Work Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

As a New Mom, My Son's Need for Contact Naps Almost Broke Me By Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

On the Outside, I Looked Like a Happy New Mom. But I Was Breaking on the Inside — And My Camera Caught the Truth By Mariah Maddox

I Used GoFundMe to Pay for My Maternity Leave

I Was Worried About Having Another Kid — But I Didn't Need to Be By Nicole Fabian-Weber, Contributing Writer

Pregnant and Single? Here’s How to Get the Support You Need Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window