'My Wife Was a Casualty of the Black Maternal Health Crisis'

Clayton Anderson is speaking out about his wife, who passed away following their second stillbirth.

*Content warning: This article contains stories of pregnancy loss and maternal death.

Clayton Anderson remembers the exact moment when he and his wife Krystal, a former Kansas City Chiefs cheerleader, found out they were pregnant the second time around. It was especially emotional because they had experienced a stillbirth just one year earlier, in 2022.

"We started to try again at the end of September 2023," he says. Their son, James, was stillborn on November 27, 2022. And on November 26, 2023, Krystal got a positive pregnancy test. "We both knew without even saying it, that this was our little sign from James," Clayton says.

At first, doctors said mom and baby were both healthy

The couple was ecstatic to be pregnant again, but they quickly became anxious. "We tried to get in to see our OB/GYN as soon as possible, but they said the earliest they could see us was the first week of January, which was when Krystal was 10 weeks along" says Clayton. Both Clayton and Krystal felt like that seemed too late since Krystal had experienced sepsis and a stillbirth with her first pregnancy.

The couple then called their maternal-fetal medicine specialist (MFM), or high-risk pregnancy doctor, but they said the earliest their office would see them was week 14, says Clayton. Clayton and Krystal didn't like that answer either, but they took the first available appointment and hoped everything would be okay.

Once they finally did see Krystal's OB/GYN at 8 weeks (their doctors actually moved up her appointment because the couple continued to advocate for themselves), she said everything looked good with the baby and that Krystal was healthy, Clayton says. The OB/GYN recommended that Krystal come in every four weeks, but they didn't feel like every four weeks was nearly enough, given what Krystal had been through. "Krystal was 40, Black, and had a previous stillbirth — it didn't seem like we should be having that standard, out of the box treatment plan at that point," says Clayton.

Once the couple was able to meet with their maternal-fetal medicine specialist at 14 weeks, they asked to be seen more frequently. “They said they would meet with us again at weeks 16, 18, 20 and 23 — and then not again until 30 weeks." Clayton and Krystal were okay with that at first since having lots of appointments up front would help ease their fears. "That sounded like a good plan, because frankly, the only days we were sleeping well during this pregnancy were the ones where we'd been seen by a medical professional."

Things started to take at turn at 16 weeks

When Krystal went in for her 16-week appointment with her MFM, they told her that her cervix was shortening. They told her she was likely going to have a preterm birth that may not be viable.

The doctors told the couple that their best bet was for the medical team to put in a cervical cerclage , which is a stitch that helps keep the cervix closed and the baby's placenta protected until birth. Krystal had the surgery that day and everything went well. "They canceled our 18-week appointment after that, which seemed odd to us at the time," says Clayton.

The couple went in for their 20-week anatomy scan a few weeks later and "baby girl was just perfect," remembers Clayton. But, unfortunately, the cerclage that was in place had failed and it was too late to perform a rescue collage, or second stitch, says Clayton.

Clayton and Krystal remember leaving their doctor that day wondering if doctors could have done more if they’d come in for that 18-week appointment instead of having it canceled. They would never know.

Their MFM told the couple they could go home and the goal was to get them to week 22, which was the minimum gestational age when their hospital would deliver their baby. “They basically sent us on our way with a 14-day countdown and a prayer."

Unfortunately, Krystal started to have complications just four days later

On Saturday, March 16, Krystal's back hurt a lot and she was having small contractions , says Clayton. They called their OB/GYN and she told them to come into labor and delivery. When they first got to the hospital, everything with both Krystal and the baby looked good — their daughter had a strong heartbeat, and they hooked Krystal up to IVs of fluids. But things started to deteriorate a few hours later.

After a nurse had trouble finding the baby’s heartbeat, the radiology team came in and confirmed the horrible news. "We lost our daughter, Charlotte," says Clayton.

The couple was devastated. The doctor explained that since Krystal still had the cerclage in, they'd have to remove it before they could have her try to give birth naturally. "She told us she would give us a couple of hours to grieve first." Krystal was given antibiotics in preparation for labor, but shortly after midnight that night, she spiked a fever.

"The medical team started getting more apprehensive and nervous because Krystal's vitals were all over the place, and Krystal was shivering and complaining about blurred vision," says Clayton. Krystal had already been through sepsis once already, so at the time, it didn't cross their minds that it could be happening again.

Clayton says their medical team made the decision to go ahead and surgically remove Charlotte around 6 a.m., since Krystal was getting worse. "She was scared, and I was telling her, 'it's gonna be alright and I'll be right here the whole time. You got this. I love you."

When the doctors came to tell Clayton that the surgery was done and they got Charlotte out, Krystal was severely ill. "They said she was on a ventilator and a dialysis machine because she was experiencing septic shock," he says. They also said that her lungs, liver and kidneys were failing and that she would be in the intensive care unit for at least a week.

The providers were optimistic that she would be okay, though, since she had taken such good care of herself and was healthy.

And then the completely unimaginable happened for Clayton

Despite the complications, including Krystal's doctors finding E. coli in her bloodstream, she seemed to be trending in the right direction over the next few days. "She had an amazing team that did a great job caring for her,” Clayton says. “She was touch and go for a little bit, but it seemed like we were having some small wins."

But then, things started to take a turn. Two days after they found E.coli in her system, her blood pressure was all over the place and everyone started to get concerned, says Clayton. "In the middle of the night I called our families and told them to come up to the hospital." And as soon as he got off the phone with his family that night, Krystal coded for the first time.

"It's a horrifying experience to see all that," Clayton says. “It’s all hands on deck, trying to save someone's life so they took me out of the room." They were able to save her briefly, but she coded twice more. On the third code, at 2:53 a.m. on Wednesday, March 20, they weren't able to save her again.

"I went in and just sat there with her, thinking maybe there's some way I could transfer my life into her and bring her back. But no."

Clayton says their pregnancy shouldn't have been treated as routine

Krystal never wanted to be seen as an "angry Black woman," but in retrospect, Clayton wishes they’d demanded to be seen by doctors earlier and more often. "I think about it every night still," he says.

He wants other Black women to know that they shouldn’t be afraid to advocate for themselves — or to seek support.

"You really do have to have somebody there that speaks the medical language, whether it's a midwife or doula, even a family member," he says.

"Out-of-the-box care may work for a 23-year-old healthy white woman, but a 40-year-old Black woman with a history of infant loss should not be getting the same pregnancy recommendations. All pregnancy is high risk . And some are more high risk than others — and they need to be treated that way."

Clayton and Krystal's story is yet another example of the Black Maternal Health Crisis in this country. If you need help finding care as a Black woman, here are some resources that can help:

10 Pregnancy-Related Complications Black Women Should Know About

Questions Every Black Mom-to-Be Should Ask Her OB/GYN

Black Mamas Matter Alliance

The National Birth Equity Collaborative (NBEC)

Join What to Expect on July 24 for #BumpDay to show your support for safe pregnancies for every mom, everywhere. Post a baby bump pic — yours or one you love, past or present — or simply share a message of solidarity with the hashtag #BumpDay.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Working Together to Reduce Black Maternal Mortality , April 2024. Cleveland Clinic, Sepsis , January 2023. National Library of Medicine, Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Pregnancy-Related Deaths — United States, 2007–2016 , September 2019.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

25 Champions of Black Maternal Health By Kelly Glass

What Every Black Mom Should Have in Her Birth Plan By Jenny LeFlore

Pregnancy-Related Complications Black Women Should Know About (and How to Protect Yourself) Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Two Weeks After My Baby Was Born, I Nearly Died From Childbirth Complications Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Why Culturally Competent Care Is Critical to Ensuring Every Mom Has a Safe Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

My VBAC Didn't Work Out — and That's Okay Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

'I Spent Half My Maternity Leave in the NICU' By Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

When Birth Doesn’t Go as Planned, It’s Okay to Grieve — Here's How to Heal Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

When My Babies Arrived, the Blissful Connection Didn't. Here's the Truth No One Talks About Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

One Mom's Postpartum 'Heartburn' Turned Out to Be a Life-Threatening Condition Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

I Was Laid Off on Maternity Leave — Twice By

Motherhood Almost Broke My Marriage — Here's What Actually Helped Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Let’s Get Real: You Can Be Grateful for Your Baby and Still Not Love Being Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Tons of Pregnant Women Feel Dismissed by Their Doctors. Here's How to Make Sure You're Not One of Them Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

I Used GoFundMe to Pay for My Maternity Leave

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window