Interview Questions for Nannies

Interview questions for nannies

You've got a slew of nanny names and numbers to narrow down. To help you find the best person for the job, consider these questions when interviewing a nanny or babysitter.

Hiring a nanny for your child can be an overwhelming process — you will be introducing someone into your life and home, counting on them and trusting them to help take care of your children, potentially for years.

Knowing what to ask potential nannies during the interview process will give you essential insight into their personalities and child care styles. At the end of the day, you must feel comfortable with this person, as they will be in your home and watching your children, and should be someone you trust and respect.

For most parents, interviewing and hiring a nanny is a three-step process: prescreening the pool of applicants, speaking to potential candidates over the phone, then scheduling an in-person interview. You may also want to arrange a playdate with each finalist and your child to watch how they interact.

Of course, when it comes to hiring a caregiver for your child, there's no such thing as too many questions (although there are some topics that are off-limits — more on that later).

And while the questions you'll want to ask potential nannies will differ slightly depending on the age of your child, where you live and what you're looking for in a caregiver, this list of nanny interview questions can help you get started, then add (and add) your own.

How to structure a nanny interview

Phone interview

Introduce yourself and describe your family.

Review the job description to make sure you're on the same page about expectations. For example, you'll want to confirm the location, work hours, start date and salary.

Mention any big-picture details the candidate should know about your family. Do you have pets? Does your child have any special requirements or medical needs?

After those details have been established, the goal of the phone interview is to gather enough information and confidence about the applicant to see if you’d like to proceed to an in-person interview.

In-person interview

If you have a good feeling about the candidate, schedule an in-person interview. This might be at your home or in a public setting like a coffee shop or park, and will give you a chance to ask more open-ended questions to get a sense of the nanny’s communication style. You may also want your child to be there so you can see how the candidate interacts with them.

Review any basic questions you weren't able to ask in the phone interview.

Ask some of the more in-depth or open-ended questions so you can gauge your candidate’s body language and get a read on their personality.

At the end of the interview, see if the candidate has any questions for you and let them know what the next steps are in the hiring process.

Interview questions for nannies

Questions to ask a potential nanny about the position

Why do you want this job?

What are you looking for in your next position?

Do you have any questions about the job description?

Do you know your way around my town/city/neighborhood?

Questions to ask a potential nanny about training, education and background

Why did you get involved in child care work?

How long have you been a caregiver?

Do you have (or are you willing to get) CPR or baby first-aid training?

What is your education level?

Have you taken classes in child care? Would you be willing to take classes if presented with the opportunity?

Are you fluent in any other languages? If so, would you be comfortable speaking in another language to the children?

Questions to ask a potential nanny about their work experience

Why did you leave your last job?

What are the ages of the children you’ve cared for?

What are your favorite ages to care for and why?

What is your favorite part about being a nanny? What’s your least favorite part?

What was the most challenging experience you had with a child you were taking care of?

Have you ever had to handle an emergency or been witness to a life-threatening situation with a child? If yes, what happened and how did you react? Or, if not, what would be your plan of action?

Do you have experience with children who have medical needs or behavioral challenges?

Are you comfortable administering medicine?

Do you have experience preparing bottles?

Do you have experience following dietary restrictions and avoiding food allergies?

Do you have experience introducing a baby to solid food?

Do you have experience navigating unusual or difficult family dynamics?

Tell me about the work style of your past employers. Was it a casual environment, or was there a strict schedule?

What additional duties did you perform in your previous jobs? Did you do any light cleaning or run household errands?

Questions to ask a potential nanny about lifestyle

What do you see yourself doing in the future?

What do you like to do in your free time?

Do you have any hobbies or do you pursue any interests outside of work?

Do you have any dietary restrictions?

Open-ended questions to ask a potential nanny

These nanny interview questions will reveal a lot about the candidate’s approach to child care — and let you see if their approach is similar to yours.

How would you structure the days with my child?

What activities would you do with her when she's older and more active?

How would you approach discipline with my child?

How do you handle tantrums?

How do you feel about screen time?

How would you handle the following emergencies: A child locks themselves in the bathroom? A car? What do you do if a child is choking on something? What would you do if my baby had a fever? What if she fell and became unconscious?

Questions you can’t ask a potential nanny during the interview

Like any employment interview, potential nannies cannot be asked intrusive, discriminatory and illegal questions. You may find it helpful to take a moment to review the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission’s Prohibited Employment Policies/Practices .

In addition to not asking about religious views, sexual orientation and any medical or disability information, here’s a list of other questions to avoid.

"Are you a U.S. citizen?" It is illegal to make a hiring decision based upon an applicant’s citizenship status. However, you should ask if someone is authorized to work in the U.S.

"How old are you?" It is illegal to discriminate against candidates for their age.

"Do you plan to have children soon?" Instead, ask about their future plans, how long of a placement they are looking for and what their career goals are in the near future. This will give you an indication of what you might expect from them for the next few years.

"Have you ever been arrested?"

Once you’ve completed your list of interview questions, end the interview by giving the applicant the chance to address any concerns they may have by asking, "Do you have any questions or anything you’d like to bring up with me?"

Before you say goodbye, offer a timeline for when they can expect to hear back from you about the position.

Questions to ask yourself after a nanny interview

During the in-person interview, take note of more than just the applicant’s answers to your questions. Jot down your first impressions post-interview and check your gut reaction. If there’s ever a time to trust your instincts, it’s when making decisions about child care.

Here are a few more things to consider when judging whether a nanny candidate would be a good nanny for your family.

"Does this potential nanny interact well with my child?" If the candidate makes it through your pre-screening process, an important step of the nanny interview should include some facetime with your baby. Does the applicant seem patient, caring and attentive? Are they comfortable holding and playing with your little one? It’s not necessarily a deal-breaker if your baby is crying or seems disinterested (she may have some stranger anxiety ) — what’s more telling is how the candidate handles the situation.

"Did this potential nanny ask appropriate questions?" An applicant’s questions are another way to gauge whether or not they’ll be a good fit for your family. No questions (or comments) at all can also be telling.

"Did we have good chemistry?" You don’t have to become best buds, but you do want to feel you can talk about potentially touchy subjects. For this relationship to work, you’ll need to be in constant contact, so a good nanny should be as comfortable with you as they are with your baby. Are they easy to talk to? Did they have a sense of humor? Did it seem like they would tell you all about your little one’s antics?

"Did this potential nanny have good communication skills?" Poor communication skills, not making eye contact or disagreeing with your rules should raise red flags. Notice if they smile and talk when they talk to you, as well as your child. These verbal and nonverbal clues indicate whether or not you have found a nanny who is warm, can communicate well and has experience.

"Do they seem reliable?" Being late for the interview (even with a good excuse) may be a sign that they’ll have trouble sticking to a schedule.

Finally, schedule a test run. It’s worth a few days' pay to give your top contender a trial run at caring for your child. This might be a couple of days or a week or two, enough time to give you both a chance to see how things feel. Make sure you (or your partner) are there for at least part of every day to get a sense of how a day unfolds. Is the person living up to your expectations?

Offer some suggestions and see how well they listen and incorporate your feedback. If you still feel comfortable and confident in the nanny’s ability once the trial period is over, make them an offer!