Nearly 90,000 Bottles of Children's Ibuprofen Recalled for Foreign Substance

Children's ibuprofen recall, liquid medication being poured

Here's what to look for in your medicine cabinet.

A nationwide recall has been issued for 89,592 bottles of children's ibuprofen after reports of a foreign substance in the medication, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) says.

Strides Pharma, the medication's manufacturer, issued the recall after it "received complaints for a gel-like mass and black particles in the product," according to the FDA enforcement report .

The medication was made in India and manufactured for Taro Pharmaceuticals U.S.A., Inc., and sold across the United States.

What to Expect reached out to Strides Pharma and Taro Pharmaceuticals representatives for comment. We will update this story if we receive a response.

Key Takeaways

Nearly 90,000 bottles of liquid children's ibuprofen have been recalled nationwide because of a foreign substance in the medication.

The recalled bottles have lot numbers of 7261973A and 7261974A, and expiration dates of Jan. 31, 2027.

If you have a recalled bottle, stop using the medication and call your health care provider if you think you gave your child some of the recalled medication.

Which bottles of children's ibuprofen are recalled?

The recall is for liquid children's ibuprofen that comes in bottles of 4 fluid ounces (120 milliliters). You may have a recalled bottle if the label says the following:

It has a lot number of 7261973A or 7261974A.

It has an expiration date of Jan. 31, 2027.

It was manufactured for Taro Pharmaceuticals U.S.A., Inc., Hawthorne, NY 10532.

It was made in India.

What should you do if you have a recalled bottle?

To be on the safe side, avoid giving your child the recalled medication unless necessary. If you think you gave your child some of the recalled medication, call your health care provider.

The FDA issued a Class II recall for the ibuprofen, which means using it "may cause temporary health consequences, but the probability of a serious health issue is remote." The FDA says it's generally safe to continue using a medication under a Class II recall, but check with your provider first.

And always check with your pediatrician before giving any medications to a child under 2 years old.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Enforcement Report , March 2026. U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Drug recall information for consumers, health care professionals and industry , October 2025.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Children's Medication Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Should You Buy European Baby Formula During the Formula Shortage? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Nara Organics Recalls All Formula After Link to Botulism Outbreak Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

Can I Take Ibuprofen While I'm Pregnant or Breastfeeding? Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window