Why Does My Newborn Keep Sneezing?

newborn sneezing, newborn baby on colorful carpet wrinkling face and nose

There’s a good reason why newborns sneeze so often — and no, it’s not necessarily because they’re getting sick.

By now, you’ve probably realized that newborns do more than just coo and gurgle. They’re also capable of making plenty of other odd noises. They hiccup often, burp loudly (make that very loudly) and yes, even sneeze frequently.

But sneezing in newborns isn’t necessarily a symptom of sickness. It’s actually a healthy reflex that helps your baby clear her nasal passages of dirt and other irritants, helping her breathe more easily. Trusted SourceUC San Diego HealthStuffy Nose, Sneezing, and Hiccups in NewbornsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceUC San Diego HealthStuffy Nose, Sneezing, and Hiccups in NewbornsSee All Sources

Of course, there are certain circumstances when all that achoo-ing could be a sign of a cold or other illness. Here’s why newborns sneeze so much and when it may warrant a call to your pediatrician.

Is it normal for my newborn to sneeze a lot?

Yes, frequent sneezing in newborns is very common. And as long as your baby isn’t experiencing any other signs of sickness, her sneezes likely aren’t a problem.

In fact, sneezing in newborns is a good thing, since it helps them clear their noses and breathe better. And what seems like a lot to you is probably just right for your baby.

Unlike adults, who use both their mouths and noses to breathe, infants breathe almost entirely through their noses — so it’s extra important that their nasal passages are clear. Only when babies are about 6 to 12 months old — once they start eating solid foods — do they start breathing more out of their mouths.

Causes of newborn sneezing

There are plenty of good reasons why newborns sneeze a lot, including the following:

They need to clear their nasal passages. Since they can’t blow their noses (and are years away from learning how to pick them ), they only have one way to expel dirt and other irritants from their noses: sneezing. Plus, those nasal passages are tiny — it’s only natural that they need a little extra clearing.

It’s a protective reflex. Sneezing is a reflex we’re born with. But unlike the startle (Moro) reflex , for example, sneezing doesn’t go away with age. It’s the reason why we continue to sneeze even as adults — at everything from pollen to dust, dander and other irritants.

They may be getting sick. If your baby’s sniffling and sneezing are accompanied by other symptoms, including a fever or runny nose, it may be a sign that she’s caught a cold or other bug. ( Seasonal allergies in babies are rare, however — they usually don’t crop up until children are older, Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSeasonal Allergies in ChildrenSee All Sources [2] by age 1 or 2 at the very earliest.)

When to call the doctor about newborn sneezing

If other symptoms of a cold or virus accompany your newborn’s sneezes — including a runny nose, stuffiness or greenish-yellow nasal discharge — it’s a good idea to get in touch with your pediatrician, especially if this is your baby’s first time getting sick.

Other signs of sickness include lethargy, a cough and a fever . For babies under 3 months old, if a fever reaches 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit or higher, you should call the doctor right away.

In most cases, though, sneezing alone isn’t an indication that your newborn is sick. Rather, it’s a sign that your baby is getting rid of germs and other irritants from her nasal passages, which helps her breathe easier. So try not to worry. Chances are very good that your baby is just fine. If you're still concerned, though, don't hesitate to reach out to your pediatrician for reassurance.