Nicole Taylor

Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

About Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

Phyliss Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C, is a board-certified general psychiatrist with a certification in perinatal mental health and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. She manages a wide range of mental health disorders including depression, anxiety, bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, and psychotic disorders.

Experience

Dr. Taylor is employed at the outpatient mental health clinic at North Florida/South Georgia Veterans Health Administration in Jacksonville, Florida. She is also a courtesy assistant professor at the University of Florida – Jacksonville and supervises psychiatry residents in training.

Dr. Taylor has worked in a variety of mental health settings including outpatient clinics, inpatient hospitals, academic settings, nursing homes, and private practice.

In addition to her clinical practice, she is a member of the board of directors and chair of the membership and professional outreach committees for Postpartum Support International. Dr. Taylor is passionate about erasing the stigma of mental illness through community education and mental health advocacy.

Education

Dr. Taylor completed her medical degree at Meharry Medical College in Nashville, Tennessee, and her psychiatry residency at East Carolina University Brody School of Medicine in Greenville, North Carolina. She received her perinatal mental health certification from Postpartum Support International.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window