Norovirus in Babies and Toddlers

norovirus in babies and toddlers, baby getting diaper changed by mom or caregiver

Think your baby's stomach bug is norovirus? Find out more here, including symptoms, causes, treatment and how long your little one might be sick.

Coming down with a stomach bug is no picnic for little kids — or their parents — but it can be hard to avoid, especially when norovirus is going around.

This easily spread stomach virus causes intestinal distress (nausea, diarrhea, vomiting), but fortunately it doesn’t usually last more than a couple of days. Read on to learn norovirus symptoms, plus treatments and prevention tips.

What is norovirus?

Norovirus is a group of highly contagious viruses that cause nausea, vomiting and diarrhea and are commonly seen during the colder months, usually between November and April. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicNorovirusSee All Sources [1]

Norovirus

Hundreds of millions of cases develop every year, affecting over 200 million children. Sometimes norovirus may be referred to as the stomach flu, but that can be misleading, as it’s not related to the flu .

Norovirus symptoms

After exposure to norovirus, your child might begin to show symptoms in a day or two. Here are the most common ones to watch for:

Nausea

Vomiting

Diarrhea

Stomach pain

Fever

Chills

Headache, muscle aches

Dehydration and dizziness that may accompany lots of diarrhea or vomiting

How do babies and toddlers catch norovirus?

Norovirus is found in the feces or vomit of those who are ill, can spread quickly and may pass from person to person before symptoms are obvious.

Like many stomach bugs, the virus can land on an object and then be transferred to babies and toddlers when they touch it. Norovirus can easily spread when people don’t wash their hands well after using the bathroom or changing diapers.

Norovirus may also develop from contaminated food or drink (in which case it’s referred to as food poisoning) or even when a child is in contact with an infected person. Someone with norovirus actually sheds billions of infected particles that can then be inhaled if you sit close.

How long does norovirus last in kids?

As messy and uncomfortable as norovirus sounds, it’s also short-lived. Symptoms in babies and toddlers usually last about two to three days.

Still, school and day care aren’t recommended until the vomiting and diarrhea have stopped for a full day because the virus is so contagious. Kids should skip swimming until they’re well, and diaper-clad tots should stay on dry land until their diarrhea has ceased for a week.

How long are you contagious with norovirus?

Once norovirus spreads, it can take 12 to 48 hours before symptoms begin, which is one of the most contagious periods. Norovirus in babies and toddlers is also contagious during the first few days after they’ve started to feel better.

Still, per the CDC, it’s smart to be careful for even longer as studies have shown norovirus can spread for two or more weeks after recovery. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionNorovirusSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionNorovirusSee All Sources

Norovirus treatments

There’s no cure for norovirus, but you can keep your child comfortable at home and ease his symptoms, which should be gone by day three. Here are some norovirus treatments tips:

Put your tot to bed. Getting plenty of rest is always a smart idea when kids are sick.

Offer small sips of water or milk. Hydration is important when there’s vomiting and diarrhea. Be sure your tot drinks plenty of liquids — but only one sip every 10 minutes for an hour or two after vomiting until you are sure he can keep it down — or offer breast milk or formula in small amounts, depending on your child’s age.

Offer oral rehydration. An over-the-counter product like Pedialyte may be recommended by your child’s doctor, or frozen electrolyte pops or broth, depending on your child’s age, though be sure to ask your pediatrician how much to give and over what period of time.

Skip the meds. Always check with your child’s physician about medications before giving them and know that antibiotics aren’t used to treat norovirus.

Resume food slowly. Once the vomiting has ended, see if your tot is up for a small, bland bite to eat (like saltine crackers, plain white rice, bananas, plain toast, or applesauce). Avoid greasy or fried foods. It may take some time before his appetite returns and his stomach is back to normal.

Ways to prevent norovirus in your baby or toddler

There isn’t a vaccine to protect kids or adults from norovirus , but there are some smart ways that you can try and avoid it altogether. Check out these tips to reduce the risk at your house:

Wash hands well (lather up for 20 seconds) after using the bathroom and before eating.

Be sure all fruits and veggies are washed before cooking or consuming them.

Steer clear of people who are infected with norovirus or showing symptoms.

Skip hand sanitizer, as alcohol-based solutions won’t kill the norovirus germs.

Wash clothing well, especially if it’s been in contact with vomit or diarrhea and keep surfaces and objects (toys, high chair tray, stroller) clean.

If someone in your house comes down with norovirus, have that person quarantine in one room (and only use one bathroom if possible), wear face masks around the sick family member if you have to be around them, avoid sharing anything (even towels), and use a bleach cleaning spray that kills most viruses to disinfect area touchpoints and when cleaning up vomit and diarrhea.

When to call the doctor

Keep an eye on your baby or toddler with norovirus and call the doctor in the following cases:

He skips fluids for more than a few hours.

There are signs of dehydration, such as few tears when crying, a dry mouth, urinating fewer than three times a day, dark or strong-smelling urine, and/or no wet diapers in four to six hours.

You notice a rapid heart rate or a change in activity (more signs of dehydration).

Diarrhea or vomiting continues for more than a few days.

He develops a high fever, throws up blood, or has bloody stools or severe stomach pain.

Remember, norovirus is a very common illness, but it’s also one that tends to get better in a few days. Do what you can to ease your tot’s discomfort and keep washing those hands! In a short time, your baby or toddler will be back to normal and ready to eat, drink and play as usual.