Oh Là Là! 16 French Baby Boy Names That Stylishly Cross Borders

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

baby boy with a French name

From the trendiest picks to tried-and-tested classic French baby boy names, you’re sure to find your "joie" here!

When it comes to boy names, Latin, Greek and Biblical first names reign supreme in France. Many popular French baby boy names cross borders effortlessly, such as Quentin, Thomas, Hugo, or Pierre.

If you're looking for a French baby boy name, we've got you covered. Give this list of French baby boy names a spin. (And if you're not sure whether you're having a boy or a girl, check out our favorite French baby girl names too.)

Still hunting for the perfect baby name? There are thousands to consider in the What to Expect app for your wee one on the way.

Antoine. "Invaluable" is the meaning of Antoine in French — and what an appropriate name for the newest member of your family. Popular across France, it's common in the Loire Valley, famous for its fairytale chateaux.

Aurélien. Taking off as a French first name in the 1980s, Aurélien, pronounced oar-el-ee-yen, is a great name for a baby who will grow up into a passionate young man. With the meaning "golden," or "shining," this first name can also be spelled Aurelian.

Camille. A unisex first name , Camille is popular as a first name for both boys and girls. Saint Camille is honored the 14th of July each year, coinciding with Bastille Day.

Corentin. From the stormy coasts of Brittany, Corentin is a name steeped in tradition. You'll pronounce it corh-ahn-tehn, and might spell it Corentyn, as homage to the Celtic influence in the region.

Émile. Pronounced em-eel, this first name of Latin and Greek origins means "rival" or "obliging respectively." If you're familiar with Émile Zola's work, you'll appreciate this first name for your baby boy.

Gaël. "Generous" is the significance of this baby boy's name. Gaël is a Celtic name with origins in Brittany. It is notably popular in the Brittany and Paris regions but present throughout the Hexagon.

Jules. A popular first name in the Parisian region, the name stems from the Latin "jovilios," or "descendent of Jupiter." Boys named Jules are considered to have strong morals, a sense of justice and ambition.

Laurent. This outdoorsy name means "carrier of bay leaf." Laurent is derived from the Latin word "laurus," or laurier (bay leaf) in French — a plant that grows wild in the hills of Provence.

Loïc. Pronounced low-eek, Loïc appeared as a first name in the 1940s and saw a surge in popularity in the '80s.

Malo. Another name from the coast of Brittany, Malo means "light pledge." Saint-Malo is also the name of a fortress and picturesque coastal town in the region. This first name, pronounced mal-low, has seen a wide rise in popularity since the early 2000s and is right on trend.

Marcel. A name meaning "dedicated to Mars," this is an excellent first name for an Aries baby boy. This first name dates back to antiquity, but has come back into fashion — especially in Paris and Bordeaux.

Maxime / Maxence. Both stemming from Latin, and meaning "the strongest," Maxime or Maxence are names that indicate strength. Several French writers, poets and artists carry these names.

Olivier. Similar to the English Oliver, Olivier means "from the olive tree." It is common in central France, and pronounced like oh-liv-ee-yay. Reaching a peak of popularity in the '70s, Olivier remains a common choice.

Romain / Roman. A classic French name from the Latin "Romanus," or "from Rome." It's equally popular in urban areas as in the provinces, making it a wonderfully versatile name. Both versions are pronounced roh-mahn.

Thibault. Thibault, pronounced tea-beau, is a very popular first name in France. It means "courageous." You can get creative with the spelling: Thibaut, Thiebault, Thybault, Thibaud, Thibald, Thiebaut, Tibault, Thybaut. Choose the one that fits your child best!

Valentin. From the Latin "valens," the first name Valentin signifies strength and vigor. It's pronounced val-ahn-tan and is a fine name for an active baby boy.

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

Ashley Parsons is a roaming journalist and copywriter covering lifestyle, adventure travel and environmental topics. She went to university in Paris, is fluent in French and has been living in France since 2015. She and her partner travel by bicycle or horseback, occasionally by train.

Updates history

September 26, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,922 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

From Paris, With Love: 17 Sweet and Chic French Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

24 Unique Baby Girl Names That Are Anything but Ordinary Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

18 Chinese Baby Boy Names With Poetic Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window