Oily Skin During Pregnancy

Updated and medically reviewed to ensure accuracy.

oily skin during pregnancy, woman doing skin care routine on her face

Has your skin been extra oily during pregnancy? Here's what causes oily skin when you're pregnant, plus how to safely manage it.

When you found out you were expecting, you probably couldn’t wait to have that much-talked-about pregnancy glow. But has it been too much, too soon? Read on for why you may have oily skin during pregnancy and what to do about it.

What causes oily skin during pregnancy?

If you’re pretty slick these days, think back to those teen years filled with angst over oily skin and the pimples that often accompanied it. During pregnancy, increased hormones (namely androgens and progesterone) are stimulating the oil glands in your skin to produce more oil. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From Nemours10 Things That Might Surprise You About Being PregnantSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From Nemours10 Things That Might Surprise You About Being PregnantSee All Sources

For some women, that’s a welcome bonus. For others, not so much, especially if you find your skin greasier than usual and you’re suddenly back to your 14-year-old acne-ridden self.

How can you treat oily skin during pregnancy?

Having a good skin care routine is always a plus, and during pregnancy will go a long way in helping you get your oily skin under wraps.

Cleanse. Wash your face twice a day, morning and evening (and after exercise). A gel-based cleanser is best for oily skin, as these formulas help break up oil better than a milky cleanser. Choose a gentle, soap-free cleanser (preferably one that is dye- and fragrance-free). You might also choose environmentally friendly packaging and brands that promise not to test on animals. When washing your face, use lukewarm water and your fingertips to apply the cleanser. Also, avoid overly drying acne washes since your skin may be more sensitive.

Blot gently. If you’re not near a sink and need to clean up a bit, try blotting papers, which come in individual sheets and soak up extra oil. These are great in a pinch and good to keep in your car or bag, notably for those times when out of nowhere you seem to sport a super-shiny forehead or nose.

Go easy on exfoliation. If you have clogged pores or acne breakouts, Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources [2] it’s okay to exfoliate during pregnancy. But look for formulas with gentle physical exfoliants instead of too-harsh chemical ones, which may irritate sensitive pregnancy skin. Rice powder, a silicone scrubber or muslin cloth are some good exfoliants to try. Exfoliate once or twice a week only, and don’t scrub too hard.

Avoid acne medications and retinol/retinoids. Just as you should skip acne washes, you should not use topical or prescription acne treatments, retinols or retinoids in an attempt to manage breakouts. Though the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) says topical salicylic acid is generally considered safe in limited amounts during pregnancy, other dermatologists and pregnancy skin experts advise against using anything containing salicylic acid until after breastfeeding. Your best bet is to check with your OB/GYN or dermatologist about safer acne treatments while you're expecting. And prescription retinoids, over-the-counter retinol products and oral vitamin A derivatives (like isotretinoin) should absolutely not be used if you are pregnant, thinking about becoming pregnant or breastfeeding.

Moisturize. You may think that your face being oily means you don’t need to moisturize. However, you still need to keep your skin hydrated. If your face tends to be oily 30 minutes after you wash it, you could probably skip moisturizer. But, otherwise, you should moisturize once or twice a day after cleansing, and only apply it where your skin feels dry. It’s best to use an oil-free moisturizer (look for ingredients such as hyaluronic acid or glycerin, and avoid products that have an oil listed in the ingredients).

Wear sunscreen. Reach for a mineral or physical sunscreen (look for zinc oxide and/or titanium dioxide as the active ingredient). These products sit on the skin instead of being absorbed by it. Choose a sunscreen that has an SPF of at least 30 and offers broad-spectrum coverage, which protects against UVA and UVB rays.

Check your makeup. It may be a good idea to switch your makeup if pregnancy is making your face extra oily. Use products that are oil-free and labeled as non-comedogenic (meaning they won’t clog pores).

Can you prevent oily skin during pregnancy?

Your first line of defense against the greasies is keeping up with your facial cleansing routine. However, be mindful of cleansing your face too often, as that could actually lead to irritation and rashes.

Some other smart strategies to manage oily skin during pregnancy:

Blood sugar swings can stimulate oil glands, so stick with healthy snacks that have protein and fat, not just carbs. Healthy snacks include combinations like an apple with almonds, or carrots and hummus, instead of munching on pretzels or a muffin.

Drinking water is always essential and even more so now, since H2O helps keep the body’s organs operating at optimum levels, and the digestive system moving along.

Your hair can play a big role in how oily your face gets every day. If your strands are oily, shampoo regularly and do your best to keep your hair off your face without tying it back too tightly.

What should you look for in pregnancy-safe products for oily skin?

When it comes to caring for oily skin during pregnancy, there are some ingredients you may want to look for in skin care products, and others you should avoid.

Go with water. Use water-based cosmetics, skin care and hair products that are oil-free so you’re not adding more oil to your face. Water-based products help keep your skin moisturized without being greasy.

Choose fragrance-free formulas. Your skin is likely more sensitive right now. Skin care products with added fragrance may cause irritation. Also, “unscented” doesn’t necessarily mean a product is fragrance-free. Some supposedly unscented products contain masking fragrances that may irritate your skin.

Pick non-pore clogging products. Look for “non-comedogenic” or “non-acnegenic” on the label. Non-comedogenic means the product won’t clog your pores, and non-acnegenic products are formulated to not cause acne.

Don’t use alcohol-based cleansers. They can cause irritation or make your face too dry, which will then cause it to pump out even more oil — so not what you want.

Avoid retinoids and retinols. If you’re thinking about becoming pregnant, are already pregnant or are breastfeeding, stay away from products that include prescription retinoids, over-the-counter retinol products or oral vitamin A derivatives. Retinoids, specifically the ingredient isotretinoin, have been linked to certain birth defects. Trusted SourceMarch of DimesIsotretinoin and Other Retinoids During PregnancySee All Sources [3] Topical retinols (found in some prescription and OTC acne and anti-aging products), are in the same drug family as isotretinoin and should be avoided.

Talk to your doctor about caring for your skin during pregnancy and get specific recommendations for products that are safe for you and your baby-to-be. With any luck, and with the right skin care regimen, that pregnancy glow will be what you pictured and won’t take you back to those shiny-faced teenage years.