Oluwatosin Goje

Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

About Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Dr. Oluwatosin "Tosin" Goje is a board-certified OB/GYN and infectious diseases specialist at the Cleveland Clinic's Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's Health Institute in Cleveland, Ohio. She works in the Obstetrics and Gynecology department and Center for Specialized Women’s Health.

Dr. Goje is an expert in infectious diseases during pregnancy, including the impact of COVID-19, Zika, HIV, sexually transmitted diseases and other infections and diseases on pregnant women and their babies.

Dr. Goje received her medical degree from Ahmadu Bello University in Zaria, Kaduna, Nigeria, and earned a Master's of Science and Clinical Research at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, South Carolina. She did an internship year in internal medicine at Metropolitan Hospital in New York, New York, and completed her obstetrics and gynecology residency at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers University, in Newark, New Jersey.

Dr. Goje completed a fellowship in reproductive infectious diseases at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston.

Board certifications

Dr. Goje is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Goje is affiliated with the Cleveland Clinic in Cleveland.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Goje is an assistant professor of obstetrics/gynecology and reproductive biology at Cleveland Clinic's Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University.

She is a member of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), the Infectious Diseases Society for Obstetrics and Gynecology (IDSOG) and the Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA).

Dr. Goje serves as a reviewer for Journal of Minimally Invasive Gynecology (JMIG), the British Medical Journal (BMJ) and other medical and academic journals. She is a regular and frequent media contributor and expert on pregnancy and infectious diseases, specifically COVID-19 and pregnancy.

Publications and research

Dr. Goje is actively involved in research and clinical trials and has published numerous papers and peer-reviewed articles on infectious diseases during pregnancy, labor and delivery, and pregnancy complications, among other topics.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window