One Week to Go? 10 Things to Do Before Your Due Date

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnant woman reading a book, things to do before your due date

Not long now before your baby arrives! Here's a bucket list of things to do before your due date.

It seems like there are a million and one things to do the week before your due date (or whenever your baby arrives) — and they all have to do with the baby. There are clothes to wash and fold, baby gear to assemble, and hospital bags to pack (and repack) a hundred times.

But here’s the thing: You have to — make that need to — take time to do a few things for yourself (and yourself only) while you’re still pregnant. Yes, becoming a parent is one of the greatest gifts in the world, but, candidly speaking, there are things you won’t be able to do (or at least do in peace) for a long time once the baby arrives. Like take a shower.

Forget putting together the swing and organizing the board books. Now’s the time to do you. Here's a bucket list of 10 things to do the week before your due date.

Key Takeaways

You deserve it! Sure, you’ll prep for the baby’s arrival, but during these last few days, it’s important to rest and recharge as you focus on yourself.

A little pampering goes a long way. You’ll feel more relaxed and ready to face a new life with your little one if you take time now to nap, read, or walk in nature.

Savor the calm. Busy days are coming up — so make the most of your quiet time, whether it’s enjoying a well-cooked meal or basking in your clean house.

1. Spend an entire weekend reading a book, start to finish. You'll soon see that lounging around on the couch with your nose buried in a good book and zero obligations will sound like the height of luxury once you have a child. It’s a little pleasure you won’t be able to indulge in when you have a baby to tend to all day (and night). Relish in it!

2. Act like a tourist in your own city. No matter what the size of your town or city, you know there are at least a few places you’ve always wanted to go but haven't had the chance to visit yet. Now’s the time to check out those nice-to-see spots. Because once your baby arrives, it’s all about convenience and scheduling things around sleep and feeding schedules .

3. Take a long nap, followed by a long shower. This goes without saying, but snoozing uninterrupted after you have a baby pretty much becomes a distant, hazy memory. So when you do take that last loooong, luxurious pregnancy nap the week before your due date (or any time leading up to the birth of your baby), enjoy the heck out of it. After you get up, take a long, equally luxurious shower. It may be the last time you're able to bathe without a baby crying or a toddler coming in because he needs you right.this.second.

Want more me-time ideas for the final days of pregnancy? The What to Expect app has loads of tips, last-minute checklists, and support from likeminded moms and dads.

4. Get your hair blown out (or do it yourself). There's something so freeing and uplifting about going to the salon and getting a blow-out, and though you'll probably be able to do it once in a while after you have the baby, it won't be the same. Not only is it much harder to totally let go and relax when you know there’s a little one waiting at home for you, “me time” often comes with a dose of guilt once you become a mom. So make an appointment the week before your due date. And while you're at it, embrace all the time you have to do your hair in peace at home too. It won't last!

5. Clean your house and watch it stay that way — for days. While cleaning isn’t exactly fun, having a tidy, organized home feels pretty amazing. It really is hard to keep the house clean after kids, even when you only have a newborn (laundry and diapers, anyone?). After giving your house a good scrub-down, appreciate the fact that, three days later, it still looks pretty dang good.

What to Expect Community parent Kandy Korn reports that before her baby arrived, she “spent the afternoon at the laundromat so I could deep clean all our bed comforters.”

6. Make a Target run, just for you. Everyone winds up spending more money than they expect when they go to Target, but when you’re a mom, there’s truly never a Target run that doesn’t involve picking up something — anything — for your children. The week before your due date (or whenever you can swing it while you're still pregnant), make a date to spend an hour there, shopping for cute shirts, throw pillows, and sheet sets — all for you. Because if you can leave the store without a package of diapers, wipes, or baby food once you become a parent, it will be a legit miracle.

7. Play your favorite music whenever you want. Loud noises at any time of the day with a baby? Oh no, honey. You’ll be cringing if you even get the ping of a text on your phone when the baby's napping. So now's the time to listen to Beyoncé at 9 p.m. on a Tuesday just because you can. But don't blast it, as too many prolonged loud noises can affect a baby in utero.

8. On the flip side, enjoy the silence. Silence can truly be a beautiful thing. Once there are children in the mix, that silence only comes during naptime and bedtime. And yes, newborns sleep a lot, but it's hard to completely relax and bask in the quiet when you have a miles-long to-do list to get through before your little one wakes up or you need to catch up on your sleep while your baby is (finally) snoozing too. When it’s just you — and it won’t be just you again for a long time — you can actually exhale without worrying about everything you should be doing.

9. Cook an elaborate dinner, and savor it. Once you have your baby, everything is decided based on what's easiest, including what to eat. Before you give birth and even the week before your due date, take the time to cook a super-involved meal you’ve always wanted to try (we’re talking the kind that requires you to pore over that fancy cookbook collecting dust on the shelf). Once it’s done, admire your hard work (maybe Instagram it?), and then savor every bite.

10. Steal a weekend away. This might sound obvious, but it’s so important to plan a weekend (or even a night) away, preferably somewhere closeby but not-too-baby-friendly that you've never visited but have always wanted to. It will give you that much-needed time to connect with your partner (and yourself!) without distractions before you give birth. Not only will those trips be few-and-far-between early in your parenting career, there are certain places you just can’t take a baby. So go!

Updates history

November 3, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

The Ultimate Third Trimester Checklist: Everything to Do Before Your Baby’s Birthday Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

12 Smart Ways to Get Ready for Labor (Physically and Mentally) Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Your Guide to a Calmer, Cozier Holiday Season During Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The 11-Step First Trimester Checklist That’ll Keep You Sane While Growing a Human Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Your No-Nonsense Hospital Bag Checklist: What to Pack and What to Skip Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Your Pre-Pregnancy Check List: How to Get Your Body, Budget, and Life Ready for Baby Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

5 Things Every Partner Should Do for a Mom-to-Be Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

18 Self-Care Ideas for Moms That Aren't Just 'Take a Shower' Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

7 Photos Every Pregnant Mom Needs — Because You'll Regret Not Taking Them Later Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Due Date's Here. Baby's Not. Should You Have Sex? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Planning for a Baby Financially? Add These 11 Tasks to Your Pre-Baby Checklist Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

The Best Babymoon Destinations for a Relaxing Vacation Before Baby Arrives By Lindsay Tigar

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window