Overwhelmed by Baby Gear? Here's What You Really Need (and What You Don't)

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

buying for baby

Shopping for baby is bound to be a blast, but no need to go overboard. Do yourself (and your budget) a favor by choosing only essential equipment and leaving the items you can do without on the store shelf.

From tricked-out strollers and over-the-top cribs to cradles with canopies and sound-and-lights video nursery monitors, it's easy to get carried away when you're buying for a baby. The dazzling selection of merchandise and wide array of adorable items for a nursery can overwhelm any parent.

But before you go blowing thousands of dollars on gear you don't need, read this guide to what's a must, what's a maybe — and what you can easily borrow or buy secondhand.

Tip: Looking for a way to save on the cost of big-ticket items? Some registries, like Amazon , give you a completion discount you can use towards the end of your pregnancy and after the baby is born. Consider using it to buy some of the must-haves on this list.

Key Takeaways

Get the basics first. Focus on the items you'll use everyday, like a crib, a car seat, and a baby monitor (the rest can wait)

Most nursery gear is optional. Truth: These extra things are nice to have, but not necessary, such as a swing, glider, and changing table. You can always borrow them!

Shop smart! Try not to overspend but instead, strive to create a cozy, well-equipped baby space that matches your sensibility — and budget.

Must-have nursery items

Crib

When you're buying for a baby, there are few bigger decisions to make than which crib to purchase. Start by making sure any models you consider, whether new or secondhand, adhere to current crib safety standards . Then consider special features.

For instance, some cribs have a storage drawer that can contain clutter and help keep your nursery neat, while other cribs are convertible, meaning they can morph into a toddler bed when your little one is ready to upgrade (and some have both features).

Steer clear of cribs with drop railings — they were banned by the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) in 2010. As for a crib mattress , spring for a new one (if you can) — your cute bundle will be spending up to 16 hours a day on it, so you'll want him to be comfortable. For safety's sake, be sure it fits snugly to the crib rails (tip: if you can fit more than two fingers between it and the crib, it doesn't).

One popular crib among parents is the Babyletto Hudson, which meets the safety standards referenced above. It can also transition to a toddler bed and a daybed, so it will grow with your baby for years to come.

babyletto hudson crib

Babyletto Hudson 3-in-1 Convertible Crib ($499; amazon.com )

Read our roundup of the best baby cribs for more great picks.

What to Expect Community parent kerithecautionarywhale recently gave a shout-out to that giant Swedish retailer for all her baby gear needs. "Ikea is a nice option for any kid's furniture," she says. "We furnished the whole kids' room from there."

Baby monitor

Unless you want to spend every minute peering into your baby's crib (and you might!), you'll want a monitor to keep tabs from another room. Believe it or not, even if you live in a small space, it's nice to have a monitor so that you can close the door to the baby's room (and shut out external noise) yet still hear what's going on inside the nursery. Audio models only transmit sound; video models also relay a live image of your little love.

miku baby monitor

The Miku Baby Monitor does so much more than give you eyes on your baby. It also tracks breathing, sleep patterns, nursery temperature, and more.

Miku Pro Smart Baby Monitor ($150; mikucare.com )

Read our picks of the best smart baby monitor .

Check out the What to Expect app for more shopping advice, must-have lists, and tips from moms who've been in the baby gear trenches (and lived to tell the tale!).

Nice-to-have nursery items

Bassinet or cradle

You can certainly live without this nursery item (just start using the crib from day one), but it does come in handy early on. Why? For one, it's portable — making it easy to bring your snoozing infant with you no matter where you are in the house. For another, your baby may enjoy its coziness, and — as you'll quickly learn — if your baby feels cozy and comfy, he'll sleep better and longer, making that bassinet or cradle worth its weight in gold!

If you do choose to go the bassinet or cradle route , look for a sturdy model with a wide and stable base. If you're considering a secondhand one, steer clear of rickety antiques (old ones could have rough or splintery edges or even lead-based paint).

Also, measure to be sure that the sides of your bassinet or cradle — from the mattress (which should be firm and fit the interior securely) to the top — are at least 8 inches high. After all, you don't want your little guy to fall out!

halo bassinet

A bedside sleeper or bassinet can make those first few months at home with a baby a touch easier for tired parents. The Halo Bassinest has a 360-degree swivel that enables you to keep your baby close by for late-night feedings and bonding.

Halo Bassinest Swivel Sleeper ($200; buybuybaby.com )

Read our picks for the best bassinets .

Changing table

When it comes to dealing with your little one's diapers, any table or dresser will do for doody duty, so long as you buy a thick changing pad and attach it firmly with secure straps. Still, many parents purchase a changing station — designed to handle all diapering needs — so that they have that allotted space to take care of business.

A combination changing table/dresser is a good space saver, though there are stand-alone changing tables too (many of which have convenient diaper/wipe storage underneath).

Whichever you choose when shopping for items for your baby's nursery, look for a stable model with safety straps, padding with a washable cover, and a place to keep supplies safely out of your baby's reach (he'll find every jar and tube fascinating!).

delta changing table

This changing table also does double duty (no pun intended) as a dresser. It has a removable changing topper so the dresser can be used once your baby is out of diapers.

Delta Children Ava 3 Drawer Dresser with Changing Top ($177; amazon.com )

Here are our picks for the best changing tables .

Rocking chair or glider

Gliders are more popular than rockers these days, and safer, since they don't tip as easily. While they're more of a nicety than a necessity, you're bound to get plenty of use out of one, first for nursing or bottle-feeding, then for snuggling.

Secondhand gliders usually still have lots of life left in them, so if someone you know is looking to unload theirs, you may want to snag it. Otherwise, if you do end up buying a new one when shopping for nursery items, let comfort be your guide and choose a model that feels good to you.

storkcraft glider

A cushy glider is essential for feeding and rocking the baby to sleep. This Storkcraft Glider comes with handy storage pockets and a matching ottoman so you and baby can feel cozy and comfortable.

Storkcraft Premium Hoop Glider and Ottoman ($170; amazon.com )

Check out our picks of the best nursery gliders .

Baby swing

While this baby soother isn't an absolute necessity, in limited stretches, it can give you a much-needed break from holding your newborn (you've got to unload the dishwasher at some point!) and often has a wonderful way of quieting even the fussiest infants.

So consider buying or borrowing a swing, but always check the manufacturer's weight and age recommendations, and look for good safety features, including secure straps and a sturdy base and frame.

Check out some great baby swings .

Must-have travel gear

Car seat

When buying for a baby, put this item at the top of your list; many hospitals won't let you take your newborn home without one. When buying a car seat , make sure the packaging states that the seat meets Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards.

What if your friend offers you her baby's old car seat? Check the model number to be sure that it's no more than six years old, is still up to code, and hasn't been recalled (find out at the CPSC website ). Also make sure this seat hasn't been in an accident, and there are no broken or missing parts.

graco snugride car seat

An infant car seat is a must-have and the Graco SnugRide is an excellent choice thanks to its light weight, adjustable car seat base, and ability to snap into compatible strollers.

Graco SnugRide 35 Lite LX Infant Car Seat ($150; amazon.com )

Check out our infant car seat guide for more great picks.

Stroller or carriage

With a baby, your wheels are your freedom, which means a stroller is a total must-have. Take a few for a test-drive around the store before buying (and make sure it's easy to open, close, and fold up), and consider where you'll be using the stroller most (on city streets, in the mall, or in the park) to find a model that suits you best.

If you're opting for a secondhand stroller, make sure the model you choose is still in good condition, has not been recalled (find out on the CPSC website), has secure safety straps, and doesn't have broken or missing parts.

baby jogger stroller

This stroller is easy to push thanks to its air-filled tires. It has a one-hand fold and extra-long canopy, making it excellent for everyday use or for travel. It can fit an infant bassinet or car seat with adapters that are sold separately.

Baby Jogger City Mini Stroller, Jet ($430; amazon.com )

Discover more great baby strollers .

Nice-to-have travel gear

Travel crib or playard

If you take frequent trips, you may want to invest in one of these (hotels often have them on hand, but their age, cleanliness, and safety can vary widely).

Look for one that folds easily (yet locks securely when it's set up!) and isn't too heavy. Some travel cribs have special features like a built-in changing area or activity bar, which may make your life easier when on the road.

lotus travel crib

This lightweight travel crib comes with its own backpack-style carrying case and weighs just 13 pounds. Kids can play and sleep comfortably, and parents love the mesh zip-down side for easy access to their little one.

Lotus Travel Crib ($300; amazon.com )

For more picks, read our roundup of the best travel cribs .