Ovulation Calculator

Based on the date of your last menstrual period and the length of your typical cycle, discover which days you're most likely to be fertile and boost your chance of conceiving.

About This Tool

When to try to get pregnant

Trying to conceive? No one needs to tell you how to do it (leave the diagrams to the amateurs, thank you very much!), but you might need a little help figuring out when would be the best time to have sex to get pregnant .

The short answer: The best time to conceive is around the time you ovulate. That prime "getting pregnant" window can be anywhere from a few days before ovulation — because sperm can live to fertilize for three to six days — until about a day after the release of the egg, which is only viable for about 12 to 24 hours.

If you want to track your cycle and your ovulation symptoms , be sure to tap into the My Journal tool on the What to Expect app , where you'll also find helpful tips, informative articles, and connections to others who are starting a family.

How we calculate your fertile window

This ovulation calendar estimates when you'll ovulate based on the date of your last menstrual cycle and the average number of days between your periods.

First, we count back 14 days from the start date of your next expected period to figure out when you're most likely to ovulate. Then we calculate your fertile window, which can extend a few days before ovulation and possibly up to a day after.

Just remember that this is not an exact science — menstrual cycles vary from woman to woman and month to month (a typical cycle length is between 21 and 35 days). And if you have irregular periods , that might also make it trickier to pinpoint your fertile window.

Ovulation symptoms

Wondering how to tell when you're ovulating? Pay attention to these signs of ovulation:

Your basal body temperature falls slightly, then rises again when ovulation has taken place.

Your cervical mucus becomes clearer and thinner with a more slippery consistency similar to that of egg whites.

Your cervix softens and opens up.

You may feel a slight twinge of pain or mild cramps in your lower abdomen.

Your sex drive may increase.

You may notice some light spotting.

Your vulva or vagina may appear swollen.

Tips for getting pregnant

Want to up your odds of getting pregnant faster? Here are some tips to try :

1. Take a prenatal vitamin

Start popping that prenatal at least a month before you begin trying for a baby. One study showed that women who were taking their prenatal vitamins while undergoing fertility treatments were twice as likely to get pregnant as those who were only taking a folic acid supplement while going through the same treatments. So while it's not a guarantee that you'll hit the baby jackpot sooner, it's definitely worth a shot!

2. Know the signs of ovulation and time sex around it

Familiarize yourself with the typical ovulation symptoms to look out for and have sex starting a few days before you ovulate, which typically happens midway through your cycle (which would be day 14 of a 28-day cycle).

Having sex the actual day of ovulation would be ideal, but it can be hard to pinpoint it.

3. Eat well

Eating the right foods and nutrients when you're trying to conceive can help your dreams of getting pregnant come true more quickly.

Make sure you're incorporating plenty of healthy fats like omega-3s, folate, calcium, protein, iron, and fiber into your daily diet.

4. Exercise

Moderate exercise for 30 minutes a day has been shown to boost fertility. Whether it's hitting the gym, going for a jog, or lifting weights, try to fit in some kind of workout while you're trying to conceive.

5. Try not to worry

Stress can delay ovulation, which can get in the way of conception. It's also been shown to increase the frequency of uterine contractions, which could make implantation more challenging. Try to find ways to relax: Take a yoga class, soak in a bubble bath, go on a rejuvenating walk, write in a journal, or get a massage.

6. Get enough sleep

Aim to log in seven to eight solid hours of sleep when you're trying to conceive, if you can.

Research has shown that spotty sleep has been linked to irregular periods, which can affect fertility. Sleep is also important in staving off stress.

7. Cut out bad habits

If you smoke, it's time to quit, as smoking has been shown to have a negative impact on fertility and getting pregnant.

It's also a good idea to stop drinking alcohol (or at least seriously limit your intake) while you're trying to conceive and cut back your caffeine consumption to no more than 200 milligrams a day (about a 12-ounce cup of coffee).

8. Try a fertility tracker

If you are looking for more information about your unique cycle and fertile window, you may want to try a fertility tracker . Ovulation test strips , hormone monitors, and basal body thermometers can help you learn more about your cycle.

FAQs About Ovulation

How can you calculate ovulation with irregular periods?

If you have irregular periods, it can be more difficult to predict ovulation with a calculator. You can look for other signs of ovulation, like clearer, thinner, and more slippery cervical mucus.

When should you take a pregnancy test after you ovulate?

Pregnancy tests are usually most accurate from the estimated first day of your period, which is approximately 14 days after ovulation if your cycle is around 28 days.

How do you calculate days past ovulation (DPO)?

Days past ovulation (DPO) is calculated exactly as you would expect: by counting the days after ovulation. If you know your estimated ovulation date after using our Ovulation Calculator or by checking for ovulation symptoms, simply add the days after that date to find your DPO.

When do you ovulate during your menstrual cycle?

You typically ovulate about 14 days before the estimated start date of your next period.

What to Expect Before You're Expecting , 2nd edition, Heidi Murkoff. What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Ovulation Symptoms: 10 Signs of Ovulation to Know , October 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Ovulation , 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Can You Get Pregnant on Your Period? , May 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Irregular Periods and Getting Pregnant , August 2022. WhatToExpect.com, When Is the Best Time to Have Sex to Get Pregnant? , October 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Preparing for a Baby Before Conception , September 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How to Have a Boy or a Girl , March 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Prepregnancy Diet: Best Foods to Eat When You're Trying to Get Pregnant , September 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How to Track Your Cycle When You're Trying to Get Pregnant , January 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Your Pregnancy Week-by-Week , September 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Preconception Health , 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Your Preconception Checkup , September 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How to Use Ovulation Test Strips to Predict Your Most Fertile Days , March 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How Do You Use a BBT Chart to Pinpoint Ovulation? , March 2022. University of Rochester Medical Center, Ovulation Date Calculator , 2025. Stanford Children's Health, Ovulation Date Calculator , 2025.

Trending On What to Expect

Early Signs of Pregnancy

Pregnancy Calculator

⚠️ You can't see this cool content because you have ad block enabled. Please whitelist our site to get all the best deals and offers from our partners.

The Signs of Ovulation to Know

Your Preconception Checkup

Prepregnancy Diet: Best Foods to Eat When You're Trying to Get Pregnant

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window