Newborn Grasping Reflex

newborn grasp reflect, palmar reflex, adult hand holding baby's hand

Did your baby just wrap her tiny hand around your finger? Alas, she’s not trying to hold hands — but she is demonstrating a just-as-exciting newborn reflex called the palmar grasp.

You wouldn’t be the first proud parent to believe that your baby knows just what she’s doing when she grasps your finger in her tiny hand. In fact, this gesture actually is one of several reflexes that babies are born with — but that shouldn’t make it any less remarkable (or adorable).

What is the palmar grasp reflex?

The palmar grasp reflex — which allows your baby to close her fingers around an object placed in her palm — is one of several newborn reflexes that appear at birth. It’s the reason why, when you put your finger or a small toy into her hand, she’ll make a fist around it and hold on tightly.

Like many of the involuntary movements babies are born with, the grasp reflex probably developed to help her in some way — for example, to grab a nearby object or prepare to feed herself.

The palmar reflex is similar to another type of movement called the plantar reflex (or Babinski reflex), which causes your infant’s foot to curl in and her toes to flare or flex outward when the sole of her foot is stroked.

Other common newborn reflexes include the Moro reflex or startle reflex (when a baby extends her arms and legs after she’s startled), the rooting reflex (when you stroke baby’s cheek and she turns in that direction with a wide-open mouth) and the tonic neck reflex (when baby lies on her back with her head turned to one side, with that same arm extending out and the opposite arm bent at the elbow — as if she’s in a fencing position).

When does the grasping reflex appear in newborns?

The palmar reflex occurs as early as birth — and you may be surprised at just how strong your baby’s grip is. Even as a newborn, your baby’s grasp is strong enough to be almost lifted up if she’s using both her hands (though you shouldn’t try to test this out — she may let go and fall).

How long does the palmar grasp reflex last in newborns?

The palmar grasp reflex tends to fade away by month 5 or 6, which is about the age when your baby is able to grasp objects all on her own. At that age, when she grabs for that noisy shaker toy, it’s because she wants them — right now!

What happens if a newborn doesn’t have a grasp reflex?

Discuss any concerns with your pediatrician if baby doesn't seem to be exhibiting the palmar grasp reflex. (In older babies, reaching with just one hand or having trouble holding a cup or toy are among the signs of a possible fine motor skills delay.) Keep in mind, though, that a doctor or other expert is usually better at evaluating all those newborn reflexes than you might be.

In the meantime, enjoy your cutie’s clutch while it lasts. The palmar grasp reflex is fleeting, but before you know it, your baby will be grabbing onto your finger with all her strength — and this time, it’ll be because she doesn’t want to let go.