Palmar Erythema During Pregnancy: Why Your Palms May Become Red and Itchy

Light copy updates and updates to sources, fact-checked for accuracy.

Pregnant Woman Running Cold Water on Her Hands

What's up with those itchy, red or darker palms and feet? Here's help for easing palmar erythema during pregnancy.

Do your hands look like you’ve been touching hot stuff all the time? As early as the second month of pregnancy, the insides of your hands and the bottoms of your feet may itch and take on a darker or reddish hue.

"I’m 25 weeks now, and my left palm is a little red and itchy," says one What to Expect Community mom. "Has this happened to anyone else? What do you use to alleviate the itch?"

This redness and itchiness of the palms is called palmar erythema. Rest assured: Though it might seem alarming, palmar erythema isn’t harmful to you or your baby.

Key Takeaways

Palmar erythema is a common, harmless pregnancy symptom where the palms (and sometimes soles of the feet) turn red or darker and may itch. About 30 to 70% of moms-to-be experience this due to hormonal changes and increased blood flow.

There’s no way to prevent or cure palmar erythema, but avoiding irritants (harsh soaps, scented lotions, alcohol-based sanitizers) and heat or water exposure may help. You may also find some relief from applying ice packs to the skin.

Luckily, this symptom usually goes away after birth, but tell your practitioner about itchy palms or soles to be safe — severe itching could signal cholestasis, a more serious pregnancy condition that needs medical attention.

What is palmar erythema?

Palmar erythema is a skin condition in which the palms of both hands (and sometimes the feet) develop a reddish or darker color. The skin in these areas might also itch. Palmar erythema may occur in about 30 to 70% of pregnant people. Trusted SourceNew Zealand Dermatological Society, DermNet New ZealandPalmar ErythemaSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNew Zealand Dermatological Society, DermNet New ZealandPalmar ErythemaSee All Sources

What causes palmar erythema during pregnancy?

As with many of the other strange pregnancy symptoms you might experience, you can blame palmar erythema on your hormones. An increase in the hormone estrogen along with increased blood volume (which causes more blood to flow to your palms) are the likely culprits. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources

What does palmar erythema look like?

Palmar erythema can produce changes to the skin on your palms, fingers, and sometimes the bottoms of the feet.

In people with light skin, palmar erythema may appear as red or pink patches, while people with dark skin may have darker patches in these areas.

How can you prevent palmar erythema during pregnancy?

There’s no way to prevent palmar erythema during pregnancy, but it’s best to stay away from potential irritants that could make symptoms worse, including:

Harsh bar soaps

Scented lotions

Hand sanitizer with alcohol

Washing dishes

Taking hot baths

Gardening

Your best bet is to wear gloves when doing activities where your hands are frequently in hot water, and using fragrance-free, gentle skincare products.

How can you treat palmar erythema during pregnancy?

While there is no specific treatment, the good news is palmar erythema is just another pregnancy symptom that should disappear after you give birth.

In the meantime, some women find relief by soaking their hands and/or feet in cold water or holding an ice bag for a few minutes a couple of times a day.

For more on navigating unexpected pregnancy symptoms, open the What to Expect app , your guide to every week of pregnancy, with a community of moms-to-be who are going through it all, too.

When to talk to your doctor about palmar erythema

It’s a good idea to mention any itching of your palms and soles to your practitioner. Sometimes itchy hands and feet (along with other symptoms) can be related to cholestasis , a serious pregnancy condition.

If itching on your palms or bottoms of your feet becomes unbearable or if it (or the darker, redder skin patches) spread to other parts of your body, consult your practitioner or dermatologist about next steps. Your health care provider will be able to give you advice about what’s safe to use for itching during pregnancy and check to make sure nothing else is contributing to your symptoms.