Parents Spend More Than $170 on Holiday Gifts for Each Child, Survey Finds

pile of colorfully wrapped presents on top of a receipt

Moms with multiple kids shell out less per child, though.

Key findings

On average, parents spend $173 on holiday gifts per each child. That doesn't really change based on age; even babies under 12 months old get a comparable amount of presents to kids ages 1 to 4.

Gen Z moms spend more on kids' gifts than Millennial ones. Even though they make considerably less money, younger moms are willing to fork over more cash on holiday presents for their little ones.

Moms with multiple kids spend about 18% less per child. Parents with only one child tend to have a bigger budget.

With Black Friday and Cyber Monday coming up, parents are feeling the pressure now more than ever to stock up on gifts for their kids ahead of this holiday season. Even with big discounts, the costs add up quickly.

"I feel like I spent a ridiculous amount on presents last year, and I'm wondering whether I should choose an amount and stick to it or just buy whatever like I usually do," one mom in the What to Expect Community recently wrote.

The "right" amount to spend on kids' presents is different for each family — many factors like kids' age and parents' salary play a role, of course. However, on average, parents spend $173 per child each holiday season, according to a new What to Expect poll of 467 moms. Here's what to know about how other families handle their holiday shopping so you can plan your own spending budget before you add to cart.

Moms with multiple kids spend less per child.

It's no surprise that the holidays get even more expensive when you have multiple kids. That's likely why moms with more than one child spend 18% less per child on average than those with one kid. Moms with only one little one plan to spend $202 on presents. If there's a sibling at home, moms spend $170 on each child. There's no lacking in any family though because if siblings share nicely they may actually end up with twice the gifts.

how much parents spend on holiday gifts per child

Families spend almost the same amount on babies, toddlers and older kids.

The magic number for holiday spending is $173 per child. That's an average, of course, and it doesn't include other holiday expenses, like decorations, special meals and presents for extended family members.

Looking closer at the child's age only changes the amount slightly: Kids ages 1 to 4 get $161 worth of presents. Then babies 12 months and under get $168 worth of presents. That's a lot considering that kids this age can find a lot of joy in less expensive items.

"We can't afford to buy lots of gifts, but besides that, it still feels a bit of a waste to heavily focus on gifts because my [1-year-old son] won't understand yet," one What to Expect mom says. "He'll just be excited to play with a new toy, be it an actual toy for him or the box from my gift to my husband ."

Gen Z moms spend more on kids' gifts than Millennial ones.

On average, Gen Z moms shell out $179 on each child, compared to Millennial moms, who spend $170 per kid.

The difference in generosity is surprising considering these younger moms earn less than their elder counterparts. Gen Z moms in the survey have an average household income of $56,021, compared to the $76,747 that Millennial moms earn annually.

If you're feeling the pinch this holiday season, you're not alone — and there are ways to make gift-giving more meaningful than a price tag: "Historically, we've caved to the pressure and gone insane trying to buy tons of gifts," one What to Expect mom shares. "But we recently decided to implement a new rule of four gifts each: one thing they want , one thing they need, one thing they wear and one thing they read . I already feel a huge weight lifted just deciding to do that!"

Methodology

The Everyday Health Group Pregnancy & Parenting Talk to Moms Monthly Poll was conducted by Everyday Health Group – Pregnancy and Parenting between October 30 and November 1, 2024. We surveyed 467 women ages 18 to 44 who have at least one child up to 5 years old.

Everyday Health Group, Pregnancy & Parenting Talk to Moms Monthly Poll, November 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Best Holiday Gifts for Newborns, According to Pediatricians and Parents , December 2022.

Your Next Read

How Much Does It Cost to Have a Baby? Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

How Much to Tip Your Nanny or Babysitter for the Holidays Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Moms Lose an Average of $9,500 When They Take Maternity Leave Fact Checked by Dominique De Lope, Senior Manager, Trade Insights

How Much to Pay a Babysitter or Nanny Fact Checked by Marcy Lovitch

Nearly Half of Moms Say They Buy Gifts for Their Labor and Delivery Team Fact Checked by Lauren LaCross, Senior Research Analyst

Ready for the Spotlight? How to Tell if Baby Modeling Is in the Stars for Your Child Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Labor and Delivery Is Pushing Moms Into Debt — This Advice Can Help Slash the Bill Fact Checked by Dominique De Lope, Senior Manager, Trade Insights

14 Ways to Save Money on Diapers Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

How to Hire a Nanny Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window