Past Your Due Date? These Restaurant Meals Might Just Kickstart Labor

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Labor inducing restaurant meals

Moms around the country swear by these dishes for speeding up labor.

When the big day should be days away (or should have been days ago), and baby's not budging, any old wives' tale seems worth a try. But rather than waiting around for baby to make her arrival, why not get dressed up one last time and dine out?

While experts will tell you there's no proof that so-called labor-inducing foods can jumpstart the birthing process, thousands of mamas beg to differ. “My water broke spontaneously after a day of walking, sex, and some slices of a super spicy jalapeño,” reported What to Expect Community member allier0120 . Many parents even credit specific restaurant meals with fast-tracking baby's arrival.

Below, seven legendary labor-inducing meals you can find at restaurants from the Atlantic to the Pacific.

Key-Takeaways

It's a fun tradition. While certain restaurant meals are rumored to help move things along, there's no scientific proof that foods help start labor.

Spicy and hearty foods top the list. Rich meals with kick like spicy tacos, buffalo pizza, or Lobster Francaise are frequently mentioned by moms-to-be.

Your body knows best. Once labor starts, stick to easy-to-digest foods and stay hydrated to make childbirth as comfortable as possible.

'Prego Pizza' from Skipolini's

If anything can get baby out, perhaps it's a four-pound pizza baby. With six locations in California and one in Nevada, Skipolini's Pizza , sees as many as 10 expectant moms each night for their famous Preggo Pizza.

As the story goes, back in 1981, a pregnant woman asked to be served whatever would get her baby out. The manager delivered a monster pie with 13 toppings, including six types of meat and extra onions and garlic. Later that evening, her water broke.

Now, there are dozens of success stories — baby photos and all — listed on the restaurant's website. At the very least, you won't leave hungry.

'The Inducer' from Hawthorne's New York Pizza & Bar

A single slice of The Inducer allegedly helped break one woman's water, and many more moms report to this Charlotte, North Carolina pizza joint for a final kick of flavor, according to The Charlotte Observer . With chicken, mozzarella cheese, and Hawthorne's medium-hot buffalo sauce, this pizza will jumpstart your digestive system — and, according to some pregnant diners, trigger contractions too.

'Maternity Salad' from Caioti Pizza Café

Seeking something slightly healthier for your pre-delivery meal? Caioti Pizza Café in Studio City, California has been serving up its Maternity Salad to hungry moms-to-be for some 30 years now. The salad's ingredients seem pretty basic (romaine lettuce, watercress, walnuts, and pasteurized gorgonzola cheese), but the dressing is a well-protected family secret.

It even has the Hollywood stamp of approval: Hilary Duff gave it a shot, and the Today Show's Carson Daly and wife Siri even had it delivered to New York City before baby number two arrived.

Have more questions about delivery or recovery? Find trusted answers and personalized support in the What to Expect app .

Shrimp quesadillas from Las Margaritas

While restaurant owner Alberto Roman makes no big deal out of his Gainesville, Florida restaurant's shrimp quesadillas, a handful of mamas insist they do the trick .

Spicy foods have long been considered possible labor-inducers, yet this quesadilla is on the mild side (think: cheese, grilled shrimp, onions, bell peppers, and tomatoes with a side of guacamole salad, sour cream, and rice or beans). Perhaps it's the jalapeño peppers in the pico de gallo that get baby ready to go, muses Roman.

Lobster Française from Henry's Salt of the Sea

Enter Henry's Salt of the Sea in Allentown, Pennsylvania with a bulging belly, and owner Randy Maurer will serve you up his signature dish: Lobster Francaise. This is one you'll want to devour. Egg-battered cold water lobster tails are finished off with mushrooms, tomatoes, capers, and loads of butter.

If you're past your due date, perhaps you'll join the ranks of the two dozen or so women who swear this dish sent them straight to the delivery room.

Spicy tacos from Loco Taqueria & Oyster Bar

Some South Boston women swear that spicy food is the ticket to a newborn baby, flocking to Loco Taqueria & Oyster Bar for spicy tacos and chips from the taqueria. Credit, perhaps, goes to a secret recipe for the spices on pretty much every dish on the menu, chef Matt Drummond tells CBS Boston . If it doesn't work, who can complain about one last night out on the town? Loco just so happens to be one of the most happening spots in Southie.

Anything from Taco Bell

No matter where you are, readers in the What to Expect Community have shared that a quick meal from Taco Bell may just take you over the finish line. One new mother writes, “I had Taco Bell yesterday, unknowingly, and had my baby girl this morning! I guess it's worth a try!” Another mama wrote that the chain's Volcano Tacos with extreme hot sauce are your best bet.

Just remember: Once you've entered early labor, skip the fatty foods and stick to easy-to-digest snacks like toast or plain pasta with lots of water (staying hydrated is key!).

WhatToExpect.com, Can Certain Foods Induce Labor? , April 2022. The Charlotte Observer, Is the Buffalo Wing Pizza at Hawthorne’s New York Pizza & Bar inducing labor? , October 2019. E! News, Hilary Duff Is Trying to Induce Her Labor—With a Special Salad , October 2018. The Gainesville Sun, Past Due Having Your Baby? Shrimp Quesadillas May Help , August 2012. CBS Boston, Women Claim South Boston Restaurant's Spicy Food Helped Induce Labor , May 2017. WhatToExpect.com, The 3 Stages of Labor: What Happens and When , October 2025.

Updates history

December 3, 2025

Editor: Lisa Lombardi/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Foods to Induce Labor: The Truth About What Works — and What's Unsafe Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

7 Exercises to 'Induce' Labor Medically Reviewed by Kristin Cohen, DNP, CNM, WHNP-BC

How to Fuel for Delivery: What to Eat and Drink During Labor for Maximum Energy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

16 Signs of Labor — Here’s What to Expect When It’s Go-Time Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Fact vs. Fiction: 8 Pregnancy Myths You'll Hear — and What's Actually True Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

12 Smart Ways to Get Ready for Labor (Physically and Mentally) Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Giving Nature a Nudge: Your Guide to Labor Induction and Why You Might Need to Be Induced Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Thinking About Castor Oil to Kick-Start Labor? The Potential Benefits (and Drawbacks) Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Unsafe Foods to Avoid at Restaurants While You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Still Pregnant? Here’s What It Means to Be Overdue Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Diarrhea Before Labor (Prelabor Diarrhea) Medically Reviewed by Lisa Hickman, M.D.

Is This It? How to Tell When It's Really Time to Go to the Hospital for Labor Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Can Sex Really Bring on Labor? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

What to Eat for Dinner When You’re Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

11 Holiday Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy and Safe Alternatives to Enjoy Instead Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window