Pelvic Pressure or Pain? Why Your Groin Hurts and What Can Help

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pelvic pain during pregnancy

It can be a pressing issue in your ninth month. Here's what causes pelvic pain during pregnancy and what you can do to ease it.

If your pelvis is aching, you're not alone. Up to 80% of women experience groin pain at some point during pregnancy, mostly in that final trimester when stress on the pelvic region is especially intense. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicLow Back and Pelvic Pain in PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicLow Back and Pelvic Pain in PregnancySee All Sources

It's even more noticeable once lightening occurs ( when your baby drops into the pelvic area in preparation for labor, typically about two to four weeks before delivery if it's your first baby — though many women won't experience it until they're in the early phases of labor).

Groin pain, however, can hit at almost any point in pregnancy, and its impact can range from minor (a few twinges, aches, or a general feeling of heaviness and pressure in the pelvic region) to debilitating (a searing sensation that wraps around your back and snakes down below your growing belly).

Pinpointing just what it is (or, rather, what it isn't) is tough because it's such a wide-ranging problem and can sometimes be difficult to describe to your obstetric provider.

Key Takeaways

Groin pain is super common. Nearly 80% of women have it in late pregnancy since your baby on board is lower and heavier in your pelvis, straining muscles and joints.

Pain and pressure are different. Pelvic pain is achy and sharp, while pressure in this area could point to early labor and feels like menstrual cramps with low back pain.

You can ease the discomfort. Try a belly sling, warm bath, massage, or pelvic exercises. But if the pain is severe, call your physician about other treatment options.

Is it pelvic pressure or pain?

It's important to know the difference between pelvic pain and pelvic pressure, as the latter signals the beginning of cervical effacement and dilation — i.e., labor.

Pelvic pressure in the pelvis and rectal area feels like cramps (similar to menstrual ones) and groin discomfort, and it often comes along with a low backache. It's also more likely to occur in second and subsequent pregnancies.

Symptoms for pelvic pain, on the other hand, include wrenching pain (as though your pelvis is coming apart) and discomfort while walking. It can be short-lived, like the round ligament pain that sometimes strikes during the second trimester.

It can also be intermittent, made worse by certain positions (yours or your little passenger's) or activities, like coughing, lifting something heavy, or certain sex positions.

Wonder if what you're feeling is normal? The What to Expect app is your go-to resource for trusted expert advice and guidance for first-time mamas and veterans alike.

What causes pelvic pain during pregnancy?

Your increasingly heavy baby is burrowing deeper into your pelvis in preparation for birth, and that little (or not-so-little) head is now pressing hard against your bladder, rectum, hips, and pelvic bones.

The result is an ever-increasing stress on the joints, muscles, and organs in your pelvis and back.

On the bright side, once your baby drops, your uterus will stop pressing up against your diaphragm and lungs, which will let you take bigger and deeper breaths. You may also notice some relief from the rib pain that may have plagued you for many months.

What to Expect Community parent kbell99 says, “I know our ligaments are loosening up, but my gosh I feel so sore down there.” Her fix? Extra rest.

Pelvic pain differs from symphysis pubis dysfunction (SPD) in that the discomfort is more generalized and isn't necessarily caused by the loosening of ligaments.

It's also not like sciatica, in that the pain isn't caused by pressure on your sciatic nerve. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSciaticaSee All Sources [2] That means it's more localized to your pelvic area (and doesn't shoot down your legs).

Sciatica

What can you do about groin pain during pregnancy?

There are a few things that might bring you relief from pelvic pain when you're pregnant:

Do some pelvic exercises (like pelvic tilts ) or relax with your hips elevated.

Take a warm bath — it'll give you a break from gravity weighing you down.

Apply a heating pad to your lower back for 20 minutes at a time, taking at least a 20-minute break before applying again.

Invest in a belly band , which can also lessen gravity's effect. Ask your practitioner for recommendations or check online.

Get a prenatal massage from a therapist certified in treating pregnant women. Be sure to check the masseuse's license and references.

Try acupuncture , an increasingly popular way to alleviate all kinds of pregnancy ills, including pelvic pain.

Talk to your practitioner about pregnancy-safe pain relievers or muscle relaxants if the pain is severe.