What Is a Phantom Pregnancy?

phantom pregnancy, ghostly image of woman's arms touching flowers, double exposed photo of woman touching flowers

A phantom pregnancy may feel like a real pregnancy and have the same symptoms, but it’s not actually a true pregnancy. Learn more about this very rare phenomenon.

Some expectant moms just know they’re pregnant even before the pregnancy test comes back positive. Other newly pregnant women can’t believe they’ve actually got a bun in the oven even when the home test or ultrasound confirms the happy news.

But in a few rare cases, a hopeful mom-to-be believes she’s pregnant — and may even have the physical symptoms to back it up — but she’s not actually expecting a baby. This is called a phantom pregnancy.

What is a phantom pregnancy?

Known officially as pseudocyesis, a phantom or false pregnancy is when a woman believes she's pregnant even though she isn’t. The phenomenon is quite rare, but for women who are experiencing it, it feels quite real … real in the sense that they feel psychologically pregnant and may even manifest some physical symptoms, but there is no actual baby growing, no positive pregnancy test, no fetal heartbeat and no ultrasound confirmation.

Symptoms of a phantom pregnancy

Women experiencing a phantom pregnancy may have many or even all of the physical signs one would normally associate with pregnancy, including:

Lack of a period

Breast tenderness and enlargement

Abdominal enlargement

Nausea

Vomiting

Weight gain

Urinary frequency

Food cravings

Sensation of fetal movement

In some cases, a woman experiencing a phantom pregnancy may have elevated levels of estrogen or prolactin, which may be the reason behind some of the physical symptoms — as well as the psychological symptoms (such as the desire to bond with a baby) — of a phantom pregnancy.

What's the difference between a phantom pregnancy and a real pregnancy?

While women with pseudocyesis report physical signs and symptoms of pregnancy, and they believe with everything they’ve got that they’re pregnant, a phantom pregnancy is missing one key component that is always there in a real pregnancy: a positive pregnancy test for the pregnancy hormone hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin). Although home pregnancy tests do sometimes come back with false negative results, a second negative blood pregnancy test proves that there is no pregnancy.

Causes of a phantom pregnancy

What might be the cause of a phantom pregnancy? There are a few possibilities as to why this phenomenon occurs.

A mind-body feedback loop

Experts suspect that most phantom pregnancies happen due to a mind-body feedback loop, in which a strong emotion causes an elevation of hormones, in turn resulting in physical symptoms that mimic those of a true pregnancy. That strong emotion could be anxiety about fertility challenges, for instance, or intense grief following a pregnancy loss . In these cases, when there’s a strong yearning for pregnancy, the mind has a surprisingly powerful influence on the body, generating pregnancy symptoms when there’s no baby in utero. In essence, the belief that there is a pregnancy serves as a defense against confrontation with a difficult reality, offering hope and reducing feelings of loss, anger, grief, jealousy and depression that may have resulted from years of infertility or pregnancy losses.

A physical condition

In some cases, a physical condition — an ovarian or pituitary tumor, for instance — can be the cause of elevated hormone levels, abdominal enlargement and missed periods.

A mental health condition

Depression on its own is also thought to be a risk factor in phantom pregnancies, often over infertility struggles or pregnancy losses.

What to do about a phantom pregnancy

In a phantom pregnancy, the woman may deny the proof (say, from an ultrasound) that she is not actually pregnant, and it’s extremely difficult to swallow the reality, since it will expose her to the psychological feelings — the grief, sadness, anxiety, envy — she was trying to protect herself from. It will be important for her to have a support system — her partner, her practitioner and a psychologist or psychiatrist — who will approach her situation with compassion and care, recognizing that she’s going through a trauma and is in mourning, all while helping her accept the truth.

The phenomenon of phantom pregnancy is very rare, but to the woman experiencing it, it feels very real. Support and emotional care will be crucial in helping the hopeful mom-to-be accept the truth and move forward in a healthy way.