Picture-Perfect Maternity Photo Ideas for Every Parent-to-Be

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Maternity photo shoot

Planning a maternity photo session? Here's inspiration for how to make the shoot uniquely yours.

Taking photos during your pregnancy helps capture your body's week-by-week transformation along with your feelings of anticipation as you wait for your family to grow.

When it comes to maternity photos , you've got tons of options. Different poses, props, backdrops, and even pets can reflect the personality and style of the parents-to-be.

"I always recommend that my clients choose a location that is meaningful for them and helps to tell their story," says Sara Wight , a New York City- and Washington D.C.-based photographer.

That could be the site of a meaningful moment, a beautiful vista, or simply the comforts of your living room. Think of spots that bring you joy, nourishment, and inspiration for your pregnancy photo shoot, she recommends.

No matter how you pose — or who joins you in the photo — keep the focus on the bump, Wight advises. "That might seem obvious, but sometimes it's unnoticeable at first glance if you are looking at [the mom-to-be] straight on," she says. Wight's goal when taking maternity pictures: a photo where the bump is showcased in a natural, flattering way.

Not sure where to begin? Browse this list for a little maternity photo shoot inspiration.

Key Takeaways

Maternity photos are a fun way to capture your growing bump and all the excitement that comes with it. From simple poses to playful props, there's no shortage of ways to make the moment feel uniquely yours.

Meaningful locations and natural, flattering angles help keep the focus right where it belongs — on your bump. Think of locations and poses that spark joy and show off your natural glow.

Whether you keep it sweet, silly, or full-on festive, there's a maternity photo idea for every parent-to-be. Think about what would be the most meaningful way for you to tell your family's story.

Couple maternity photo ideas

Want to give your partner a starring role in your maternity pictures? Recreate one of these couple-friendly poses.

Hand-in-hand, together

hand-in-hand maternity photo

No need to strike an unnatural pose for a pregnancy announcement. In this simple shot, the parents-to-be hold hands while walking together, with the mom-to-be's free hand resting on her baby bump.

Sweet embrace

maternity photo idea for couple

Pull your significant other in close to replicate this sweet photo.

A holiday twist

holiday maternity photo

If the timing works, both parents-to-be can don Halloween costumes. That, along with a letterboard to share some pertinent details about the baby's arrival, can help you spread the news. Or, work in another upcoming holiday — Easter, Hanukkah, or more! — into a couple-friendly photo shoot.

Confetti, plus a big balloon

couple maternity photo

Cue the confetti! Along with a big balloon — and bigger smiles — a festive sprinkle on the expectant parents shows the excitement levels for this baby are high.

Cute and cozy

maternity photo of couple in the woods

Let your wardrobe help signify your closeness. Warm textures and complimentary colors can help convey your (growing!) love on camera.

Family maternity photo ideas

Welcoming a second child to your family? Make celebratory photos a group event including friends, family, and soon-to-be older siblings.

All dressed in white

family maternity photo

It's a family affair for these glowing parents as they announce their second child.

Matching bumps

mom and toddler maternity photo

A pudgy toddler belly resting on mom's own growing bump leads to a sweet shot. This maternity photo idea gives an older sibling a starring role.

Funny maternity photo ideas

Sending maternity photos to friends and family near and far? Seize the opportunity to put a smile on their faces.

An unexpected vantage point

funny maternity photo

This pose plays with perspective by placing the dad-to-be's head atop the pregnant parent's body. It's the kind of photo that'll make viewers do a second take — then giggle.

Surprise! A baby's on the way

funny maternity photo pose for couple

These parents-to-be don their best shocked faces to spread the news, complete with a sonogram .

Starring dad

pregnancy test maternity photo

A message on a pregnancy test sums it all up for this growing family.

Maternity photo poses

A growing bump is the natural star of any maternity photo. But figuring out the best way to pose isn't always easy. Let these beautiful photos inspire you on how to approach your own photo session.

Looking down at your bump

maternity photo pose

No need to reinvent the wheel! This mom-to-be proves that a loving look at your growing baby bump plus a natural backdrop is a no-fail combination.

Cross-legged

maternity photo at home

A casual photo, with legs crossed at home, captures this mom at ease in her third trimester . Just don't wait to go too close to your due date. "I'm a maternity and newborn photographer, and I encourage my clients to have their maternity session between 28 and 34 weeks," says What to Expect Community mom elliesmom24. "It's the perfect sweet spot. Anything later and you might feel way too swollen and blah, or you might entirely miss the session because baby came earlier. It's happened before!"

Among the trees

maternity photo pose with bump

A side profile puts the focus on the baby, with the mama's big grin making her joy for the new arrival crystal clear.

A close-up on a moment of calm

maternity photo pose sitting

Both the setting (in the bedroom) and the tight crop on the mom-to-be make this an intimate shot.

A side stance

maternity photo with waterfall

Standing in silhouette and turning to face the camera can showcase your bump and beaming smile all at once.

Framed by foliage

fall maternity photo

The sightlines at your photo shoot setting can help draw the focus to your growing baby.

In silhouette

maternity photo pose silhouette

A glowing sunset provided the perfect light for showcasing this mom-to-be's baby bump.

Cute candid

candid maternity photo

Bonus points if the photographer (or your partner) can get a genuine laugh out of you.

Maternity photo shoot props

Not sure what to bring with you besides your best duds? Try posing with some props for a wider variety of photos in your camera reel.

Colorful balloons

maternity photo with couple holding balloons

A trip to the party store for some oversized balloons can yield some pretty festive results.

Baby is THIS big

maternity photo pose from the side

If you love to track your baby's week-by-week development , bring on the produce props and highlight baby's size with the corresponding fruit or vegetable. A handy letterboard can provide more relevant details.

Shades and a summery hat

summer maternity photo

Your family's future is looking bright, so why not put on a pair of sunnies and a wide-brimmed hat for part of your maternity photo shoot?

Get prepped for baby one step at a time with the What to Expect app , where you'll find pregnancy and post-baby checklists, tips, and expert guidance from now through delivery.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, What Are Milk Bath Maternity Photos — and Are They Safe? , June 2021. WhatToExpect.com, How to Take Professional-Looking Newborn Photos at Home , October 2021. Sara Wight, Sara Wight Fine Art Photography , New York City, NY, and Washington, D.C.

Updates history

November 25, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

13 Fabulous Fall Maternity Photos to Honor a New Season of Your Life Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Family Maternity Shoot Ideas to Celebrate a New Sibling Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

11 Gorgeous Winter Maternity Photos Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

14 Gorgeous Plus-Size Maternity Photos That'll Inspire You to Document This Beautiful Stage Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

7 Photos Every Pregnant Mom Needs — Because You'll Regret Not Taking Them Later Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Sweet Monthly Photo Shoot Ideas for Every Family By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

11 Fall Pregnancy Announcements That Are Pure Autumnal Bliss Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

From 'Half-Baked' Desserts to 'Half-Bloomed' Bellies: Inside the Middle-of-Pregnancy Photo Trend Taking Off Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Easy-to-Take Holiday Photos You’ll Cherish for Years to Come By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

9 Creative DIY Pregnancy Announcements for Crafty Parents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

This Is Your Sign to Have a Valentine's Day Photo Shoot With Your Baby By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

12 Pregnancy Announcement Templates to Personalize Your Big News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

8 Tips to Get the Sweetest Photos of Your Kids — Without Fancy Equipment or a Full Day Photoshoot Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window