Planning for a Baby Financially? Add These 11 Tasks to Your Pre-Baby Checklist

getting finances in order to have baby

Whether your pregnancy was part of a carefully considered plan or a complete surprise, try some of these tips to get your financial ducks in a row before your little duckling arrives.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, What Is a Doula and Should You Hire One for Your Baby's Birth? , April 2022. WhatToExpect.com, How to Write a Will: A Guide for New Parents , October 2021. WhatToExpect.com, What Every Mom Needs to Know About Maternity Leave , March 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Life Insurance 101: A Guide for New Parents , October 2021. WhatToExpect.com, 4 Ways to Save for Your Kid's College , December 2023. WhatToExpect.com, How to Use WIC — Because It Goes Way Beyond Free Formula , December 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Should You Buy New or Used? A Guide to Baby Gear , September 2023. WhatToExpect.com, The Best 529 Plans to Set Up for Your Children , January 2024. WhatToExpect.com, When to Buy and Start Wearing Maternity Clothes , February 2024. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, HealthCare.gov . Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, HealthCare.gov, Medicaid & CHIP . Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Service, HealthCare.gov, Ways to Apply & Enroll for Health Insurance . Department of Labor, Wages and Hour Division (WHD), Family and Medical Leave Act . Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, WIC Eligibility Requirements , April 2023. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) . Department of Health and Human Services, HHS.gov, Who Is Eligible for Medicaid? , December 2022.

Your Next Read

Your Pre-Pregnancy Check List: How to Get Your Body, Budget, and Life Ready for Baby Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

How to Make — and Keep! — a Family Budget Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

What New Parents Need to Know About Life Insurance to Plan With Confidence Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How Much Does It Cost to Have a Baby? Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Not Sure If You’re Ready For a Baby? The Big Questions to Ask Before You Start Trying Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The 10 Questions Experts Say Matter Most Before Deciding to Have Another Baby Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

One Week to Go? 10 Things to Do Before Your Due Date Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

How Much Does Pregnancy Cost? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Creating a Nursery on a Budget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

12 Smart Ways to Get Ready for Labor (Physically and Mentally) Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Pregnant and Single? Here’s How to Get the Support You Need Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

The Ultimate Third Trimester Checklist: Everything to Do Before Your Baby’s Birthday Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Baby Registry Checklist: Exactly What to Put on a Baby Registry Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window