Playground Safety for Babies and Toddlers

playground safety

Busy toddlers and soon-to-be walkers should always play it safe on the playground. Here’s what you need to know the next time you head to the sandbox, slide or swings.

Just because she's pint-sized doesn't mean your baby or toddler is too little for the playground! In fact, you’ll be helping to develop your child’s gross motor skills as she explores the swings, sandbox and slide. And a visit to the playground can mean you both might make some new friends, too.

But beyond practicing coordination, building muscles and honing social skills, your child’s safety should be your top priority. Always supervise your baby or toddler and check each play area for safety before your child uses it. For safety tips by the ages, here’s how to cruise the grounds with your little cruiser.

Why is playground safety so important?

Unfortunately, more than 200,000 kids are injured on playgrounds each year, in part because of a lack of supervision by parents as well as falls from equipment and other gear-related hazards. Safety on the playground is vital for kids as not every apparatus is designed for all age ranges and some items may have hidden dangers, including broken or worn out pieces that make them unsafe.

All kids also need to be taught the ground rules (taking turns, no pushing) when they’re on swings or climbing a jungle gym. And because playing is hard work, proper footwear like sneakers or other sporty shoes is a must. Be sure to skip hooded sweatshirts with strings, scarves and necklaces that may snag on play gear.

Be mindful of playground surfaces and avoid concrete or asphalt. Instead, choose safe substances underfoot like wood chips, sand, pea gravel, synthetic turf or rubber mats. Soft materials should be 12 inches deep and all types should extend six feet around in-ground equipment. For swings, safe surfaces should stretch to double the height of the set’s top.

Playground safety tips for babies

While your baby may not be walking or even crawling yet, it's still important to keep safety in mind at the playground. Keep an eagle eye on her at all times and bear these safety tips in mind:

Buckle up. If the park has baby bucket-style swings, by month 7, your baby is probably old enough to take a gentle spin. Look for seats made from rubber, plastic or canvas, and buckle your baby with the safety strap.

Check the clearance. Be sure the set is securely attached to the ground with a six-foot swing clearance on the sides, at least 24 inches between seats and just two swings per section.

Help her slide… Most babies can’t tackle the slide alone so stand at the side and glide her gently down on her bottom — and always position her feet first.

…but don’t slide together. As cute as it seems, don’t be tempted to ride the slide with your baby on your lap. It’s not safe, as kids’ legs can get caught or hurt on the descent.

Sift the sand. Yup, do a quick check of this material for any broken glass or other debris. And since she’ll no doubt want to taste the sand, sit next to her to discourage the practice!

Climb with help. Just as with the slide, you’ll need to guide your little climber (or literally support her the whole way) as she attempts to climb playground gear.

Playground safety tips for toddlers

Older tots can do a lot more on the playground, but they still require supervision from you and some safety reminders (or a helping hand) when they use the equipment.

Sit — don’t stand. Be sure your toddler sits bottom down on the swing, rather than dangle on her tummy, kneel or try to stand up. Only one person should swing per seat, and remind your tot to hold on while in motion and let the swing stop before getting off.

Walk with care. Point out to your toddler that walking too closely in front of or behind the swings could knock her over. Show her how to make a wide arc around the swing set.

Feet first. Some bigger kids are daredevils, so be certain your child uses the slide on her bottom with her feet forward — not head first or on her stomach.

Exit quickly. Kids should leave the bottom of the slide as soon as they arrive and never climb back up it (someone could be careening down at the same time).

Slide one at a time. No teaming up on the slide, please. Toddlers should descend one at a time and only after the slide and bottom area are clear of other kids.

Ascend slowly. Teach your tot to hold the rails of any apparatus with both hands and climb the slide stairs and jungle gyms carefully.

Watch for sharp edges. Metal equipment may sport pointy parts and nails or screws may protrude from wooden structures. Give these pieces a once-over and then a pass if you spy anything sharp. Ditto for rusty patches or peeling paint, which may contain lead.

Seesaw smart. Older toddlers may have enough coordination to try this piece out, though the one-per-seat rule still applies. Find a child of similar age to sit opposite yours and show her how to hold the bar with two hands and point her feet out to the sides.

How to teach your child about playground safety

It’s not too early to point out some playground safety rules to your baby or toddler, like waiting for other kids to get off before you take a turn on a piece of equipment and never shoving or rushing someone on the slide or swings. Always explain the right way to use an apparatus, which means sitting down to swing, never climbing up the slide and staying inside the railings at the top of a slide or jungle gym.

It’s also smart to show your child how to test the surfaces of jungle gym bars, swings and slides, as contact burns from hot metal or plastic are possible. And avoid wet equipment and play surfaces, which may be slippery and could cause falls. Bikes and backpacks should be kept away from equipment to prevent tripping.

Kids love to jump, as you’re quickly learning, so warn your child to make sure no one is in the way if they’re going to leap off the slide bottom or jump the last step of a climbing structure. For the safest landing, have her end up on both feet with knees bent. And don’t forget to apply sunscreen and dress your baby or toddler in a hat — even on cloudy days — to prevent sunburn.

Playground fun can only be successful if safety is kept top of mind. With close supervision, the right clothing and shoes and some simple rules against rough play around the equipment, your baby or toddler will have the time of her life at the playground (she may never want to leave!).