Port-Wine Stain (Nevus flammeus) in Babies

Updated and medically reviewed to ensure accuracy.

Updated and medically reviewed to ensure accuracy.

port-wine stain baby birthmark, paint brush with lilac flowers conceptual image

This purplish-red birthmark typically appears on the face and limbs and on just one side of the body.

Port-wine stains are hard to miss — so chances are you've spotted one before. But if your baby has one of these birthmarks, you probably have a lot more questions. At the top of the list: Are they harmful?

Here are the answers you're looking for, plus more about where port-wine stains come from and advice on keeping your sweetie's spots properly cared for.

What are port-wine stains?

Port-wine stains are flat, purplish-reddish birthmarks that get their name from their resemblance to spilled red wine. Officially called nevus flammeus, port-wine stains affect around 3 in 1,000 children and seem to occur with the same frequency in all skin tones. They're typically visible at birth but tend to get darker and bigger with age. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBaby Birthmarks & RashesSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBaby Birthmarks & RashesSee All Sources

Port-wine stains are usually harmless. But as your little one gets older and starts to take notice, she might become self-conscious about her birthmark. The spots can also be prone to dryness or irritation, and in rare cases, could be linked to certain health conditions.

Where do port-wine stains usually appear?

Port-wine stains tend to show up in prominent areas like the face, neck, arms or legs. But they can also appear on the scalp, where they're more hidden. It's possible for the marks to form on other parts of the body too.

What causes port-wine stain birthmarks?

Research has shown that port-wine stains are caused by tiny blood vessels called capillaries that form abnormally in the skin (also known as capillary malformation).

But while experts know what seems to cause port-wine stains, there's no known way to prevent them. One thing that is certain, however: They're not caused by anything a mother does while she's pregnant. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursPort-Wine StainsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursPort-Wine StainsSee All Sources

Do port-wine stains disappear?

Unlike some other birthmarks, port-wine stains are considered permanent. Most experts recommend treating port-wine stains on the face at a young age when they tend to be smaller in size and lighter in color.

Some laser treatments can be effective in safely getting the mark to fade or even disappear, especially if the procedure is done during infancy before the stain starts to grow darker. That said, success isn't always guaranteed — the purplish blood vessels under the skin can be resistant and often require multiple treatments over many months before there's any improvement.

You can care for your child's port-wine stain by keeping the area well moisturized, since port-wine stains can get drier than the rest of your baby's skin. Plenty of hydration will help keep the spot comfortable and reduce the risk of potential irritation.

When to speak to your baby's pediatrician about port-wine stains

Your child's doctor will likely spot a port-wine stain during a routine well visit. But if the pediatrician doesn't notice or mention it, bring it up. While port-wine stains are usually harmless, certain marks might need to be monitored. Stains around the eyes or forehead could be linked to a rare genetic neurological condition called Sturge-Weber syndrome. Marks near the eyes could also raise the risk of glaucoma.

No matter where your baby's stain might be, watch for any signs of irritation. If you notice that her port-wine stain seems to be itchy or painful, or if it's bleeding or becomes infected, call the pediatrician.

The good news? As long as you keep port-wine stains moisturized and watch for any signs of itching or irritation, they're usually nothing to worry about.