Postpartum Sweating

woman sweating postpartum

Plagued with postpartum perspiration? You can chill out — and grab a towel. Here's what to do about that post-baby sweating, especially night sweats after pregnancy.

If you find yourself sweating like you've just run a marathon after having a baby, even when you're sitting still, you may be experiencing a very common postpartum symptom: postpartum night sweats.

Postpartum sweating is normal and tends to happen more often when you're sleeping, a phenomenon known as night sweats. Here's everything new moms need to know.

What are postpartum night sweats?

Postpartum sweating often happens when you're sleeping and takes the form of postpartum night sweats.

Rest assured that even if those damp night sweats are putting a damper on your sleep, lots of perspiration is normal in the weeks after pregnancy.

What causes postpartum sweating?

Your pregnancy hormones are the culprit here again, as they instruct your body to rid itself of all those extra fluids it was formerly using to nourish your baby.

How long do postpartum sweating and postpartum night sweats last?

Postpartum sweating and night sweats will taper off naturally as those extra fluids make their way out and your hormones settle down.

In the meantime, stay cool and try not to sweat it!

What can you do about postpartum sweating and postpartum night sweats?

There are several things you can do to make yourself more comfortable if you're sweating a lot after giving birth, whether it's at night, during the day or both.

To manage postpartum sweating, try the following:

Drink up. All that perspiring can leave you dehydrated, so make sure you're drinking plenty of fluids , especially when you first wake up after a bout of night sweats. This is especially important if you're breastfeeding . One easy way to tell if you're getting enough liquids? If your urine is plentiful and a pale yellow color, you're hydrated; if it's dark or scant, you're not.

Cover your bedding. Put a soft towel or a pad on your pillow to absorb some of the moisture, and try placing a rubber sheet under your sheets to protect the mattress. This can ease the discomfort of those post-pregnancy night sweats, and save you from washing your bed linens every morning.

Wear loose, lightweight clothing. Choose cotton, not synthetics — or sleep au naturel.

Crank up the AC or open a window. And tell your partner to grab a sweater or an extra layer if it's cold outside.

Sprinkle on some talc-free powder. This'll help to absorb excess moisture and prevent heat rash.

If you think you might have a fever, take your temperature. If it's over 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit, give your practitioner a call.

Just remember that a lot of sweating is normal after you have a baby and it will subside within a few weeks. As always, if you're at all concerned or just need reassurance, give your practitioner a call. In the meantime, do what you can to stay comfortable if you're dealing with postpartum night sweats or the daytime variety.