Postpartum Hair Loss

hair loss postpartum

Here's what causes a new mother to lose her hair — even when she's not pulling it out — and what she can do about postpartum hair loss.

If you have postpartum hair loss, or hair loss after pregnancy, you'll notice a sudden shedding — sometimes in clumps — in the six months after you give birth.

What causes postpartum hair loss?

The average person loses about 100 hairs a day, but not all at once, so you don't notice them. When you're expecting, however, your pregnancy hormones keep those hairs from falling out — leaving your hair looking as lush as a supermodel's, or so thick that you can barely get a brush through it.

But all good things must come to an end, and that includes your awesome new 'do. When those hormones drop back to normal, the extra hairs drop, too.

How long does postpartum hair loss last?

Don't freak: You're not going bald, you're just getting back to normal. If you're breastfeeding, some of your extra hair may hang on to your scalp until you wean or start to supplement with formula or solids.

But nursing or not, take comfort in knowing that by the time your baby is ready to blow out the candles on that first birthday cake — and perhaps has plenty of hair of her own — your catch-up hair loss will be finished, and your locks should be back to the way they were before pregnancy too.

Tips for dealing with postpartum hair loss

If you're losing hair since giving birth, there are some things you can do about it:

Get the right nutrients. Keep your hair healthy by eating well and continuing to take your prenatal vitamin supplement .

Go easy on your hair. Be extra gentle to prevent excess hair loss after pregnancy. Shampoo only when necessary (as if you have time to shampoo at all!), and use a good conditioner and a wide-toothed comb to minimize tangling.

Choose the right accessories. Use scrunchies or barrettes to put hair up instead of elastic bands — and don't pull hair into tight ponytails.

Turn down the heat. Skip blow-dryers, curling and flat irons if you can.

Take a break from chemically based treatments. Put off any highlights, perms and straightening sessions until the shedding stops.

Talk to your practitioner if your hair loss is excessive. When it's accompanied by other symptoms, hair loss after pregnancy could be a sign of postpartum thyroiditis.

What to Expect When You're Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Your Guide to Pregnancy Hormones , January 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Hair Changes During Pregnancy , May 2021. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Skin Conditions During Pregnancy , June 2020. American Academy of Dermatology, Hair Loss in New Moms , 2022.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

When Do Babies Grow and Lose Their Hair? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Postpartum Sweating Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

From Frizz to Fabulous: The Real Deal on Pregnancy Hair Changes Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Postpartum Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Postpartum Bipolar Disorder Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

The Pregnancy Perk No One Talks About: Less Shaving Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Postpartum Skin Care Guide Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Postpartum Symptoms You Might Experience After Giving Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Postpartum Depression (PPD) Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Postpartum Recovery Timeline Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Low Libido Postpartum Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Losing the Baby Weight: The Truth About Postpartum Weight Loss Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Leaking Breast Milk Postpartum Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

Postpartum Bleeding (Lochia): What's Normal and What's Not? Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

How to Ask for Help When You Think You Have Postpartum Depression Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window