Postpartum Skin Care Guide

postpartum skin, woman's face close-up

Some of the skin changes you experienced during pregnancy may persist after you have the baby. Here's what to expect and when your skin should return to normal.

It can take a while for your skin to rebound after pregnancy, and we’re not just talking about your stretched-out belly. Dark patches across your forehead, nose and cheeks? It’s called melasma and it’s really common. Pregnancy acne? That can happen too.

Fortunately, blemishes and other skin changes that arise during the nine-month prelude to the big event will mostly resolve during the postpartum period. But if you’re still having breakouts, dry skin or other skin problems after pregnancy, here’s what may be going on and what you can do to pamper your postpartum skin.

What causes postpartum skin changes?

Your skin — your body’s largest organ — stretched and morphed to accommodate your newborn (or multiples). Pregnancy-related skin changes arise for a number of reasons, including:

Hormonal swings

Vascular changes

Glandular changes

Structural changes in your skin

Pre-existing skin conditions that worsen (or sometimes improve) during pregnancy

Postpartum skin changes are mostly the continuation of pregnancy-related issues, but occasionally certain conditions like acne only crop up after giving birth. Is it any wonder that your skin is acting up? Give it time. It may take a while for the effects of pregnancy to wear off and your skin to return to normal.

Top postpartum skin issues

Don’t worry too much about your skin’s texture or appearance after childbirth. Your body has been through the mill, and the fact that you’re not sleeping very much doesn’t help at all. In many cases, your skin issues will resolve with the passage of time and some TLC!

Here’s what may be causing your postpartum skin problems:

Postpartum acne

A pimple-pocked face is annoying but often unavoidable. During pregnancy, your sebaceous glands kick into overdrive. These glands produce the oily wax, called sebum, that keeps your skin moist. Excess sebum can clog pores, leading to acne breakouts .

If you’re still pimply postpartum, here’s what you can do:

Wash your face twice daily. Use a mild cleanser and warm water.

Resist the urge to pick or squeeze. That could cause scarring.

Consult your doctor. Ask about which topical treatments to try.

Postpartum dry skin

Hormonal changes in pregnancy can leave your body parched, especially your face. To treat dry, flaky skin that persists after you’ve delivered, maintain a moisturizing routine.

Follow this dry-skin revival regimen:

Gently cleanse. In other words, no harsh soaps. Wash with a non-soap cleanser once a day and plain water the rest of the time.

Moisturize. Do it after your shower and before bed.

Avoid long, hot soaks or showers. You don’t want to strip your skin of its natural oils. Instead, take a 10- to 15-minute shower or bath (perhaps with added bath oil) in warm water.

Hydrate from within. Drinking plenty of fluids and including healthy, omega-3 fatty acids in your diet can help to keep your skin supple.

Use a humidifier (to add moisture to your environment).

Protect your skin from the sun. Apply a 30-or-greater SPF broad-spectrum sunscreen each day.

Take note: There can be other reasons your skin is bone-dry. For example, about 5 to 10 percent of women in the U.S. develop inflammation of the thyroid gland after pregnancy (a condition called postpartum thyroiditis).

At first, thyroid hormone levels in the blood spike. You may have anxiety, insomnia, fast heart rate, fatigue, weight loss or irritability. In a matter of months, thyroid levels then plummet, and new symptoms surface, such as weight gain, constipation, depression and, yes, dry skin.

It often resolves in 12 to 18 months, yet as many 20 percent of women may continue to have low thyroid levels. Your doctor can order a blood test to check your thyroid function.

Postpartum oily skin

A woman’s beaming complexion during pregnancy tells the world she’s expecting. That rosy glow is really due to increased hormones, which stimulate oil-producing glands.

If your skin is an oil slick after giving birth, gentle cleansing ought to be part of your daily routine.

Other steps you can take for oily skin include:

Choose oil-free cosmetics and moisturizers. These won’t clog up your pores.

Clean your makeup brushes. They can harbor bacteria that can worsen your breakout.

Consult a dermatologist. If the problem persists, ask about possible treatments.

Postpartum loose skin

If your skin’s not snapping back after giving birth, don’t sweat it. It just endured a nine-month stretch to accommodate a growing fetus and any extra baby fat you put on while pregnant.

For the time being, focus on healing your body with a healthy diet, hydration, physical activity and shut-eye. Give it at least six months before you pursue more aggressive measures.

Ultimately, if diet and exercise aren’t fixing your sagging skin or abdominal muscles, you might be a good candidate for a tummy tuck, or an “abdominoplasty.” However, if you plan to have more children or lose more weight, now is not the time for surgical reconstruction.

Postpartum hives

If you develop a rash of small, red and itchy bumps across your abdomen, it’s a good bet it’s PUPPP (pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy) , also known as PEP (polymorphic eruption of pregnancy). It is the most common pregnancy-related skin condition.

PUPPP often develops late in pregnancy, during the third trimester, or early in the postpartum period. It’s much more common in women having their first child or multiples. The theory is that abdominal skin-stretching damages the underlying connective tissue. That, in turn, sets off an inflammatory process. And next thing you know, an itchy rash erupts across your stomach. It can also spread to your thighs, butt and arms.

Your doctor may suggest taking antihistamines or applying a topical steroid to calm your urge to scratch.

When do pregnancy skin changes go away after giving birth?

If your skin is still a little wonky, be patient. Pregnancy-related skin changes are common, and they often resolve on their own.

Here’s what experts say you can expect:

Melasma. Also known as the “mask of pregnancy,” melasma leaves darker-hued splotches across a woman’s face. A rise in hormone levels plus exposure to the sun’s UVA and UVB rays cause hyperpigmentation. It’s more common in women of color. Fortunately, these patches of discoloration usually fade over time, although sun exposure can make it worse. As a preventive measure, wear broad-spectrum sunscreen of at least an SPF 30, and stay out of the sun when rays are strongest, between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. If the dark spots persist, a dermatologist may prescribe topical creams or ointments that may lighten or even out skin tone.

Linea nigra. Latin for “black line,” the linea nigra literally a darkening of the vertical band of fibrous connective tissue the runs from your navel to your pubic region. Again, this type of pigmentation is due to hormonal changes. The tell-tale line usually fades within months.

Stretch marks. Moms-to-be know all about the red, brown or purple lines that streak their bellies during pregnancy. Butts, thighs, hips and breasts can get stretch marks too. They are thought to be the result of both physical (due to stretching and pulling of the skin) and hormonal changes. Stretch marks probably won’t disappear entirely, but they can fade over time, becoming flesh-toned.

What skin care products should you avoid if breastfeeding?

Many medications are safe to use while nursing , and that includes most topical products. In fact, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) cites only “rare circumstances in which breastfeeding should be discontinued” when a mother is taking medication for a condition.

Topical tretinoin, a retinoid treatment for acne, hasn’t been studied in moms who nurse. Little of it is thought to reach breast milk. Likewise for other many other acne treatments, such as benzoyl peroxide or salicylic acid. Just be sure the treatment dries on your skin before baby’s skin comes into contact with it.

There’s little research on the use of topical corticosteroids by breastfeeding moms. Still, you would likely have to use a strong medication over a large area of your body for it to make its way into your breast milk. If you apply a steroid cream on your breasts, wipe it clean before baby’s mouth and skin come into contact with it.

It’s always best to check with your doctor before using any medication while breastfeeding.

Tips to care for your postpartum skin

Your post-pregnancy skin routine mimics what you ought to be doing for healthy skin anyway. As a reminder:

Stay out of the sun. Or at least minimize potential sun damage by applying a broad-spectrum sunscreen (that blocks UVA and UVB rays) with an SPF of 30 or greater every day. Another option: Switch to a moisturizer or foundation that offers the same level of sun protection.

Keep it clean. A gentle, twice-daily cleansing may help prevent blemishes.

Eat healthy foods. Nutrient-rich foods, including fruits and veggies, whole grains and healthy fats, can support overall health, including healthy skin.

Drink plenty of water. Whether you get it from straight-up tap water, other fluids or food, your body needs a total of eight to 12 8-ounce cups of water a day when you’re pregnant. Aim for the same amount after delivery.

Remember, your baby thinks you’re beautiful just the way you are — no matter what your skin looks like after you give birth. So hang in there! These postpartum skin changes won't last forever.