Postpartum Urinary Incontinence: What to Do About Loss of Bladder Control After Childbirth

loss of bladder control postpartum, roll of toilet paper unraveling on yellow blocks

Are you having problems with your bladder after pregnancy? Here's what to do about urinary incontinence when you have a new baby.

If, along with other postpartum symptoms like perineal pain and constipation, you're noticing that it's harder to control your bladder after giving birth, you're not alone.

Postpartum urinary incontinence is very common, but there are strategies that can help manage and decrease leakage over time.

What is postpartum urinary incontinence?

Postpartum urinary incontinence is involuntary leaking of urine that can occur after pregnancy and childbirth.

You may experience this loss of bladder control while laughing, sneezing, coughing or performing a strenuous activity, and it's very common after giving birth. In fact, it's estimated that about half of adult women may experience postpartum urinary incontinence.

Some women experience urinary leakage associated with urgency — that “gotta go” sensation. Others actually experience both types of leakage.

What causes postpartum incontinence?

You can blame this common postpartum symptom on the pregnancy- and delivery-weakened muscles around the bladder and pelvis, which may have a harder time controlling your flow after childbirth.

Plus, as your uterus shrinks in the weeks following delivery, it sits directly on the bladder, compressing it and making it more difficult to stem the tide. Hormonal changes (what else is new?) during and after pregnancy can batter your bladder too.

How long does postpartum incontinence last?

It can take a few weeks or even months for urinary incontinence after pregnancy to go away and for you to regain complete bladder control, though there are steps you can take to get it back faster. However, some women may experience urinary incontinence for longer.

How can you improve postpartum urinary incontinence?

Follow these tips to help with those leaks after childbirth:

Do your Kegels. You've heard it before, but Kegel exercises are one of the best ways to strengthen your pelvic floor both during pregnancy and postpartum. Try to work up to three sets of 10 Kegel exercises a day, holding each squeeze for 10 seconds while standing. (You can also use them as a last line of defense when you feel the need to cough, sneeze, laugh or lift something heavy.)

Train your bladder. Urinate every 30 minutes — before you have the urge, in other words — and then try to extend the time between bathroom trips each day. Over time, bladder training may help you work up to what's considered more normal urination intervals, every three to four hours during the day and four to eight hours at night.

Increase your fiber intake. This may help you avoid constipation after pregnancy , so full bowels don't put added pressure on your bladder.

Drink enough fluids. Although you should continue drinking at least eight glasses of fluids every day (cutting back on water to control the peeing only makes you vulnerable to dehydration and urinary tract infections), you may find it helpful to limit fluid intake around bedtime if you experience incontinence during the night.

Avoid coffee, citrus, tomatoes, soft drinks and alcohol. These beverages can irritate your bladder and make urine harder to control.

Invest in postpartum pads. Pads can help absorb leaking urine (you should not use tampons during your postpartum recovery period — they don't block the flow of urine and they're considered unsafe during the postpartum period).

Maintain a healthy weight. Extra pounds can put added pressure on your bladder.

When to talk to your doctor about postpartum incontinence

If your symptoms don't improve after a few weeks and after trying some of the strategies above, speak with your practitioner.

Some women may benefit from additional therapy or treatments for postpartum urinary incontinence, such as physical therapy, bladder support devices, medication or surgery for certain types of incontinence.

You should also speak to your practitioner if you experience pain during urination, an urgency to pee with only a small amount of urine, lower abdominal pain, foul-smelling urine or fever, which may be symptoms of a urinary tract infection (UTI) .