Losing the Baby Weight: The Truth About Postpartum Weight Loss

losing the baby weight, mom in workout clothes on the floor

Many new moms wonder how long it takes to lose baby weight after pregnancy. Get the real facts about postpartum weight loss here.

After nine months of a growing belly and having your body not quite feel like your own, you’re ready to reclaim some normalcy — starting, perhaps, with getting back into your old jeans. So what do you have to do to get there, and how long will it take?

While many of us wish we could magically lose all those extra pregnancy pounds the moment baby finally arrives, the fact is no one — not even celebs! — snaps right back to her pre-baby body so quickly.

There are lots of things you can do to get into shape again. But it’s really important to give yourself a break: Your body just birthed another being. Things moved around, stretched and grew to make that happen.

So rather than focusing on "getting your body back" (it actually didn’t go anywhere!), put your efforts towards creating a healthy, happy, and — possibly slightly differently-shaped — you. Here’s how to do just that.

How much weight do you lose after giving birth?

Most women shed around 13 pounds after giving birth, whether they delivered vaginally or via C-section. The majority of that comes, of course, from your baby — since most new bundles weigh between 5 ½ and 8 ¾ pounds.

The rest of that initial weight loss comes from delivering the placenta and the loss of the amniotic fluids that surrounded your baby in the womb. You may lose a little more during that first week postpartum simply by shedding retained fluids. (If it feels like you’re peeing and sweating more than usual , that’s why!)

Considering that women of average weight should gain between 25 and 35 pounds during pregnancy, this loss is healthy start. But it’s not everything, of course. Your body is still holding onto extra weight from the fat stores you gained over the course of your pregnancy, which won’t disappear so quickly.

And even if you are close to your pre-pregnancy weight shortly after giving birth, your body will still likely look a little different than what you’re used to. As your uterus shrinks back down to its pre-pregnancy size (which usually takes about six weeks), your stomach will still appear round and swollen.

How long does it take to lose weight after pregnancy?

Many women who gained the recommended amount of weight during pregnancy find they’re able to return to their old weight within six months to a year after giving birth — which experts say is a reasonable goal.

But that’s just an estimate, and ultimately, everyone’s timeline is unique. If you gained more than the recommended amount of weight during your pregnancy, for instance, it could take extra time — from 10 months to two years — to bounce back.

Keep in mind, too, that even once you reach that familiar number on the scale, your body might not look exactly as it did. Some women notice that their belly is softer, their hips are wider or their breasts are smaller (particularly if they breast-fed) after having a baby.

And that’s more than okay. It’s amazing! All these changes are the result of the incredible physical feat of growing your child and bringing her into the world — and they deserve to be celebrated.

Does breastfeeding help you lose weight?

It can. Your body burns between 400 and 500 calories per day making breast milk , which come from your diet as well as the fat you stored during pregnancy. That calorie-burning boost is enough to help some moms get back to their pre-pregnancy weight without doing much else.

Breastfeeding also stimulates the release of hormones that help shrink your uterus and your post-baby belly.

Even so, breastfeeding isn’t a guaranteed ticket back to your pre-baby body, and you shouldn’t necessarily look at it that way. In fact, many moms find that they eat more than usual while breastfeeding because they’re so much hungrier, which in turn means they hold onto that last five to 10 pounds of baby weight.

That amped-up appetite is completely normal — your body needs more calories to fuel your milk production. What’s more, ignoring your appetite or deliberately trying to cut back too much on your food intake could potentially put a damper on your milk supply. Moms often find that they shed those last few pounds once they stop nursing and their appetites return to normal. Just be sure you don't continue to eat the extra 400 to 500 calories a day after you're finished breastfeeding.

If breastfeeding alone isn’t enough to help you return to your old weight, experts agree that it’s safe to adjust your food intake and exercise to try to lose up to 1 ½ pounds per week. But steer clear of crash diets that promise faster weight loss — they could affect how much milk you produce.

What foods should be in your post-baby diet?

Since your body needs ample rest and nutrition to recover from delivery , fend off infection and feed your baby, you shouldn’t even think about dieting until your baby is at least 6 weeks old or older — no matter how anxious you are to squeeze back into your pre-pregnancy clothes.

Once you feel ready to start a post-baby diet and you’ve gotten the okay from your doctor, make sure you’re still eating enough calories. Crash dieting isn’t just risky for you: If you’re breastfeeding and don’t eat enough calories, your body ends up producing less milk — which means your hungry, growing baby goes on a diet with you.

What’s more, burning fat too quickly (more than 1 ½ pounds per week) can trigger the release of toxins that end up in breast milk and can cause your body to lose water and lean tissue. Even if you’re not nursing, eating too few calories can make your body think you’re starving. This confusion can actually slow down your metabolism, making it harder to shed those extra pounds in the long run.

Remember, if you’re nursing, your calorie needs are even greater during the first six months after delivery than they were during the last trimester of pregnancy. Your doctor can help determine exactly how many calories you should be eating, since the number will vary depending on your BMI before pregnancy and your activity level.

To put things into perspective, the average woman needs about 2,000 calories a day, and breastfeeding women should tack on an extra 400 to 500 calories to maintain their current weight.

To lose a pound, though, you need to create a calorie deficit of 3,500 calories per week, or 500 calories fewer per day, by eating less or exercising more — which means the average breastfeeding woman would be back at 2,000 calories per day to lose about a pound a week.

Whether you’re breastfeeding or not, when choosing foods to support your weight loss, you can stick with the same healthy eating principles you followed during your pregnancy: Fill up on wholesome, nutrient-dense picks that will keep you satisfied and limit the empty-calorie snacks. Strive to have moderate portions of foods like:

Fruits and vegetables. Fresh or frozen are both great choices, so take your pick.

Whole grains. Think oatmeal, whole wheat bread or pasta, brown rice or quinoa.

Lean protein. Low-mercury fish and shellfish, poultry, lean red meat, eggs, tofu and beans or legumes are all good choices.

Low-fat dairy. Try plain yogurt, milk, cheese or cottage cheese.

Healthy fats. Think nuts, seeds, avocado or olive oil.

When can you start exercising after giving birth?

Getting moving can help support your weight loss efforts and give you a much-needed energy boost. So it’s worth saying yes to working out when your body feels ready.

It’s fine to start engaging in light exercise a few days after birth if you exercised before pregnancy and had an uncomplicated vaginal delivery. If you had a C-section or experienced complications during birth, you may need to wait at least six weeks before resuming physical activity. But it’s best to get the official go-ahead from your doctor before getting started.

In either case, keep in mind that just because you’re cleared for exercise doesn’t mean you have to start right away. If you feel like you need a little more time, there’s no rush.

When you do start exercising, aim to move for 20 to 30 minutes a day, broken up into shorter chunks if need be. Start with exercises designed to strengthen your weakened core muscles and back like modified crunches, or light aerobic activity like walking. You can gradually up the intensity as you feel ready, but never exercise to the point of exhaustion.

Tips to help you stay healthy after giving birth

Sure, you might be excited to get back into your old clothes. But broadening your focus from weight loss to making healthy choices will help you get back into shape without the pressure. These tips can help you stay on track:

Team up. Support is a must for maintaining healthy habits with a baby — so get your partner on board. Take a walk instead of watching TV after dinner, and make a commitment to choosing healthier foods together. Take turns prepping healthy meals while the other watches the baby instead of ordering takeout.

Keep healthy snacks handy. Those need-to-eat-now feelings can come out of nowhere, especially if you’re breastfeeding. Having wholesome nibbles within grabbing distance — think fresh fruit, nuts, plain yogurt or sliced veggies with hummus — means you’ll be less tempted to reach for the half-eaten ice cream pint at the back of the freezer.

Find activities you love. Hate slogging it on the treadmill? Don’t do it. You’ll be more likely to stick with workouts for the long haul if you enjoy them.

Don't discount the small stuff. Squeeze even a little extra activity into your daily routine. Every step counts, so don't discount the little things: You'd be amazed by how many calories you'll burn from a number of everyday activities.

Don’t be all or nothing. Everyone deserves a treat now and then, especially new moms. Try to eat healthy 80 percent of the time, but don’t deprive yourself of that cookie or ice cream cone when you’re really in the mood.

Stay positive. Focus on what you've accomplished so far and the weight you've already lost, and remember that fitness is about more than the number you see on the scale.

Above all, give yourself the same patience and grace you’d give a close friend who was in your shoes. Remember that it took you nine months to gain the weight, so it’s completely normal for it to take that long to lose it (or even longer — you’ve got a baby to care for now!)

Even more important, don’t forget that you created a fabulous human being who adores you — all of you. So instead of staring at your tummy, take a peek at your beautiful baby and cut yourself some slack.