Your Postpartum Nutrition Guide

How to eat healthy after baby

Nourish your body — and your baby's, if you're breastfeeding — by filling your plate with some smart choices (and refilling your water bottle on the reg). Here's what you need to know about postpartum nutrition in order to speed recovery and boost your energy.

You’ve delivered your baby, but that’s no reason to oust spinach or, really, any nutritional superfood from your grocery cart. What you eat still matters — for your own wellbeing and the health of your baby if you're breastfeeding.

Fortunately, there’s more wiggle room when it comes to foods you can enjoy postpartum compared to your pregnancy diet !

Here’s what you should know about what to eat after giving birth, including the best postpartum healing foods and a sample meal plan to follow.

Why is postpartum nutrition so important?

Think about it: You carried a growing fetus — plus extra fat, fluid and tissue to accommodate the little passenger — for longer than the average Major League Baseball season. You powered through labor and delivery and, at last, the juggernaut is complete. But your energy is sapped and you might not be feeling your best right now.

How you nourish your body in the postpartum period is important for your own health and, if you’re breastfeeding, for your baby’s growth and development. Here are just a few of the benefits of eating well post-pregnancy:

It can speed your recovery. A nutrient-dense diet full of complex carbs, fiber, healthy fats and protein, plus adequate hydration, can help heal your body. A healthy postpartum eating plan is the way to go to stave off bone loss, replenish your iron stores, head off hemorrhoids and much, much more.

It promotes milk production. What you eat and drink is super important for the quantity and quality of your milk supply .

It supports overall wellbeing. A well-balanced diet can support the 24/7 stamina you’re going to need as a busy mom.

That’s not to say you can’t indulge your sweet tooth or junk food craving! After nine months of disciplined eating, who wouldn’t want to treat themselves? In general, though, it’s a good idea to continue eating healthily.

What are the best postpartum foods?

A postpartum diet doesn’t look remarkably different from a typical healthy eating plan. Fill up on the following, and you’re probably getting most of the vitamins and minerals your body needs.

Vegetables, including leafy greens, bell peppers, broccoli, avocados, carrots, kale, sweet potatoes, tomatoes, celery, cabbage and carrots

Fruits, like citrus, berries, mangos, melon, apples and bananas

Whole grains, such as oats, quinoa, brown rice and whole wheat bread

Lean or low-fat protein, including fish, poultry, tofu, beans, seeds, nuts, lentils, edamame and lean beef

Low-fat or fat-free dairy, like yogurt, milk, cheese and eggs

There are, however, a few specific nutrients you might need to monitor your intake of, including:

Iodine. Many lactating women fall short of getting enough of this trace mineral , especially those who don’t eat dairy, shun table salt, smoke or eat a lot of foods that inhibit iodine intake (including certain cruciferous veggies). Iodine supports infant growth and brain development. Lactating women should get 290 micrograms per day, nearly double the pre-pregnancy recommended daily amount (RDA) of 150 micrograms. One-quarter teaspoon of iodized table salt provides 76 micrograms, but many brands of sea salt and Kosher salt don’t add iodine, so check nutrition labels. Good dietary sources of iodine include seafood, seaweed, milk, yogurt and cheese.

Choline. This nutrient, present in breast milk, plays a role in babies’ brain and nervous system development. Lactating women need more of it, some 550 milligrams per day, to replenish their own stores and meet baby’s needs. The risk of getting too little is higher in women who don’t take folic acid supplements. Food sources of choline include meat, poultry, fish, dairy, eggs, cruciferous veggies, certain beans, nuts, seeds and whole grains.

Omega-3 fatty acids. Just as in pregnancy, lactating women should consume 8 to 12 ounces of fish per week. Opt for varieties low in mercury and high in eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), such as salmon, anchovies, sardines and trout. DHA, in particular, is important for fetal brain development.

It’s also important to stay well-hydrated whether or not you’re breastfeeding. Aim for eight to 10 eight-ounce cups per day, plus water from other sources like fruits and veggies, to keep you from getting dehydrated. Even if your baby has moved on to formula, you still need about eight to 10 glasses of water a day as part of your recovery from childbirth and for overall health.

Sample postpartum diet meal plan

If you’ve been paying attention to your diet in pregnancy, your fridge and pantry are likely stocked with many of the best postpartum foods. Here’s what a day of meals might look like:

Breakfast. Oatmeal (1/2 to 3/4 cup) with low-fat milk. Add 1/2 cup of melon for extra vitamins, potassium and fiber.

Lunch. Light tuna (3 to 4 ounces) made with celery and hard-cooked egg (for choline) on whole grain bread. Top with crispy romaine lettuce, a good source of vitamin A, and tomato slices for vitamin C. Note: Canned light tuna makes the Food and Drug Administration’s list of “Best Choices” of healthy and safe fish options.

Dinner. Chicken or beef stir-fry. Combine 2 ounces of meat with 1 cup of veggies, such as broccoli, cabbage, red bell pepper and carrots, along with 1/2 to 3/4 cup of cooked brown rice.

Snacks. Keep snacks in the 200 to 300 calorie range for an energy boost between meals. Try low-fat Greek yogurt with frozen berries and almonds; apple slices and popcorn; or a smoothie with yogurt, fruit and spinach or kale.

Don’t forget to keep drinking fluids throughout the day, if not with meals then in between them.

Should new moms take postpartum vitamins?

Make a note to ask your doctor what kind of supplement, if any, is best for you. There’s no consensus on supplementation in the postpartum period.

Some doctors recommend that women keep taking their prenatal vitamins while they’re breastfeeding. Even women who aren’t nursing might be advised to continue taking these supplements for several weeks after delivery. Others may suggest switching to a standard vitamin and mineral supplement.

Top postpartum nutrition questions, answered

Still have questions about navigating your nutritional needs? Here’s the scoop on eating after giving birth and while you’re breastfeeding.

What foods should I eat when breastfeeding?

When filling your plate , focus on three key goals:

Quality of food choices. Choose a variety of lean proteins, fruits, veggies, whole grains and healthy fats. By sticking with natural, whole foods, you’ll get the vitamins, minerals and fiber you need to sustain your energy and keep your body well-nourished while you’re nursing. Contrary to what you may have heard, spicy foods, dairy, caffeine and certain vegetables won't necessarily make baby gassy , so unless your little one seems to be having a lot of gas or digestive issues, you don't have to steer clear.

Sufficient caloric intake. Women typically burn 300 to 500 extra calories per day while breastfeeding (or 450 to 500 extra calories while breastfeeding exclusively), so keep that in mind and try to take in about that same extra daily amount to match.

Adequate hydration. Whether you’re sipping beverages, slurping soup or munching on juicy fruits and veggies, you need to replenish your fluids so you don't get dehydrated, which can affect your milk supply.

What foods should I avoid when breastfeeding?

Many of the foods you shunned during pregnancy (raw fish, soft-boiled eggs, cold cuts and unpasteurized soft cheeses) can come back into the rotation. Organisms that cause foodborne illnesses don’t usually pass through breast milk, so feel free to enjoy some of the treats you missed out on for the past nine months.

Is it safe to drink alcohol while breastfeeding?

Abstaining from drinking is the safest choice while breastfeeding, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), but alcohol isn’t forbidden. If you decide to drink , stick to light drinking here and there rather than heavy, frequent alcohol consumption (which isn't safe for you or your baby), and time it right.

After one drink, you should wait four hours before breastfeeding or pumping to give your body time to metabolize the alcohol, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends. Otherwise, it could end up in your breast milk. So while an occasional glass of wine after you’ve nursed might be fine, moderation is key.

Are my nutritional needs different if I’m breastfeeding twins?

Moms who exclusively breastfeed twins need about 500 extra calories every day per baby. To achieve that higher bar, focus on eating a healthy diet and staying hydrated.

It’s a good idea to track the number of wet or dirty diapers each baby produces each day to make sure they’re getting enough to eat too. Fewer than six wet diapers over a 24-hour period may be a sign that your baby is dehydrated.

Should I adjust my diet so my baby doesn’t develop allergies?

An allergy to breast milk is very rare. When it does happen, a protein in cow’s milk is often the cause. (Other potential allergens in your diet include nuts, peanuts, wheat and soy.)

If milk allergy is suspected , your doctor may suggest eliminating milk from your diet for a couple of weeks to see if your infant’s symptoms improve. Keep in mind that breastfed babies are less likely to develop allergies than formula-fed infants.

How much water should I drink postpartum?

Make it your goal to drink around 96 ounces of fluids (including water, seltzer, decaffeinated tea and other unsweetened drinks, along with fruits, vegetables and other sources) each day while you’re breastfeeding. That’s about eight to 10 or even 12 eight-ounce cups from all sources, but you may find it easier to fill up a large water bottle two or three times a day.

If you’re formula-feeding your baby, 80 ounces or about eight to 10 cups per day from all sources should cover your hydration needs .

A healthy postpartum diet isn’t a panacea. Your overall health and recovery also depend on staying physically active and grabbing sleep when you can. Still, diet goes a long way toward healing your body and helping your baby thrive.