Postpartum Back Pain

postpartum back pain, woman rubbing the back of her neck with her hand

Suffering from a backache after giving birth? Here's why your back still hurts after delivery and what you can do about it.

If you have nagging stiffness and soreness in your back post-delivery, you're likely suffering from postpartum back pain. And you're not alone, either.

What is postpartum back pain?

Postpartum back pain is pain in your back that lingers even after you've given birth to your baby.

What causes postpartum back pain?

There are a number of causes of postpartum back pain, including:

Pregnancy hormones that loosened your ligaments and joints.

Strained abdominal muscles that were used to support your bump and during delivery (if you labored at any point during your baby's birth), which may have thrown your back and even your posture out of whack.

Bending and baby lifting, plus rocking your little one, which you are probably doing you're doing around the clock now.

Holding your growing baby the wrong way can also lead to postpartum back pain too later on.

How long will my postpartum back pain last?

The pain can last for weeks or even months after delivery. It takes time for your back to return to normal (whatever that might be for you), so be patient and don't try to do too much too soon.

Tips for relief from those postpartum backaches

Easy does it! You can help alleviate your postpartum back pain and help that achy back get back to normal by being extra careful about how you use it — which takes some doing, since you use it most of the time — and doing a few easy, sensible exercises.

Try following these tips to avoid aggravating your postpartum back pain:

Stay conscious of how you bend and lift. Start the movement from your knees, not your back, when you lift baby, laundry, the stroller, etc.

Don't hunch over when you're feeding or cooing to your baby. A straight spine is a happy spine.

Start slowly with some gentle postpartum exercises . Pelvic tilts are a good first option.

Take a nice warm bath — in a very clean, scrubbed tub. If you're recovering from having a C-section , ask your practitioner to tell you when it's safe to bathe. Or let a pulsating shower head work its magic.

Use a foot rest to elevate your feet slightly when sitting and when feeding baby. You deserve to put your feet up anyway!

Try not to stand for long periods of time. Whenever possible, place one foot on a low stool when standing in order to take some pressure off your lower back.

Get a massage. If possible, get a professionally done massage. Or ask your partner or a family member to do the honors at home.

For many new moms, postpartum back pain is part of the after-pregnancy recovery process. It isn't fun, but take heart: The discomfort won't stick around forever. In the meantime, try to go easy on yourself.