Biogen Your Guide eyebrow

How to Find a Postpartum Depression Therapist You Can Actually Afford

how to find a postpartum depression therapist, woman talking to a therapist

Get help finding a therapist you can afford who specializes in treating postpartum depression.

Therapy is a key part of treatment for postpartum depression. But finding the right therapist — one you like who has availability and is either covered by your insurance or isn't exorbitantly expensive — can be challenging.

A serious medical condition, postpartum depression is a type of depression that affects some new moms. It can happen any time within a year of giving birth, though it most often occurs within a week to a month postpartum.

No two women have exactly the same experience with PPD. But many describe it as feeling intensely sad or overwhelmed or paralyzed by the stresses of taking care of a baby. It often comes with frequent mood swings, bouts of crying, anxiety and exhaustion. It's also common to lose interest in the things you normally enjoy and feel indifferent towards the baby. (If these feelings sound familiar, this screening quiz can help you determine whether you might be affected by PPD.)

If you're looking for guidance on which types of therapists might be a good fit and how to start your search, here's help.

What is a postpartum depression therapist?

A postpartum depression therapist is a mental health professional who has experience treating postpartum depression and related disorders that can affect new moms. Psychologists, social workers and psychiatrists can all treat PPD, and each has different levels of training and certifications.

Psychologists: Have degrees such as M.A., Ph.D., Psy.D., and Ed.D. Those with master's degrees (like M.A.s) have undergone two years of training after college, while those with doctoral degrees (like Ph.D., Psy.D., and Ed.D.) have undergone four to six years. All complete a one- to two-year internship before practicing on their own. Psychologists in some states may also be licensed to prescribe medication like antidepressants.

Social workers: Have degrees such as M.S.W. or L.C.S.W. Social workers have taken graduate-level courses on human behavior, psychotherapy and community resources and have completed two years of clinical work before practicing on their own. They are not licensed to prescribe medication.

Psychiatrists: Have degrees such as M.D. or D.O. Psychiatrists have completed four years of medical school (like other doctors) followed by three or four years of additional training in mental illness and medical treatment. They are licensed to prescribe medication.

It's worth noting that no one type of therapist is inherently better than the others for treating PPD. (Though if you're looking to explore antidepressants, you'll want to make sure the therapist is either licensed to prescribe medication or can refer you to a psychiatrist who can prescribe medication. Another way to go is to get a prescription from either your OB/GYN or your pediatrician, both of whom will generally be comfortable prescribing antidepressants, and then go to a therapist who isn't licensed to prescribe medication.)

Often, the therapist's individual approach to treatment and how they make you feel during your sessions is just as important as their professional qualifications.

Where to find a postpartum depression therapist

Not sure where to start? Don't worry. There are lots of ways to find potential therapists who can help with your PPD. Some options to consider:

Ask your doctor for a referral

If you haven't already talked with your primary care doctor, OB/GYN or your baby's pediatrician about your PPD, start there. They can give you a screening test to assess your symptoms and may have good recommendations for therapists who can meet your needs. And if you're planning to pay for therapy through your insurance, in some cases you might need a doctor's referral anyway.

Check an online database

There are plenty of reputable ones that allow you to search for therapists in your city and state and meet the qualifications you're looking for. Try:

American Psychological Association Psychologist Locator

National Register of Health Service Psychologists

American Psychiatric Association

Society of Clinical Psychology

National Association of Social Workers

Open Path Psychotherapy Collective , which lists therapists who offer sliding fees for those without insurance coverage or who are on limited budgets.

Use your insurance provider's directory

Most providers will list their in-network mental health professionals on their website, saving you the trouble of confirming later whether a therapist you found elsewhere is covered on your plan. If you can't find a listing on your provider's website, call them.

Ask another mom

If you know a family member or friend has gotten treatment for PPD and the subject isn't too sensitive, ask if they'd be willing to share some information about their therapist. Most fellow moms who have been in a similar boat are more than happy to help.

Check to see if your company has an employee assisstance program

If you work, particularly if you work for a large employer, your company may have what's called an employee assistance program, which offers confidential referrals to mental health care.

What to look for in a postpartum therapist

There are two main parts to finding the right PPD therapist. The first is logistical: You'll want to make sure the therapist's qualifications check out, they have time to see you and you're able to pay for the sessions.

But the second is more by feel: You'll need to determine if the therapist is someone you're comfortable talking to.

Start by checking out the therapist's website. It should list basic information like the therapist's credentials and qualifications, as well as their education and training. Usually, the website will also cover what the therapist specializes in treating. Someone who regularly works with new moms with postpartum depression or anxiety will understand where you're coming from and have insight into the challenges you're dealing with.

Once you've got these basics covered, give the therapist a call. On the phone or virtually, you can ask more about the therapist's work, including the type of therapy they practice, their goals for therapy and the time it typically takes to see results.

Now's a good time, too, to ask about their availability and fees (if you plan to pay through insurance and haven't checked whether they're covered by your provider, confirm that). If you're open to virtual sessions, you can also see if those are an option and find out what steps the therapist takes to ensure your sessions remain confidential.

After you've spoken on the phone and confirmed the therapist's availability, you'll likely have an introductory visit or session. This is a chance to talk about how you've been feeling and what you hope to get out of treatment, as well as get to know the therapist and see whether it's a good fit.

A lot of this is by feel, so go with your gut! If you're comfortable opening up to the therapist and you feel like they understand you, those are good signs.

On the other hand, if you feel as though you're not able to talk freely, the therapist is having trouble grasping what's upsetting you, or the therapist is judging you, those are red flags that this person may not be the right fit. That's okay. Not every therapist is a perfect match, and it's common to have to try a second (or third) option before finding the right person.

How much does postpartum depression therapy cost?

One-on-one meetings with a therapist generally cost anywhere between $100 and $200 per session, though the rates can be much higher in certain parts of the country. Where you are in the country and the therapist’s training can affect cost. Longer sessions or sessions with a highly specialized expert may cost more too.

While that might seem like a hefty price, the good news is that there are options for making mental health care more affordable.

If you're paying out of pocket

Shouldering the full cost of regular therapy sessions can be challenging, but there are ways to lessen the impact on your budget. Some therapists offer sliding scale fees for clients who are paying out of pocket; you can find ones in your city and state by searching the Open Path Psychotherapy Collective database.

Virtual sessions or teletherapy may prove less pricey too, and research shows that they can be an effective treatment option for women with postpartum depression or anxiety. They can be especially helpful for moms in their 20s and 30s and remove barriers to care. The key is making sure that you're talking with a live, qualified therapist. Try reaching out to a support coordinator through Postpartum Support International or check BetterHelp for potential therapists that match what you're looking for.

Another option to consider: Group therapy or a support group for moms with PPD, which are typically less expensive than private therapy. Though you won't get as much time talking with the therapist as you would in solo sessions, group therapy has been shown to be helpful for women with PPD. Plus, it gives you a chance to meet other moms who are in similar positions and learn about different perspectives. Socializing with other moms going through the same thing can be very helpful, as can the normalization of PPD and other postpartum mood disorders. Postpartum Support International's support group database is a good place to start.

If you have Medicaid

Most Medicaid programs require that your provider cover at least a portion of mental health care, though the exact amount may depend on your plan. Before booking an appointment with a therapist, you'll want to confirm that the therapist is in your provider's network. Check your provider's website or call the provider directly.

If you have private insurance

Insurance plans purchased through the health insurance exchange as well as those offered by employers for companies with 50 or more employees are also required to cover at least a portion of mental health care, though again, the exact amount may depend on your plan. You should confirm that the therapist you want to see is in your provider's network before booking an appointment, either by checking your provider's website or calling the provider directly.

Finding the right therapist can be tough work. But it's worth it for your well-being and the well-being of your baby. So start doing some digging and don't let yourself get discouraged. Once you've found a therapist you're comfortable with, you're well on your way to feeling better.