Pregnant and Exhausted? How to Tell If It's Normal — or Chronic Fatigue Syndrome

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnant woman lying down

What's the difference between normal sleepiness during pregnancy and the debilitating condition known as myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome? Here's exactly what you need to know.

Feeling tired while you're pregnant is so common that you'd probably wonder what was going on if you weren't at least occasionally sleepy. As What to Expect Community member tagrr shared, "I'm 11 weeks and the fatigue hit me like a bus."

But sometimes that drowsiness goes well beyond what's normal and manifests itself as a condition known as myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS).

Answers about ME/CFS during pregnancy are pretty hard to come by, but the good news is, the majority of women with the condition go on to have a healthy pregnancy and baby. Here's what you need to know to manage fatigue while you're expecting.

Key Takeaways

It's common to feel tired during pregnancy . But if you're so exhausted you can't get through the day, you might have a condition called chronic fatigue syndrome, or ME/CFS.

ME/CFS causes chronic exhaustion . You might notice post-exertional malaise (PEM), which is a crash after a mentally or physically active day.

Most women with chronic fatigue syndrome have healthy pregnancies and healthy babies. If you have the condition, let your prenatal provider know so you can manage your symptoms together.

What is chronic fatigue syndrome?

ME/CFS is a complex chronic condition affecting more than a million American men and women of all ages, though women are two to four times more likely to suffer from it than men. While its dominant symptom is, not surprisingly, fatigue, the illness affects so much more than a person's state of exhaustion.

What are the signs of chronic fatigue syndrome during pregnancy?

One primary symptom of chronic fatigue syndrome is exhaustion coupled with a greatly lowered ability to do activities that you usually did before the illness.

Everyday activities like grocery shopping or showering may leave a person with ME/CFS bed-bound or unable to do other tasks for hours. Along with unrelenting tiredness, chronic fatigue syndrome can come with other symptoms, including:

Post-exertional malaise (PEM) , a worsening of symptoms — often described as a "crash" or "relapse" — after physical or mental activity

Orthostatic intolerance , a worsening of symptoms while standing or sitting upright, sometimes accompanied by light-headedness or vision changes

Problems with thinking , including memory lapses and brain fog

Sleep problems, including having trouble falling asleep or staying asleep, as well as feeling unrested after a full night's sleep

Pain , most commonly muscle pains, joint pain, and headaches

All of these may come and go, and they could last for weeks, months, or even years. The difficulty with chronic fatigue syndrome is that it's hard to diagnose (there aren't any tests for it, and other illnesses can cause similar symptoms), it's not known what causes it, and there's currently no cure.

Track your symptoms and find out what's normal and what may be a more serious condition in the What to Expect app .

How does chronic fatigue syndrome affect pregnancy?

Very little is known about the condition's impact on pregnancy beyond anecdotal evidence, which suggests that chronic fatigue syndrome affects different women differently when they're expecting (no big surprise there).

Some moms-to-be with ME/CFS say their symptoms improve during pregnancy, while others say they get worse. Of course, it may be hard to tell, since pregnancy is physically exhausting for all women, even those not dealing with ME/CFS. Being chronically tired isn't normal during other times of life, but it can be considered normal when you're expecting, especially during the first and third trimesters.

Still, it's important not to confuse the fatigue and symptoms of ME/CFS with the typical fatigue of pregnancy . Being tired during pregnancy — even very tired — does not mean you've developed ME/CFS, which is characterized by an extreme feeling of exhaustion that limits your ability to function as usual and lasts for six months or longer.

Happily, moms-to-be with ME/CFS don't have any higher chances of developing pregnancy complications like preeclampsia , gestational diabetes , premature labor , or having a low birthweight baby. While some research has shown that women with ME/CFS are slightly more likely to have pregnancy loss, more research is needed to say for sure.

Pregnant people with ME/CFS may also be prone to morning sickness that lasts all day (as opposed to the kind that only strikes when they wake up). The serious form of pregnancy nausea and vomiting called hyperemesis gravidarum is also more common among expectant moms with ME/CFS.

As for handling childbirth if you have ME/CFS, moms with the condition may tire more quickly during labor and may have a longer recovery period post-delivery. Postpartum depression may also be more common among new moms with ME/CFS.

How is chronic fatigue syndrome treated during pregnancy?

If you're pregnant and received a ME/CFS diagnosis prior to conceiving, it's important that the doctor who has been caring for your condition knows about your pregnancy and the practitioner you've chosen for your prenatal care knows about your ME/CFS.

Together, they can help you cope with your ME/CFS while nurturing your baby-to-be. Treatments will likely incorporate strategies that have made you feel better in the past, such as activity management (also called pacing). You'll also need to take a good look at any medications you've been taking to make sure they're compatible with pregnancy. Some — like Midodrine — aren't.

Just remember that the vast majority of women with ME/CFS can and do have healthy pregnancies and healthy babies. Having the support of your family members and some close friends — as well as being under the care of a good medical team — can help you weather the challenges of suffering from ME/CFS during pregnancy.