A What to Expect survey shows what matters most to moms when choosing an insurance plan.

Expecting a baby brings big changes — and can bring big medical bills , too. Open enrollment season is the perfect time to check that your health insurance is up to the task.

What to Expect surveyed moms to understand how satisfied they were with their insurance coverage throughout pregnancy and childbirth. These findings reflect the experiences and satisfaction levels reported by moms in What to Expect's 2025 Maternal Health Study.

As it turns out, Cigna subscribers are the most satisfied expecting moms. More than four out of five moms (84%) say they were satisfied with their prenatal coverage, and more than three out of five (68%) say the same for their labor and delivery coverage.

On the other hand, moms who subscribe to UnitedHealthcare (UHC) rate their satisfaction the lowest of those surveyed: 72% say they were satisfied with their prenatal coverage, and 63% say the same for labor and delivery .

infographic

How moms rate different insurance companies

Moms who have Cigna give the insurance company positive scores when it comes to being able to find a healthcare provider who accepts their insurance (only 19% say they’ve had trouble with this). Of the major health insurance companies that What to Expect’s study looks at, Aetna/CVS Health and Kaiser Permanente subscribers report that they struggle most in this area — 31% of their subscribers say they experienced difficulty locating in-network providers.

Cigna also received a better ranking compared to other large insurance companies for how easy it is to understand what is covered by your insurance plan (51% of Cigna users say it’s difficult to understand what’s covered by their insurance plan; the only company that scored better was Kaiser Permanente, with 45%).

“We’re proud of the strides we’ve made in ensuring healthier pregnancies, safer deliveries, and better outcomes for both moms and babies, but we recognize that there is always more work to do,” a spokesperson at Cigna tells What to Expect. “We are continuously striving to enhance our services and are excited about the new AI tools we’ve developed to help customers navigate their benefits more easily."

UnitedHealthcare customers, on the other hand, are the most likely to say it’s difficult to understand what’s covered by their insurance plan (61% of respondents who use UnitedHealthcare agree with this statement). Moms who use UnitedHealthcare are also the most likely to say their experiences with insurance made them distrustful of the healthcare system (50% agree with this statement).

“UnitedHealthcare offers a wide variety of health plans, and the vast majority include coverage for maternity care, which is also a requirement of the Affordable Care Act,” a spokesperson for UnitedHealthcare tells What to Expect. “Some maternity care is considered preventive and covered with no out-of-pocket costs for the member. We encourage anyone who is planning to expand their family or is currently pregnant to utilize the UnitedHealthcare app or call the number on their insurance card to clarify their coverage, find providers and confirm if their providers are in-network, and see cost per service estimates.

“In addition, some employers offer the UHC Surest health plan, which offers upfront cost transparency with no deductible and no coinsurance,” the spokesperson adds. “Surest members can shop for care and view prices (copays) in advance of seeking care so they can plan accordingly.”

When choosing an insurance provider, moms say they care most about keeping costs low

For most moms (61%), the top priority when it comes to health insurance is low out-of-pocket expenses .

More than half of moms (54%) also say they care most about avoiding surprise bills. Unfortunately, unexpected charges are quite common during and after pregnancy: More than half of Cigna, UnitedHealthCare, and Aetna subscribers say they’ve received an unexpected bill for a service they thought was covered.

Under the Affordable Care Act, most plans are required to cover routine preventive OB/GYN visits, lab tests, ultrasounds, and labor and delivery as an essential health benefit at no out-of-pocket cost — as long as the provider is in-network. Prenatal genetic testing or appointments and imaging related to a high-risk pregnancy may not be included, says Caitlin Donovan, senior director for the Patient Advocate Foundation (PAF).

What also may not be covered: alternative providers, like doulas , midwives, acupuncturists, and any additional medications or equipment, Donovan says. “Make sure the hospital is in-network, along with whether it will cost more for a single room and how many nights they will cover,” she says.

If you call your insurance company to confirm what you can expect to pay out of pocket, make sure you ask if your provider or hospital is in-network, rather than just covered. It could technically be covered, but at your (higher) out-of-network pricing.

Tips if you’re expecting and choosing an insurance company right now

If you’re pregnant during open enrollment, or might become pregnant once on the plan you select, here are a few ways to find the best coverage for you.

Check that your OB is in-network. The most important thing to confirm is whether your doctor and their affiliated hospital or birthing center accept your insurance plan, says Donovan. If you have an existing OB, call and make sure they accept the specific insurance plan you’re considering. Also ask what hospital they deliver at, then call to make sure that hospital is in-network as well. If you’re in need of a new OB, check that your insurance has local providers in-network who have privileges to deliver in nearby hospitals or birthing centers that are also in-network.

Get picky with your plan. Even if you don’t get to choose your insurance carrier, you will likely have a choice between a few plans. Consider your budget — how much you can afford to pay monthly, says Donovan. Then look at three numbers on your plan: Your premium (your monthly payment), your deductible (how much you have to spend before your coverage kicks in), and your out-of-pocket costs, which include copays and coinsurance until your maximum spend amount is met. “It may be tempting to choose based on the monthly premium, but if the deductible is so high that you can't afford to pay for a doctor's visit, it'll be like you don't have insurance at all,” Donovan says.

Enroll in an HSA or FSA. This is money you set aside to be excluded from your taxable income that can be used for qualifying medical expenses. These accounts are plan-dependent and can be used to pay for costs like prescriptions and copays. Use your deductible or out-of-pocket maximum to ballpark how much money to put in this account — you’ll maximize savings if you put in as close to the amount you’ll actually spend on prescriptions and medical bills as possible.

Look for extra benefits, like a lactation consultant. While all qualified plans will cover essential preventative maternity care, consider other services you may want to use, and check if they are included as well. “You may get access for lactation consultants or postnatal visits from a nurse practitioner to your home,” Donovan shares.

Enrolling in an insurance plan can feel overwhelming, so don’t hesitate to reach out to a benefits specialist through your employer or the insurance company itself if you have questions.

The good news is that moms are generally happy with their insurance benefits, with 77% saying they were satisfied with prenatal coverage and 68% saying they were satisfied with their labor and delivery coverage.

“Your health and finances are intimately related,” Donovan says, “but there are ways to take control that don’t have to cost you a lot of money.”

Methodology

The What to Expect 2025 Maternal Health Study was conducted between June 26 and July 10, 2025. We surveyed 3,285 women ages 18 to 49 who are trying to conceive, are expecting, or have a child ages 0 to 11 months old. The study specifically asked users about UnitedHealthcare, Blue Cross Blue Shield or Elevance Health, Cigna, Aetna or CVS Health, and Kaiser Permanente.

Key takeaways

Moms who subscribe to Cigna are the most satisfied with their coverage, compared to other major health insurance providers. Of the moms with Cigna, 84% say they were satisfied with prenatal coverage, and 68% say the same for labor and delivery coverage.

Cigna receives high scores for having a broad selection of in-network providers and having coverage that’s easy to understand.

Moms who subscribe to UnitedHealthcare rate their satisfaction the lowest of the large health insurance companies (72% of subscribers say they were satisfied with their prenatal coverage, and 63% say the same for labor and delivery coverage).