Pregnant at 40: Why It’s More Common (and Safer!) Than Ever

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Pregnancy for moms 40 and up

"I'm 40 years old and pregnant with my first baby. My doctor has ordered some tests that my younger sister never had when she was pregnant. Why the extra scrutiny? What are the pregnancy risks associated with being an older mom?"

Congratulations on your pregnancy! With birth rates actually increasing for the 40-and-over set, there's never been a more popular time to be a pregnant mom at or over 40. Fortunately, there's also never been a better time — or a safer one.

Key Takeaways

The odds are with you. With regular prenatal care and a wholesome lifestyle, most moms 40 and over go on to have healthy pregnancies and healthy babies.

Be ready for more screening. As an older mama, the risk of some chromosomal conditions and certain complications goes up, which means extra monitoring and tests.

Stay fit and eat well. Healthy habits as well as guidance from your medical team can help support you and your baby-on-board throughout pregnancy.

What to expect when you're pregnant at or over 40

A mom-to-be in your age bracket has nearly the same odds of having a healthy pregnancy and a healthy baby as her much younger counterparts.

Why "nearly"? As we move into the golden years of baby-making — "advanced maternal age," in doctor-speak — our chances of pregnancy complications creep up ever-so-slightly.

What are the risks of being pregnant at or over 40?

First, we have to deal with the fact that our eggs have been around for longer. Women are born with a lifetime supply of eggs. Though the vast majority continue ripening without incident as we age, each passing year very slightly increases the risk that those eggs will have certain chromosomal abnormalities.

For instance, while a 25-year-old mom-to-be has a 1 in 1,200 chance of delivering a baby with Down syndrome — a genetic condition caused by the presence of an extra copy of chromosome 21 — a 40-year-old's odds are 1 in 100, according to the National Down Syndrome Society.

You'll be scheduled for routine prenatal testing — like NIPT or a quad screen and nuchal translucency screening — that can identify Down syndrome and other chromosomal conditions, just to be on the safe side.

Second, we have to deal with the fact that older bodies are, in general, somewhat more susceptible to a variety of health issues, including high blood pressure and diabetes. That puts pregnant moms 35 and older at a slightly greater risk for the pregnancy-related forms of these conditions like preeclampsia and gestational diabetes — which gives your practitioner another reason to pay closer attention to your pregnancy.

Preterm labor is also a little more common in 40-and-over moms — as it is in expectant moms 17 and under — which is yet another reason for all the extra scrutiny.

Other risks the advanced maternal age set might have to confront include slightly longer labor and a higher chance of C-section or assisted delivery with vacuum extraction or forceps , for example, probably due to having somewhat poorer muscle tone and less flexible joints.

Want to connect with other pregnant moms who are 40 and up? Download the What to Expect app for expert advice, week-by-week updates, and parent tips.

What else do you need to know if you're pregnant at or over 40?

The good news is that if you start off your pregnancy in tip-top shape and maintain it as much as possible throughout, you'll do just as well as your younger pregnant friends. You know what that means: eating well, exercising regularly, taking your prenatal vitamins, and getting all those tests your practitioner recommends .

What to Expect Community parent MsKen is about to share her exciting 40-plus pregnancy news. “I’m 41 and was totally not expecting to be pregnant — but here I am. I’m happy but we haven’t told anyone yet; we are going to announce it at Thanksgiving.”

Once the delivery is behind you, you'll have years more experience and wisdom to offer that precious little person you've brought into the world.

Here's to a healthy pregnancy at any age,

Heidi Murkoff

What To Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. What to Expect Before You’re Expecting , 2nd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, 20 Tips for Getting Pregnant: Your Guide to Trying to Conceive , June 2023. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Pregnancy at Age 35 Years or Older , August 2022. National Down Syndrome Society, About Down Syndrome , 2025. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Down Syndrome , January 2024. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, Association Between Very Advanced Maternal Age and Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes: A Cross Sectional Japanese Study , October 2017. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, PLOS One, Effect of Maternal Age on the Risk of Preterm Birth: A Large Cohort Study , January 2018. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, Maternal Age and Risk of Labor and Delivery Complications , June 2015. National Vital Statistics Reports, Effects of Age-Specific Fertility Trends on Overall Fertility Trends: United States , 1990-2023, March 2025.

Updates history

November 10, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Yes, You Can Have a Baby at 45 — Here's What It Might Be Like Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

Ready to Conceive at 35 (or Older)? These Tips Can Help You Feel Confident and Prepared Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Here's How to Have a Healthy Pregnancy if You're Overweight Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Surprising Truth: Why 90% of Moms-to-Be Are Actually at Risk for Gestational Diabetes Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnancy-Related Complications Black Women Should Know About (and How to Protect Yourself) Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Warning Signs You Shouldn't Ignore in the Third Trimester Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

11 Questions Your OB/GYN Wishes You’d Ask When You Get Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Still Pregnant? Here’s What It Means to Be Overdue Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Depression During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

What to Know About Twin Pregnancy Risks — and How to Stay Ahead of Them Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Due Date's Here. Baby's Not. Should You Have Sex? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

How to Boost Your Chances of Getting Pregnant (Starting Today) Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Do I Really Need All Those Prenatal Appointments? Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

How Long Does Getting Pregnant Usually Take — and What Affects Your Timing? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window