Pregnant and Missing Sushi? Here’s What’s Safe to Order

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

sushi during pregnancy

Sushi is a nutritious and popular restaurant pick. It can also be a nourishing meal for you and your growing baby — if you know what to order. Here's what to pick and what to avoid on the menu.

Cutting out raw fish during pregnancy is a big sacrifice for some sushi lovers. Thankfully, you can continue to indulge your seafood cravings with delicacies ranging from shrimp tempura to California rolls. Here's what you need to know before joining your pals for a night at the sushi restaurant or sitting down for a homemade sushi meal. There are more than a few options on the menu you can still enjoy.

Key Takeaways

Skip raw (the rest is OK!) Medical experts say avoiding raw seafood is best right now — but there are lots of cooked fish options that are perfectly fine.

Fish is good brain food. Cooked shrimp and salmon in hand rolls are a great source of protein and omega 3s, which are key to your baby’s brain development. Try to eat 8 to 12 ounces of low-mercury fish a week.

Order wisely. Truth: there’s lots to choose from at a sushi restaurant, so dive into miso soup, California rolls, edamame, and seaweed salad. But skip things that aren’t fully cooked and nix fish high in mercury (like swordfish and bigeye tuna).

Can I eat raw sushi while pregnant?

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) says it's better to be safe than sorry until your baby's been delivered. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologyCan I Eat Sushi While I'm Pregnant?See All Sources [1] Steer clear of any seafood that hasn't been cooked fully, including fish sashimi and raw fish rolls, due to the potential for foodborne illness. Seafood can remain a staple in your diet, though — fish is safe as long as you cook it through. (Stay away from anything seared.)

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologyCan I Eat Sushi While I'm Pregnant?See All Sources

One particularly significant threat, listeria, is a bacteria that's a danger to you and your baby's health. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Listeria InfectionSee All Sources [2] You can contract listeriosis — an illness caused by eating foods contaminated with listeria — from other uncooked foods, like meat and eggs, as well as from unpasteurized dairy products.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Listeria InfectionSee All Sources

Symptoms of listeriosis can vary. Cases are often asymptomatic and you may not notice symptoms, but you may feel like you have the flu. If you suspect you've contracted a case of listeriosis, call a doctor. Although you're far more susceptible to listeriosis during pregnancy, reported cases are rare.

What to Expect Community parent BBAmummy knows what people choose to eat is personal, but for her, sushi during pregnancy is a no-go. “It’s such a short period of time, I just personally don’t feel it’s worth the risk.”

Still wondering what’s safe to eat? Go to the What to Expect app for expert guidance, healthy meal ideas, and support from other mamas who’re also craving poke bowls.

Can I eat cooked sushi while pregnant?

Yes! Cooked fish — including cooked sushi — is an excellent, protein-rich option during pregnancy that comes packed with omega 3s . Eating fish is a great way to help your baby develop, nurture your neurological health, and combat heart disease, and it could even decrease the likelihood that you'll deliver before you're due .

According to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), your weekly fish and shellfish intake should hover around 8 to 12 ounces when you're pregnant, and a morsel of shrimp tempura can help you on your way to meeting that goal. Trusted SourceFood and Drug AdministrationAdvice About Eating Fish,See All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceFood and Drug AdministrationAdvice About Eating Fish,See All Sources

Watch out for fish with a higher mercury content. The FDA advises that you limit mercury consumption during pregnancy — the heavy metal is linked to birth defects and nervous system damage. On a typical sushi menu, fish to skip over includes bigeye tuna and swordfish, while cooked wild salmon is considered a safer pick. If in doubt, consult the FDA's guidelines .

Can I eat shrimp while pregnant?

As long as your shrimp is cooked, go for it! Shrimp has plenty of iron , a mineral that will serve you well when you're expecting.

Other crustaceans and shellfish like clams, lobster, crab, scallops, and oysters are also acceptable options when they're cooked. They're only counted among the handful of foods you should avoid during pregnancy when they're raw.

Can I eat seaweed while pregnant?

You can't go wrong with seaweed, whether it's served as a seaweed salad, as an ingredient in your miso soup, or as the wrapping around a cucumber roll. Seaweed contains tons of iodine , an important mineral during pregnancy, along with omega-3 fatty acids.

Bonus points if you pair your seaweed salad with edamame and avocado. Edamame is packed with healthy protein and fat, while avocado can help you meet your daily need for folate , which allows babies to grow properly and reduces the risk of neural tube defects.

Sushi you can eat while pregnant

If you're unsure what to order, ask your server about the ingredients in a dish to help you make a decision. There's likely plenty you can enjoy.

Here are a few common menu items that get the green light:

Any cooked fish roll (opt for fish with a lower mercury content, like salmon, and avoid seafood with a higher mercury content, like swordfish, tilefish, and bigeye tuna)

Tempura and tempura rolls

California rolls

Cucumber rolls

Avocado rolls

Edamame

Seaweed salad

Miso soup

I ate raw fish while pregnant — what should I do?

First of all, don't panic! If you can't shake your concern, check in with your healthcare provider. Overall, the risk is low. Chances are you're fine, but it's still a good idea to notify him or her, especially if you experience any flu-like symptoms.

Pregnancy is a time to indulge in foods you enjoy and make nutritional choices that make you feel your best, and you're unlikely to contract an illness from your dinner. Give yourself a pat on the back for choosing cooked sushi — it's rich with nutrients for you and your baby.

It won't be long before you have free rein over the menu, too. As long as you monitor your mercury intake, you can eat raw sushi while you're breastfeeding . Just think how delectable that first postpartum bite of sashimi will be!