First Trimester Pregnancy Must-Haves

first trimester must-haves

You just got that big fat positive and you’re going to be a parent. Congratulations!

The first trimester of pregnancy is an exciting — albeit often uncomfortable — time. Your breasts may be tender , you might feel more tired than usual and you may experience some morning sickness . While it’s all considered typical of pregnancy, it’s not always fun.

With that, it’s only natural to search for things to help your body better adjust to growing a baby. Luckily, there are tools out there that can help.

Of course, it’s easier said than done knowing exactly which products might help you feel better — they don’t teach this kind of thing in school, and you don’t automatically know how to deal with all the changes that can come in the first trimester . Here’s what you need to know.

What kinds of products do you need during the first trimester?

The first trimester has a reputation for being a little rough, and with good reason — your body is going through a lot of changes, says Christine Greves, M.D., an OB/GYN at the Winnie Palmer Hospital for Women and Babies in Orlando, Florida. “Some women may feel tired, a little nauseous and even have vomiting,” she says. “But it all depends.”

Food aversions can lead to changes in your diet, which may make you feel a little off, too, she says. And, of course, you’re growing a new life inside you — that takes a lot of energy.

When it comes to the first trimester, there are a few essential items that many moms-to-be find especially helpful during those first weeks. These products help alleviate nausea caused by morning sickness, ensure that you and baby are getting all the vitamins and nutrients you need and keep your changing body as comfortable and content as possible. Just keep this advice in mind, per Dr. Greves: “Do what feels right for you. You’re in survival mode at this time.”

How we chose the best first trimester pregnancy must-haves

We started by scouting out the most popular first trimester products on the market, including What to Expect readers’ favorites and what doctors have seen their pregnant patients find success with. Then, we narrowed down our picks to the top-reviewed and best-rated items to select products that are designed to help you get through this period of pregnancy with relative ease.

Check out our first trimester shopping checklist below for all the must-haves you'll want on hand those first few months.

Morning Sickness Soother

Tummydrops Ginger

Why We Love It

For many moms-to-be, morning sickness is one of the first signs that they’ve got a bun in the oven. If nausea is getting you down, eating a ginger candy might help calm your tummy. Ginger may or may not help — it depends on the person, Dr. Greves says, noting that “there’s no harm in trying.” She also notes that ginger “helps with nausea in quite a bit of my patients.” Lots of expectant parents turn to these extra-spicy lozenges, which are organic and non-GMO. If you don’t enjoy the taste of ginger, the brand also offers a peppermint variety .

Community Reviews

Liliky Tummy drops have been amazing for me at keeping the nausea calmed between snacks.”

Lkush89 so far the only thing I’ve tried are Tummy Drops… You just suck on it and it helps so much”

Prenatal Vitamins

Perelel Trimester Prenatal Packs

Why We Love It

Folic acid is particularly important in the early days of pregnancy, before many people even know they conceived. If you haven’t already been taking a prenatal , the time to start is now, Dr. Greves says. Perelel Trimester Prenatal Packs are packed with the activated form of folate, plus DHA and other good-for-you-and-baby vitamins and nutrients. (DHA, in case you’re not familiar with it, is thought to be good for baby’s brain and eye development.) Plus, to combat queasiness that often pops up during the first trimester, the initial prenatal pack has a supplement to help reduce nausea and improve digestion. This is the first of three prenatal packs created by Perelel, each of which cater to mom’s and baby’s specific needs at weeks 0-13, 14-27, and 28+.

Community Reviews

mw6070 "I love them! I’ve been on them for 4 years (I’ve taken all the packs from pre-conception to the mom support pack postpartum). This is my second pregnancy with them!"

Angelica456789 "I tried them and I liked them a lot. I felt good about the quality and how they seemed to really take into consideration what you’re going through each trimester."

A Waistband Extender

Maeband Maternity Belly Band

Why We Love It

If you’re not quite ready to splurge on maternity jeans , using a waistline extender can help you to stretch your regular pants until you’re a little further along in your pregnancy. This extender comes recommended by some What to Expect community parents and is offered in several sizes to grow with your expanding belly. Paired with a tunic or longer shirt, no one but you will be the wiser.

Community Reviews

juni-19-22 These were awesome for me.

prt97 I’ve been using the maeband belly band with my regular jeans though and having been liking that!

Nausea Relief Band

SeaBand Mama Morning Sickness Relief Acupressure Wrist Bands

Why We Love It

Not a fan of ginger candy? Many parents-to-be swear by acupressure wrist bands as a natural and effective way to relieve morning sickness. These SeaBand acupressure bracelets — which are praised by lots of parents in the What to Expect community — might help soothe your tummy, and they’re washable, too. “The bands hit a pressure point that may help with nausea,” Dr. Greves says. “It’s worth a try and can’t hurt.” Dr. Greves also notes she’s had several patients who have seen relief with these bands.

Community Reviews

Leh143 They helped me! It at least took the edge off so I didn't feel so terrible.

A Gentle Toothbrush

Brilliant Expectant Mom Toothbrush

Why We Love It

Thanks to those wonderful pregnancy hormones, many people experience sore and bleeding gums during pregnancy . Help keep gingivitis at bay — and those pearlies looking white — by using a soft-bristled toothbrush twice daily. Brilliant’s Expectant Mom Toothbrush has 360 degrees of extra-fine bristles to help you get to those hard-to-reach spots, made with a soft material that won’t irritate your gums. This three-pack allows you to have some extras on-hand. (Don’t forget to make a visit to your dentist every six months, too!)

A Pregnancy Journal

What to Expect Pregnancy Journal & Organizer

Why We Love It

Your pregnancy is such an exciting life event, and you’ll want to remember it forever . A specially designed pregnancy journal can help you document all those special memories right from the moment you get a positive test. This journal from What to Expect creator Heidi Murkoff gives you special spots to write down everything, like visits to your healthcare provider, shopping lists, birthing plans, potential baby names and gifts you’ve received for baby.

Community Reviews

Ashdashlee1992 I really like it. it even has a section for the labor and childbirth time.

The Ultimate Resource

What to Expect When You're Expecting

Why We Love It

This book (you may have heard of it!) is often referred to as the “pregnancy bible” as it contains everything you need to know about the growth of your little bundle. Filled with facts, helpful tips and reassurance as to what’s happening with your body and baby through all trimesters of pregnancy, it’s a must-have for helping quell parent-to-be anxiety .

Community Reviews

The What to Expect When You're Expecting book was great. I'm a STM, and everything we went over in the birthing class for my first (except stuff specific to that hospital) was covered in the book.

My favourite book has always been the WTE books-so What To Expect When You’re Expecting and also What To Expect The First Year.

I had the What to Expect book & the actual journal one too! I loved it!!

A Helpful Hydration Tool

Yeti Rambler

Why We Love It

Hydration is crucial during your pregnancy. “Your blood volume is expanding so you need the liquid for that,” Greves says. And, she points out, if you’re struggling with morning sickness, you need to replace fluids you’re losing. “Hydration can just help you feel better overall,” she adds. Make sure you always have cold H2O ready to go with this Yeti Rambler . It has a double-walled vacuum to keep your drinks cold (or hot) for hours and holds up to 18 ounces at a time (a great size for day-to-day use). A wide bottle mouth makes it easier to drink lots of liquids at once, while sturdy construction means it can stand up to accidental drops. And, of course, you can use this well beyond pregnancy.

Community Reviews

ribbonwren I LOVE my Yeti's. They keep your drink cold, you don't have to worry about condensation, and I like the ‘chug cap’ with the handle which makes the bottles easy to carry. I have a 26oz, and an 18oz which is lighter to carry and fits in car cup holders. I will never go back to using a different type of water bottle. They are pricey but so worth it. … You can machine wash Yeti's which is awesome. With some of the other brand name water bottles you need to hand wash.”

Nutrient-Packed Snacks

RXBAR Protein Bars

Why We Love It

It might be hard to stomach breakfast during the first trimester, which makes having a stash of protein- and fiber-packed bars a real lifesaver. Small enough to tuck into your purse but dense enough to keep you feeling full until lunchtime, these bars come in several flavors (with no artificial sweeteners) and are sure to satisfy those pregnancy cravings for something sweet without being overpowering. “Stay away from super sweet things — those tend to make women feel not so great,” Dr. Greves says. Each bar contains eight grams of protein to help sustain you as you go about your day.

Good for Replacing Electrolytes

Gatorade

Why We Love It

Gatorade has been a favorite sports drink for years, and it can help when you’re struggling with morning sickness, too. “Gatorade beverages can definitely help with replenishing electrolytes, especially if you’ve been vomiting,” Dr. Greves says. This 24-pack gives you plenty of flavors to choose from — Glacier Freeze, Glacier Cherry, Cool Blue and Berry — so you can go with whatever your taste buds prefer on any given day. Note that it contains lots of sugar, though, so it may be a good idea to check in with your OB/GYN before chugging a bunch of this sports drink.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Morning Sickness: Nausea and Vomiting of Pregnancy , December 2021 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Oral Health Care During Pregnancy and Through the Lifespan , August 2013 Christine Greves , M.D., OB/GYN, Winnie Palmer Hospital for Women and Babies, Orlando, Florida. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, The Relationship of Docosahexaenoic Acid (DHA) with Learning and Behavior in Healthy Children: A Review , July 2013.

Your Next Read

What to Eat in the First Trimester Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

The 11-Step First Trimester Checklist That’ll Keep You Sane While Growing a Human Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

10 Things I Wish Someone Had Told Me About the Third Trimester of Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

7 Products to Help with Constipation During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

How the Second Trimester Brings Relief, New Milestones, and Big-Time Baby Growth Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Easing the Quease: How to Cope With Morning Sickness During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

When Pregnancy Kills Your Appetite Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

12 Home Remedies for Pregnancy Morning Sickness Worth Trying Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

The Ultimate Third Trimester Checklist: Everything to Do Before Your Baby’s Birthday Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Is Nausea After Eating an Early Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Feeling Hungry All the Time During Pregnancy? It's Not Just You Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Managing Pregnancy Cravings and Aversions (From No-Thanks to Need-It-Now) Medically Reviewed by Kameelah Phillips, M.D.

Why You're So Fatigued in the Second Trimester of Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window