Pregnant and Low on Vitamin D? Here’s How to Boost Your Levels Safely

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

vitamin D during pregnancy

Vitamin D is essential for everyone, but it's extra critical during pregnancy. Here’s how much vitamin D expecting moms need per day, plus easy ways to put it on your plate.

Most people know that to build and maintain strong bones and teeth, you should eat calcium-rich foods like milk and yogurt. But you might not know that vitamin D plays an equally important role — it's what enables your body to absorb and hold onto that calcium and other minerals you and your developing baby need.

Not only does vitamin D help us absorb calcium so we maintain strong bones, but the fat-soluble vitamin also aids immune function and plays a part in blood sugar regulation. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary SupplementsVitamin DSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary SupplementsVitamin DSee All Sources

So how much vitamin D should expecting moms get daily to meet their needs? And what are some easy ways to put more vitamin D on your plate?

Read on to discover how much vitamin D is recommended during pregnancy, the best vitamin D-rich foods, plus everything you need to know about vitamin D supplementation when there’s a baby on the way.

Key Takeaways

Vitamin D supports strong bones, immune health, and blood sugar regulation, making it vital for both you and your baby during pregnancy.

Getting enough vitamin D helps reduce the risk of complications like preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and low birth weight, with about 600 IUs recommended daily.

You can maintain healthy vitamin D levels through your prenatal vitamins, supplements (if your doctor recommends them), and foods like salmon, fortified milk, trout, sardines, and eggs.

Why is vitamin D so important during pregnancy?

Vitamin D is one of the most essential nutrients for pregnant women, and the vitamin plays a key role in the development of your little one’s bones. Although very rare, in cases of severe malnutrition low levels of vitamin D in pregnancy have been linked to conditions like rickets (a softening of the bones), muscle disease, and seizures in a newborn. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsVitamin D: Screening and Supplementation During PregnancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsVitamin D: Screening and Supplementation During PregnancySee All Sources

Maintaining adequate vitamin D levels while you have a baby on board may also lower the risk of complications like preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and even low birth weight. And while research is ongoing, studies also suggest that moms-to-be who get enough vitamin D are less likely to go into preterm labor. Trusted SourceCochraneDoes vitamin D supplementation benefit, harm, or have no effects on pregnant women or their babies?See All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCochraneDoes vitamin D supplementation benefit, harm, or have no effects on pregnant women or their babies?See All Sources

How much vitamin D do pregnant women need?

Pregnant and lactating women should get about 600 IUs (or the equivalent of 15 micrograms) of vitamin D per day. Luckily, most prenatal vitamins provide about 400 to 600 IUs of vitamin D, and you can also get the vitamin from certain foods and beverages.

What to know about vitamin D deficiency during pregnancy

Although the body produces vitamin D when exposed to sunlight, some women struggle to get enough, particularly moms-to-be who live in less-sunny climates or have darker skin.

While the fat-soluble vitamin can be tricky (though not impossible!) to find in food sources, taking your daily prenatal vitamin throughout pregnancy can help cover your vitamin D needs.

Unless you have a very severe vitamin D deficiency, you’re unlikely to experience symptoms if your levels are low. But if you think you might not be getting enough, the best way to assess your vitamin D status is to get a blood test. Based on those results, your doctor will determine if it makes sense for you to take a supplement.

If you do have a vitamin D deficiency, your practitioner may recommend upping your intake with a daily dose of 1,000 to 2,000 IU of vitamin D, either in a supercharged prenatal or as another supplement.

"My doctor recommended additional vitamin D to my prenatals, and I bought the specific one she told me to get," says What to Expect Community user ViennaMama.

As with all vitamins and supplements in pregnancy, you should never take anything without first discussing it with your practitioner. Some nutrients, including vitamin D, can be dangerous in very high doses.

Best foods high in vitamin D for pregnant women

Although not found in large amounts in food, it is possible to get your fix of this nutrient in food form in addition to your prenatal (and you can't overdose on fat-soluble vitamins such as vitamin D by eating foods that are naturally rich in them, even if you’re also taking a prenatal).

Here are some of the best vitamin D-rich foods and beverages to put on your plate:

Rainbow trout (645 IU per 3 ounces, cooked): A 3-ounce serving of rainbow trout serves up more than 100% of a pregnant woman’s recommended daily intake for vitamin D. It’s also packed with the omega-3 fatty acids EPA and DHA that support fetal brain development.

Sockeye salmon (570 IU per 3 ounces, cooked): Ditto on salmon. The fatty fish provides a healthy amount of anti-inflammatory omega-3s, as well as vitamin D.

Fortified 2% milk (120 IU per 1 cup): Most cow’s milk is fortified with vitamin D, meaning manufacturers add the critical nutrient to their product to ensure consumers are hitting their goals. Cow’s milk is also a great source of calcium and protein, two other important nutrients during pregnancy.

Fortified plant-based milks (100-144 IUs per 1 cup): If you prefer non-dairy milks, opt for a plant-based milk that’s fortified with vitamin D. Check the ingredient list on the package to determine whether the nutrient has been added to the product.

Sardines (46 IU per 2 sardines, canned in oil): While sardines may not be at the top of your cravings list, the mini fishies are a good source of two bone-building nutrients, vitamin D and calcium.

Eggs (44 IU per egg): While they won’t cover your daily vitamin D needs alone, eggs are still a great choice for expecting moms. They also provide protein and choline, which supports fetal brain development and guards against other birth defects. To get your fill of the latter nutrient, be sure to eat the whole egg — not just the egg white — since choline is only found in the yolk.

Have more pregnancy nutrition questions? Open the What to Expect app for a detailed guide to different nutrients you should make sure you're getting enough of, pregnancy-friendly meal ideas, and much more.

The bottom line? Vitamin D is an essential nutrient during pregnancy, so it's important to get enough of this sunshine vitamin by taking a prenatal that includes around 600 IUs of vitamin D, as well as possibly an additional supplement if your practitioner recommends it. And whether or not your practitioner suggests supplementation, focus on regularly including nourishing sources of vitamin D in your diet.