Pregnant or Postpartum? This Simple Tool Could Save Your Life

A doctor shares why it’s crucial to have a blood pressure cuff at home.

During pregnancy, What to Expect mom Olivia DeLong had a few high blood pressure readings during her regular appointments with her OB/GYN. They suspected it may have just been nerves from previous pregnancy losses , but they recommended she get a blood pressure cuff at home just to make sure.

DeLong went on to have pretty consistent normal readings at home (and then eventually her numbers improved at the doctor’s office, too!), but she says she was grateful they recommended she check at home, just in case her blood pressure had gone up and she needed treatment.

Turns out, it's pretty common for providers to recommend you have a good idea of your blood pressure readings at home, both during pregnancy and after.

“I have been recommending remote blood pressure monitoring for my patients for years,” says Veronica Gillispie-Bell, M.D ., an OB/GYN and associate professor for Ochsner Health in New Orleans. “During pregnancy and in the postpartum period , you are at increased risk for hypertensive disorders like gestational hypertension or preeclampsia . When you monitor your blood pressure at home, it helps us detect those blood pressure changes early.”

Key Takeaways

Taking your blood pressure reading regularly during pregnancy and postpartum could help you and your provider detect any issues and get help ASAP.

Follow the directions in the user manual, and be sure to position yourself correctly for the most accurate reading.

If your reading is high the first time, wait a few minutes and test it again. If it's still high, call your provider.

How to use an at-home blood pressure monitor

Blood pressure cuffs can be found at most drugstores or online, and they come in all different price points, says Dr. Gillispie-Bell. The best blood pressure cuff is the one you'll use.

“You should also check with your insurance provider,” Dr. Gillispie-Bell says. “In many states, digital blood pressure cuffs are covered by your insurance.”

I have been recommending remote blood pressure monitoring for my patients for years.

Veronica Gillispie-Bell, M.D., OB/GYN

When you do start using a cuff, it's also important to use it correctly to make sure you get the right reading.

1. Set it up properly

Sit down and rest for about five minutes to avoid a falsely high reading.

Sit in a chair with your legs uncrossed, then unroll the cuff and slide it over your arm (either one works!).

Position the arrow on the bottom of the cuff so it looks like it’s pointing down at the center of your arm.

Check that the cuff is secure but not too tight.

Position your arm at a right angle, with your forearm parallel to the floor. Typically, resting your arm on your leg will work.

2. Start the monitor

Once you're comfortable, press the button on the monitor. You'll start to feel the cuff get tight, which means the cuff is starting to measure your blood pressure.

3. Log the numbers

Wait until your cuff releases its grip.

Look at the monitor's display. You'll notice two numbers. The top one represents systolic blood pressure; this measures the pressure your blood uses to push against the artery walls whenever your heart beats, according to the American Heart Association. Trusted SourceAmerican Heart AssociationUnderstanding Blood Pressure ReadingsSee All Sources [2] The bottom number shows your diastolic blood pressure, or the pressure of your blood pushing against the artery walls when your heart muscle relaxes in between beats.

The goal is to have the top number be less than 140. If it's 160 or above, that means it's high. Trusted SourceACOGPreeclampsia and High Blood Pressure During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

The bottom number should be less than 90, but if it's greater than 110, that means it's high. 4. Re-check (if needed)

If your blood pressure is coming up high, rest for 15 minutes, then repeat the process a few minutes later. If it's still elevated, call your doctor.

It may be helpful to take your blood pressure at least once a week, says Dr. Gillispie-Bell. “We don't have actual evidence-based guidelines to say how often, but we do have some data from other remote blood pressure monitoring programs that taking your blood pressure at least once a week during pregnancy may allow us to detect signs of hypertensive disorder.” And an earlier diagnosis leads to a better outcome, she says.

Other things to keep in mind about taking your blood pressure at home

If the first reading came back high and the second was fine, it could mean that your arm wasn't resting at the right angle (maybe you had it straight down instead of parallel to the floor) or you had just moved around (rather than sitting still).

“While you're taking your blood pressure, you want to remain calm,” says Dr. Gillispie-Bell. “You do not want to talk or have a conversation. Just sit.”

It can be challenging, of course, to stay calm if you have a high blood pressure reading or just got off a tough work call. And your partner or another child may wish to talk your ear off. That's why it's important to re-test if it comes back high, just to make sure.

Call your OB/GYN if your blood pressure remains elevated after the second reading, says Dr. Gillispie-Bell. “You may need to go to the hospital for evaluation."

High blood pressure isn’t the only sign of preeclampsia. See your doctor if you have:

Headaches

Blurred vision

Pain on the upper-right side of your ribs

“Don't ignore these symptoms,” Dr. Gillispie-Bell says. “Don't ignore your blood pressure. It could save your life.”

Join What to Expect on July 23 for #BumpDay to show your support for pregnancy and postpartum care that supports every mom, everywhere. Post a baby bump pic — yours or one you love, past or present — or simply share a message of solidarity with the hashtag #BumpDay.

Sources

Preeclampsia and High Blood Pressure During Pregnancy

Show in the article

Understanding Blood Pressure Readings

Show in the article

Remote Monitoring Compared With In-Office Surveillance of Blood Pressure in Patients With Pregnancy-Related Hypertension

Masked pregnancy-associated hypertension as a predictor of adverse outcomes

Veronica Gillispie-Bell, M.D