Pregnancy Due Date Calculator

When is your baby due? Use this pregnancy calculator to find your due date based on the date of your last menstrual period, conception date, IVF three-day or five-day transfer date, or date of your last ultrasound.

How to Calculate Your Due Date

What is an estimated due date during pregnancy?

What is an estimated due date during pregnancy?

Your due date (also known as your estimated due date) is a calculation of when you're expected to give birth. Your EDD is important for you to know as you prepare to welcome your baby.

But remember, it's only an estimated due date, not a deadline for your baby to arrive. Just 4 percent of babies are born on their EDD.

Our pregnancy Due Date Calculator (or estimated Due Date Calculator) can help. Here’s how to calculate your due date using your last period, conception date, IVF transfer date, or timing of your last ultrasound.

Want to connect with other parents who have the same birth month? Find them on the What to Expect app .

First day of last period

Most pregnancies last around 40 weeks (or 38 weeks from conception), so typically the best way to estimate your due date is to count 40 weeks, or 280 days, from the first day of your last menstrual period (LMP).

Formula: Due Date = LMP + 280 days

You can also subtract three months from the first day of your last period and add seven days.

Formula: Due Date = LMP − 3 months + 7 days

Or choose "last period" from the choices in our Due Date Calculator menu, above.

The first day of your LMP is how most health care providers estimate a baby's due date.

Conception date

If you've been tracking ovulation symptoms or have been using ovulation test strips , you may be able to use your conception date to see how far along you are and when baby is likely to arrive.

Just add 266 days to get your estimated due date. Or select "conception date" and let our pregnancy Due Date Calculator do the math for you.

Wondering when your baby was conceived? Use the Conception Date Calculator to find out the most likely date.

IVF transfer date

If you conceived through in vitro fertilization (IVF) , you can calculate your due date using your IVF transfer date. Most embryo transfers occur either three days or five days after egg retrieval and fertilization.

If you had a day-three transfer, count 263 days from the transfer date to calculate your due date, and if you had a day-five transfer, count 261 days. Or use our IVF Due Date Calculator to find out the big day!

Ultrasound scan

Even if you can’t pinpoint when you conceived, forget the day of your last menstrual period, or aren’t sure when ovulation occurred, the date of an early ultrasound , if you have one, can help your practitioner determine your due date at your first prenatal appointment or another prenatal visit in your first trimester .

The timing of an early ultrasound can sometimes more accurately date the pregnancy than your LMP and other methods. Just choose "ultrasound" from our Due Date Calculator choices.

Just be aware, however, that not all women get an early ultrasound. Some practitioners perform them routinely, but others only recommend one if your periods are irregular, you're 35 or older, you have a history of miscarriages or pregnancy complications, or the due date can’t be determined based on your physical exam and LMP.

Other clues can help your health care provider figure out how far along you are and better pinpoint your due date at your prenatal check-ups.

Pregnancy milestones such as the first time the baby's heartbeat is detected (around week 9 or 10, though it can vary) and when you first feel fetal movement (on average between 18 and 22 weeks, but it can be earlier or later), can give clues as to whether your due date is accurate.

Your fundal height , which is the measurement from your pubic bone to the top of your uterus, is checked by your practitioner at each prenatal visit and helps confirm your due date.

The size of your uterus, which will be noted when your initial internal pregnancy exam is performed, can also be a factor in pinpointing the EDD.

Can I plan my due date?

Whether you're trying to avoid being very pregnant in the middle of summer or are a teacher who wants to maximize time off with your little one, you can try to time when you conceive in order to "plan" your due date.

But even if you're one of the lucky ones who's able to get pregnant when she really wants to, just remember that you probably won't be able to map out exactly when you'll give birth to the day (or even the week or month!).

Still, you can try our Ovulation Calculator , which uses the date of your last menstrual period and your typical cycle length to discover the days you're most likely to be fertile and increase your chances of conceiving.

Can my due date change?

Yes, your due date can change . While it’s definitely not a reason to worry, your doctor may change your due date for a number of reasons as your pregnancy progresses.

It may be that you have irregular periods and your early ultrasound dating was off, or that your first ultrasound was in the second trimester.

It could also be because your fundal height is abnormal, or your levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), a protein made by the baby, are outside the usual range. Talk to your practitioner if you have any questions or concerns.

Other resources

Early Pregnancy, Week-by-Week

FAQs About Due Dates

How many weeks is pregnancy?

Pregnancy lasts 40 weeks from the start of your last period. It’s likely that you’ll give birth a little before or after 40 weeks, but this estimate helps healthcare providers time your prenatal care. Your due date may be adjusted if you have an ultrasound or testing that shows your pregnancy is further along than you thought.

How can I know how far along I am?

When you calculate your due date with our Due Date Calculator tool, you’ll also find out how many weeks pregnant you are. And if you download the What to Expect app , you can easily keep track of how far along you are each day.

Will my due date change?

That depends! Your provider may change your due date if an ultrasound shows your baby is significantly bigger or smaller than expected based on your last menstrual period. Usually you can expect your due date to stay the same, but remember it’s just an estimate.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Methods for Estimating the Due Date , 2022. Stanford Children's Health, Calculating a Due Date , 2023. What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. What to Expect Before You're Expecting , 2nd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Pregnancy Week-by-Week , 2023. WhatToExpect.com, 8 Ovulation Symptoms to Detect Your Most Fertile Days , January 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Why Your Doctor May Change Your Due Date , January 2023. WhatToExpect.com, How Many Weeks, Months and Trimesters in a Pregnancy? , May 2022. WhatToExpect.com, In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) , March 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Birth Symbols by Month: Zodiac, Birthstone, Flower and Tree , September 2018. WhatToExpect.com, Your Guide to Prenatal Appointments , August 2022. Mayo Clinic, Prenatal Care: First Trimester Visits , August 2022.

Your Next Read

5 Surprisingly Common Reasons Your Due Date Might Change Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

IVF Due Date Calculator Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Conception Date Calculator: When Did You Conceive? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Still Pregnant? Here’s What It Means to Be Overdue Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Ovulation Calculator Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Chinese Gender Predictor Chart Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Is Your Baby Measuring Big? Why Size Estimates Aren't Always Spot-On Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

I Wish I Never Told Anyone My Due Date — Here’s Why Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Pinpoint Your Fertile Window: How to Track Ovulation and Boost Your Chances of Getting Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Pregnancy Weight Gain Calculator Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Due Date's Here. Baby's Not. Should You Have Sex? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

How Late Ovulation Impacts Conception Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

When You'll Get Ultrasounds During Pregnancy and What They Can Tell You About Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

When Does Implantation Occur? Symptoms, What to Expect Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

The Second Half of Your Cycle: A Simple Guide to the Luteal Phase Medically Reviewed by Allison Bloom, D.O., M.P.H.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window