Pregnant and Single? Here’s How to Get the Support You Need

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnant single mom using tablet

Though being single and pregnant can be challenging, there are plenty of ways to find support and get through it.

Pregnancy is a momentous time, full of anticipation and a fair share of worry. If you're going through it without a husband or partner — by circumstance or by design — your worry may feel even bigger.

But you're never totally alone: You have family, friends, an online community. In fact, there are very likely many more people ready and willing to help than you realize. Still, the challenges probably feel steep. Here's how to deal with some of the big ones.

Key-Takeaways

Tap your support team. Build a small circle of support — family, friends, or coworkers — so you have company at appointments and allies to turn to when you're feeling stressed.

Tackle baby gear early. Researching essentials and enlisting a handy friend to help assemble trickier items can make those final weeks feel much easier.

Lean on your village. Your community may look different as a single mom-to-be, but it's no less meaningful. Reaching out and letting people in will give you the support you need to navigate this exciting milestone.

Attending prenatal appointments when you're single and pregnant

You may be thinking you need to find that one someone who can be your wingman or woman, but who says this is a job for just one person? Instead, identify a circle of people who can play the role of partner during your pregnancy at different times.

On the list may be your mom or dad (or both), siblings, a good friend, or a cousin. Any one of a rotating band of close-to-you-folks can be tapped to go with you to prenatal visits and childbirth classes.

And it's not just for appointments. Rely on your circle for shoulders to lean on, hands to hold, and ears to bend when you're feeling stressed or just need some emotional support . From that group, choose a willing partner or partners to coach you through labor. There's no rule that it has to be anyone in particular!

Setting up baby gear as a pregnant single mom

Dig in to your contacts even deeper! What you need here are people who are adept at research on things like the best cribs and latest car seat recommendations and love to shop, plus a willing pal who's handy. (Even if you're good with a screwdriver and a set of instructions, it always helps to have extra hands when assembling tricky furniture and other items.)

These may be work colleagues or people at your place of worship, your book club, your gym, or elsewhere who would be tickled pink (or blue!) to help you find the perfect stroller, assemble your adorable new crib, and pick out nursery paint colors.

And if you've got family or friends who live far away, don't count them out: Chances are good they'd be thrilled to make the trip. Consider setting up a long weekend for folks to visit from out of town and pitch in when you're setting up your nursery, assembling your supplies, and getting ready for baby.

If the timing isn't right for before your baby's birth, don't worry. Lots of things — the crib, for instance — don't necessarily need to be put together right away.

Finding single mom friends

Pregnancy is always easier when you can chat with women facing the same challenges, right? If you don't know any single moms-to-be in your circle of family and friends, expand your reach. Consider a support group, either in person or online, to connect with other women in your situation, both now and after the baby's born.

There are many online support groups for single moms-to-be, including those at What to Expect. In our Community groups , you'll find plenty of women to chat with who understand just what you're going through.

Speaking of which: Don't underestimate your own strength, resilience, and abilities. Give yourself plenty of credit, get yourself plenty of help, and you'll surely be able to manage the next nine months — and beyond — just fine.

Want support every step of the way? Find week-by-week guidance in the What to Expect app .

Budgeting when you're single and pregnant

Work as best you can to get your finances in order early in your pregnancy or before you're pregnant.

A lot of parenting, you're probably already finding, is about preparation. Look into buying some life insurance and creating a will. Make a budget and a plan for managing debt. Living within your means will lessen the stress and allow you to focus on motherhood.

In the short term, try to squirrel away enough money that will cover your pregnancy costs — health insurance copays, out-of-pocket expenses, and supplies — and any expenses you expect to have while on maternity leave.

Then: Calculate what you think you might need to cover things like diapers, bottles, formula, clothes, and other supplies for your baby so you have a clearer idea of how to adjust your budget after your little boy or girl arrives.

Keep in mind that there are plenty of things you'll be able to borrow from other parents whose kids have outgrown their onesies, strollers, and high chairs, and other necessities you might get as gifts before your baby arrives.

Once you've settled on budgets for before and after your baby arrives, there are a million different ways you can save money and shave off extraneous costs, big and small. Look at cable, gym memberships, phone bills, and other expenses that might offer some room for cutting back.

Reduce credit card debt by paying on time and avoiding late fees. Set up your paycheck to deposit a small amount of money each pay period into a savings account for baby expenses or, if you have money left over, your baby's college fund. (It's never too early …)

Trying to do it all

Single parents often feel the pressure to play two roles — which only makes you feel overtaxed, overtired, and overworked. This is where your posse comes in. Team up with other single moms, your family and friends, and others to build your network, even before your baby arrives. Every family is built around community, regardless of the parent count.

You may want extra help in the first weeks after bringing your little one home, but wonder how much you'll need. As What to Expect Community member LM68chi shares, “My parents are planning to come stay with me (they live out of state), but I'm hesitant, given I'm 39 and have been independent for so long, [about] having so many hands when I'm trying to figure things out as a FTM. I know I'll need the help, but not exactly sure what it will look like.”

Just remember: You've got a village. Don't discount the eagerness of people around you to help you navigate this new part of your life. Cover the basics, tap into your community — your inner circle and beyond — and take care of yourself in the process. And try not to allow yourself to get so caught up in the particulars that you forget that you're in the middle of this amazing moment of becoming a mom.