Pregnancy Orgasms: Are They Safe — And Do They Feel Different?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

orgasm during pregnancy, women in bed smiling

The big O during pregnancy is usually safe but may come with a few surprises. Learn what’s normal, how orgasms can change as your bump grows, and when to call your provider.

Pregnancy sex can be even more satisfying compared to the days when you were trying to conceive . But if you're worried that orgasms during pregnancy are risky or unsafe, well, that can really zap the fun.

The truth is, having an orgasm during pregnancy is safe for the majority of women and poses no risk to you or your baby. That said, the big O might not feel exactly like it did in your pre-pregnancy days.

Here's what to know about orgasms during pregnancy and who needs to avoid them, plus what's normal and what's not in terms of post-sex side effects.

Key Takeaways

Orgasms are safe for most pregnancies. If you have a low-risk pregnancy and your provider hasn’t advised otherwise, orgasms and sex won’t harm your baby or increase the risk of miscarriage or preterm labor.

Some post-orgasm changes are normal. Mild cramping, light spotting, temporary contractions, or changes in baby’s movement after sex are common and usually harmless — but call your provider if symptoms are severe, persistent, or concerning.

Orgasms can feel different as pregnancy progresses. Hormonal shifts, increased blood flow, and physical changes may make orgasms stronger, weaker, or harder to achieve depending on the trimester — and all of these experiences are completely normal.

Are orgasms safe during pregnancy?

Unless you've been told by your practitioner to avoid orgasm or sex during pregnancy , both are perfectly safe. For women with low-risk pregnancies, orgasms won't harm your developing baby, increase the risk for miscarriage, or lead to preterm labor.

There are some instances, though, where your practitioner might recommend avoiding orgasm or steering clear of sex altogether for all or part of your pregnancy. Orgasm or sex may not be safe during pregnancy if:

You're showing signs of preterm labor or you have a history of preterm labor.

You've been diagnosed with placenta previa or an incompetent cervix .

You have a history of miscarriage .

You're experiencing vaginal bleeding .

You're leaking amniotic fluid .

You have or develop a hernia during pregnancy that puts you at risk for preterm labor.

You're carrying multiples .

Even for women with low-risk pregnancies who have been given the green light to have sex and climax, orgasm has the potential to cause certain side effects. These are generally considered normal and harmless, but if you have any concerns, it's never a bad idea to bring them up with your practitioner:

Cramping

During or after orgasm, increased blood flow to the pelvic region can cause mild cramping or lower back discomfort. It's par for the course. However, if you're experiencing severe cramping or cramping that doesn't seem to be going away, let your doctor know.

"Sometimes I get a little crampy with orgasm," says What to Expect Community mom mrspzs, "but honestly for me orgasms have been more intense."

Spotting

Some spotting or light bleeding after penetrative sex during pregnancy is okay. Typically, it's the result of increased blood flow to the cervix and vagina paired with friction from sex itself. But you should call your doctor if the bleeding seems heavy, like a period.

"This happened with my last baby, and the pregnancy was completely healthy and so is she!" says What to Expect Community member ksr17. "My OB explained that the cervix is super sensitive right now with extra blood flow going to it."

Mild contractions

It's common for the uterus to contract after you orgasm, sometimes for up to half an hour. These post-climax contractions aren't a sign of preterm labor, and they won't harm your baby. But you should let your provider know if you're experiencing contractions that are happening at regular intervals or occur with a change in vaginal discharge , strong cramps, back pain, fluid leaking from your vagina, or pelvic pressure.

"After I have sex I get Braxton Hicks , every time," says What to Expect Community member Amccombs1.

Fewer kicks from the baby

You might notice your little rocker-and-roller slows down for a while after sex. Not to worry. Your rocking motion paired with the rhythmic contractions of your uterus during orgasm may have lulled your sweet pea off to sleep. (That's not always the case, though. It's also completely normal for babies to kick more after sex.)

Finally, keep in mind that as long as sex and orgasm have been okayed by your practitioner, they may do your brain and body good. Orgasm signals the release of oxytocin, a hormone that triggers feelings of warmth and love that can in turn make you feel more connected to your partner. Oxytocin can also help ease pain, making those pregnancy-related backaches or other discomforts feel a little more tolerable.

What to Expect Community member taylorie123 thinks, "Orgasms are seriously so good for your health!"

Are orgasms better during pregnancy?

Some women find that their orgasms are stronger and more powerful during pregnancy.

"Orgasms while pregnant have been the BEST," says What to Expect Community mom tunytartare. "Trying to get as many as I can!"

For others, the opposite seems to be true.

What to Expect Community mom BarryDingle says, "Personally I tried, but it's just not the same. The intensity is like half the amount as normal."

Both responses are completely normal, and in fact, you might find yourself having both types of experiences during the course of your pregnancy. Hormone shifts and body changes may cause sex and orgasms to feel different during different stages of pregnancy .

First trimester

Early on, hormone-fueled morning sickness , breast tenderness , and fatigue might zap your interest in sex altogether. But that's not the case for every woman. It's also possible for the rapid first trimester hormone shifts to ramp up your sex drive , while increased blood flow to your pelvic region can make orgasms more intense.

Second trimester

Chances are the nausea and fatigue that may have sidelined you during the first trimester have subsided by your second trimester . As a result, you might be feeling more like yourself — and more interested in getting busy. On the other hand, midway through your pregnancy, it's possible that your genitals are engorged to the point that orgasm starts to become harder to achieve.

Third trimester

Studies show that women are less likely to have an orgasm as their pregnancy progresses, so the big O might be harder to come by in your third trimester . Your ever-expanding bump might mean that positions that once felt good no longer get the job done, and in some cases, you just may not have the energy for sex.

It's also possible for higher levels of vaginal discharge to decrease sensation for you and your partner, making it harder for you to have an orgasm when you do have sex.

"Orgasms in the third trimester, for me, are so weird," says What to Expect Community member BlaisdellJA. "Hasn't stopped me, but I just don't like how my belly gets involved lol."

Sometimes trying a more bump-friendly sex position (like lying on your side with a pillow between your knees while your partner enters you from behind or the "woman on top" position) can make sex more comfortable and help you achieve an orgasm. But if you're just not in the mood, that's okay too. Oral sex, mutual masturbation, massage, kissing, or cuddling can all help you feel connected with your partner too.

Want more real-talk pregnancy sex tips? Get the What to Expect app for more expert-backed advice, safe sex positions, and ways to stay connected with your partner during every trimester.

What about masturbation?

Unless the doctor's orders say orgasm is off the table, masturbation during pregnancy is safe. You can do it solo or with your partner, incorporating sex toys like vibrators if you'd like. Just make sure anything you put in your vagina is clean before you use it.

Your orgasms might not feel exactly the same during pregnancy as they did before (for better or worse), but as long as your doctor hasn't said to steer clear, sex and orgasm during pregnancy get the green light. Communicate with your partner about what works and what doesn't, and be open to changing things up — or taking a break — as your pregnancy progresses.