Pregnancy After an Abortion

Updated language to reflect the Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization decision.

pregnancy after an abortion, inflated pink heart-shaped balloon

Learn more about whether you can get pregnant after having an abortion and how long you need to wait after you’ve ended a pregnancy to try to get pregnant again.

Most women don't have trouble getting pregnant after an abortion, and the procedure doesn't generally affect the health of a future pregnancy or fetus. Still, it's normal to have concerns and, if you chose to terminate a pregnancy for medical reasons and you're able to where you live, you may wonder how long you need to wait before trying again. Here are the facts.

Can you get pregnant after an abortion?

Yes, you can get pregnant after having an abortion. Generally, having an abortion does not affect fertility or increase a woman's risk for other health issues, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Research has also shown having an abortion doesn't significantly increase the risk for future pregnancy complications or miscarriage.

How soon after an abortion can you get pregnant?

A woman will typically get her period back within four to six weeks of terminating a pregnancy. However, it's possible to become pregnant even before that. That makes it crucial to use a reliable form of birth control if you don't want to conceive again right away.

It's worth discussing birth control options with your provider before undergoing an abortion, if it's legal where you live.

Most birth control methods can be used right away — in some cases, the same day the abortion is performed. These include birth control pills, patches, vaginal rings or birth control implants or injections. Depending on the type of abortion procedure a women has, an intrauterine device (IUD) can also be placed right away or shortly afterwards.

How long after an abortion should you wait to get pregnant?

If you terminated a pregnancy because of a complication or medical problem, you may be thinking about trying to conceive again fairly soon. After a pregnancy loss, a woman is generally physically able to get pregnant again once her periods resume (though again, it's still possible to become pregnant before your period comes back).

With that general timeline in mind, it's worth talking with your doctor before making any decisions about getting started. Getting the green light that your body is ready can help ease some of the fears you might have around trying again. It's also a chance to have a preconception checkup and address any underlying health problems to ensure you have the healthiest possible pregnancy.

Of course, there's also the matter of when you feel ready emotionally, which could take a little longer. Deciding to end a pregnancy for medical reasons can be a gut-wrenching decision, and it's normal to need time to grieve and process your loss before you feel ready to move forward.

Symptoms after an abortion

After-abortion symptoms are common following your procedure. It's normal to experience:

Abdominal pain or cramping

Nausea or vomiting

Diarrhea

Vaginal bleeding

Headache

Dizziness

It's worth keeping in mind that some of these symptoms — especially nausea or vomiting — can overlap with the symptoms you may have been experiencing while you were pregnant. But in general, the queasiness should ease up within three days.

In some cases, post-abortion symptoms could be a sign of an infection or complication. You should call your provider if you experience severe abdominal or back pain, heavy vaginal bleeding (defined as soaking through two maxi pads per hour for more than two hours in a row), foul-smelling vaginal discharge, or a fever above 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit.

Are there any risks of getting pregnant after an abortion?

In most cases, the risks of abortion are small and won't affect your ability to become pregnant or have a healthy pregnancy in the future. However, there are some important things to consider as you're deciding about trying to get pregnant again:

Surgical abortion may slightly raise the risk for premature birth or low birth weight. The increased chance for complications is very small. If you have concerns, talk with your doctor.

Multiple surgical abortions may impact fertility. Undergoing more than one surgical abortion poses the potential for Asherman syndrome, an uncommon condition marked by scarring of the uterine lining. This scarring could make it harder to become pregnant.

You may need some time to feel emotionally ready. It's a good idea to take the time to fully grieve and process your loss before trying to get pregnant again.

It's worth taking steps to have the healthiest possible pregnancy. You can't control every factor that could potentially increase the risk for pregnancy complications or fetal health problems — like your genetics, medical history, or age. But it's always worth talking with your provider to address any issues that you can control, that can help you and your baby stay healthy. That includes managing any underlying health problems like diabetes, STDs, high blood pressure or thyroid conditions.

Trying to get pregnant again after an abortion can feel like a big step. If you have concerns about your fertility or the health of a future pregnancy, bring them up with your doctor before you start trying. Together you can talk through your fears and take the steps you need to have the healthiest pregnancy possible.