Pregnant and Craving a Glass of Wine? Why It’s Best to Skip It (for Now)

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

can pregnant women drink wine?

"What are your thoughts on the occasional glass of wine? I've heard conflicting stories. Is it okay to splurge once in a while, or is it better to play it safe?"

Unfortunately there's no research to support that an occasional glass of wine (or cocktail, or beer) is a safe bet when you're expecting — and ultimately, even a little wine while pregnant is just not worth the risk.

Key Takeaways

Zero alcohol is best. All the big health orgs (CDC, ACOG, AAP) say there's no safe level of booze during pregnancy — so it's wise to skip it during pregnancy.

The risks can vary. It's unknown whether a little or a lot of alcohol does damage to your unborn baby, which is why avoiding it is the best option.

Rock a mocktail. Yes, you can have a special drink! There are so many delicious alcohol-free drinks on the market and menus today that you're sure to find one you love.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the Surgeon General all recommend abstaining from alcohol during pregnancy , including the occasional glass of wine, altogether.

Why? Mostly because nobody knows what the safe limit is — and depending on all kinds of variables, that safe limit may vary from woman to woman and fetus to fetus.

True, in many European countries an occasional glass of wine during pregnancy, sipped with food during a meal, is accepted. But given all of the risks of drinking when you're expecting, it's best to avoid it altogether. Although abstaining may seem like a high hurdle now, the next few dry months will fly by (and you will drink again!).

Head to the What to Expect app for more info about food and drinks during pregnancy as well as expert advice and tips from fellow moms-to-be.

Looking for confirmation or more motivation to skip that glass of wine? Check with your practitioner.

Curious if you can still use wine and other types of alcohol in recipes that call for it? Refer to the chart below for how much alcohol remains after various bake or simmer times:

amount of alcohol remaining with different simmer times.

If you'd like an alternative to quench your thirst, try a pregnancy-safe mocktail . A few refreshing options — some of which have the added benefit of nausea-calming ginger:

Ginger mule: Mix together non-alcoholic ginger beer, a few slices of cucumber, and a squeeze of fresh lime juice and pour over ice.

Faux mojito: Combine club soda, lime juice, mint leaves, and simple syrup together over ice.

Watermelon slushie: Mix watermelon, ice cubes, and honey in a blender.

Fake champagne: Combine one part pineapple juice, two parts white grape juice, and three parts ginger ale, to taste.

To your healthy pregnancy,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Can You Drink Any Alcohol While You're Pregnant? , May 2025. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Alcohol and Women , May 2025. American Academy of Pediatrics, Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders , January 2025. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders (FASDs) . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Notice to Readers: Surgeon General's Advisory on Alcohol Use in Pregnancy , 2005.

Updates history

October 30, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Can You Drink Any Alcohol While You're Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

From Coffee to Juice: What’s Safe to Drink When You’re Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

11 Holiday Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy and Safe Alternatives to Enjoy Instead Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Can You Drink Alcohol While Trying to Conceive? Here’s What Experts Recommend Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Unsafe Foods to Avoid at Restaurants While You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Keeping Your Pregnancy Secret During the Holidays? Try This Decoy Drink Strategy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How Much Water to Drink During Pregnancy (and What to Do if You Hate Plain Water) Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

How to Make Sure Your Water Is Safe to Drink When You’re Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

From Sushi to Soft Cheese: What’s Off Limits During Pregnancy and Why Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

How Much Caffeine Is Safe During Pregnancy? The Sneaky Sources That Put Moms-to-Be Over the Limit Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Smoking Cigarettes During Pregnancy: Is It Ever Safe? Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Is Herbal Tea Safe During Pregnancy? What to Know Before You Sip By Heidi Murkoff

Is It Safe to Use Marijuana During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

5 Delicious DIY Pregnancy Mocktails (With Bump-Friendly Benefits!) Fact Checked by Marcy Lovitch

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window