Your Premature Baby's Development and Doctor's Appointments

adult hand holding preemie baby hand, premature baby's development according to weeks born

When it comes to premature babies' development, parents need a big dose of patience. Thankfully, most preemie babies catch up with the full-term crowd by toddlerhood.

Preemie babies are born weeks and sometimes months ahead of their actual due dates, often before their nervous systems and little bodies have fully developed. As a result, they can fall behind full-term babies for a while after they arrive. That doesn’t mean that premature babies won’t develop into perfectly normal and healthy kids, but it does mean that their timelines can be a little different.

Read on for a breakdown of your premature baby’s development based on when she's born, as well as some of the various doctors' appointments you can expect to have and a few smart ways to help your early bird blossom and grow. With some patience and effort, your preemie baby will thrive right along with her full-term peers and catch up over time.

How do premature babies develop based on the week they're born?

In order to learn more about your premature baby’s physical health, it helps to do a little dive into how her development is affected by the week she's born and what type of preemie baby she is. Here’s a snapshot of what’s going on with your preemie depending on how early she arrives.

Before or at 28 weeks: extremely preterm

These are the tiniest premature babies, known as micro preemies, and they’re considered extremely preterm. Babies born around the 24th- or 25th-week mark usually weigh around 1 pound, 7 ounces, though it varies. Week 24 is usually deemed the point of potential viability for a fetus. As for survival rates, at 25 weeks, a baby has a 67 to 76 percent chance of viability, and if the fetus makes it to 26 weeks, the rates can increase to as high as 89 percent.

Between 28 weeks and 32 weeks: very preterm

Preemies born at this gestational age are called very preterm and their weight can range from 2 pounds, 7 ounces, at 28 weeks to as much as 3 pounds, 15 ounces, at 32 weeks, depending on the baby's sex. Preemies born after 28 weeks have a high chance of survival (94 percent), though they still require more treatment in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) than those who are born later.

Between 32 weeks and 34 weeks: moderate preterm

Babies born in this range tend to have few, if any, long-term health or developmental problems, though they will likely still have respiratory issues and need help breathing for a while. Infants born in this range are classified as moderate preterm and often weigh close to 5 pounds.

Between 34 weeks and 36 weeks, 6 days: late preterm

These preemies are called late preterm, and it’s within this gestational age range that many premature births occur. At 35 weeks , an infant’s weight ranges from roughly 5 pounds, 4.7 ounces, to 5 pounds, 8 ounces, though there's a range as always.

Between 37 weeks and 39 weeks: early preterm

Early preterm is the category for babies who arrive between 37 and 39 weeks of pregnancy, though in the past any baby born between 37 and 42 weeks was considered “full-term.” Today, if a delivery happens between 37 and 38 weeks, 6 days, it’s known as early term — and full-term is reserved for those born at 39 weeks through 40 weeks and 6 days.

What doctors' appointments will my premature baby need after we come home?

Indeed, premature babies do get check-ups with the doctor, so regular contact with your baby’s pediatrician is important. This doctor will be seeing your baby for years to come, so it’s critical to involve them from the start, even if you’re taking your child to other specialists.

Here's more about medical follow-ups for your preemie:

Make an appointment as soon as your baby is released. Most doctors will want to see a preemie within a day or two of coming home from the hospital. That way, your practitioner can get baseline readings on your premature baby’s weight and general health in order to keep close tabs on her. Note: Make sure you have a discharge summary from the NICU, along with a record of your baby's immunizations in the hospital.

Attend every developmental checkup. At these visits, pediatric specialists, including physical and occupational therapists, will look at your baby's reflexes, reactions and developmental milestones. (Is she rolling over? Sitting? Holding a toy?) If any problems do surface, early intervention can begin and should help immensely.

Arrange for eye exams. Preemies are especially prone to a condition called retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), in which an abnormal growth of blood vessels can lead to vision loss. Your baby will get a special eye exam before she leaves the hospital. After that, her eyes may need to be checked every few months or so. The good news is that most cases of ROP can be easily detected and the majority go away on their own without treatment.

Schedule dental exams. Premature babies are more likely to suffer from delayed tooth growth and discolored teeth. Schedule your baby’s first dental exam either within six months of the time your baby sprouts a tooth or when she turns 1, whichever comes first.

How can I nurture my preemie baby and her development?

Of course, it’s easier said than done, but try not to make your baby’s prematurity the only thing you think about.

Try to enjoy and appreciate your preemie for the amazing little person she is — and not as you would a delicate piece of china. It might also help to remember these tips that’ll contribute to her development:

Not everything is about her prematurity. When you’re parenting a preemie, it’s easy to attribute every small bump in the road to your baby’s premature status. But sometimes a baby's cold is just a cold. And maybe she’s colicky because she’s got colic, period.

Strive for eye contact . Babies love to gaze at faces so hold yours close as you cuddle and speak to her. She’ll love the sound of your voice, even if your face is still a bit fuzzy.

Sing her a song. Both preemies and full-term infants benefit greatly from those little ditties you make up naturally during the day. As you sing, your bond grows and strengthens.

Try kangaroo care. Skin-to-skin contact, which is also called kangaroo care , is especially beneficial to premature babies. By trying this method, you can help regulate your baby’s heart rate and breathing pattern, soothe crying, improve breastfeeding sessions and aid weight gain.

Follow your gut. No one knows your baby better than you. If something isn’t quite right, you’re most likely going to be the one to notice first, so don’t underestimate your intuition. Talk to your doctor at any point if something seems off.

You’ve already been on a roller coaster of emotions waiting round the clock for the newest member of your family to finally be released from the hospital. It can be easy to transition that stress to your preemie’s development at home. Patience is a virtue that can’t be underestimated when it comes to your preemie’s development. And don't worry: She’s going to catch up before you know it!