Preparing for a Move With Kids

moving with children

Whether you're moving across town or across the country, you'll want to do all you can to prep your toddler or preschooler for the big changes ahead. Here's a primer for preparing to move.

To you, a move to a new house probably means more space, a better neighborhood, or even a brand-new start (and job). But to your toddler, it means leaving behind a place he knows and loves. (At least at first — the good news is little kids are extremely adaptable.) To help the family move go as smoothly as possible, keep these tips in mind when you’re preparing:

Break the news before you start packing. Your perceptive little pipsqueak will quickly pick up that change is afoot; so as soon as your plans are definite, tell him what’s going on in words he can understand, like “We’re going to live in a different house soon.”

Be upbeat. No matter how excited you might be as you prepare to move, you’re bound to feel anxious as well. When moving with a toddler , try not to pass your worries along, but let your child know it’s okay if he feels scared or confused and that you’re there to help him. (Extra hugs and kisses work wonders, too.)

Mark the calendar. As with any anticipated date (like his birthday or the start of school), tracking the time until the big day arrives can help make the wait a little easier.

Dole out the details. Explain what’s happening as you go about preparing for a move. Involve your tot in packing up his room or running a yard sale. As the actual day approaches, start talking about what will happen (keep it simple, but don’t skimp on details). It’ll comfort him to know that his bed is coming along, as well as the family pooch. Describe how the movers will put everything into boxes, then put those boxes into a big truck and drive them to the new house.

Visit the new digs. If you’re staying local, take your child to see the new house. Even if you can’t go inside, walk or drive by and show him which window will be his and where the swing set will go. Stroll down your new street (you might even meet some future playmates on your tour), scope out the nearest playground, and visit the local ice-cream shop so you both start to get a sense of the neighborhood.

Take a virtual tour. If you’re preparing to move far away, post pictures of the new house and nearby landmarks in a place where your child can check them out frequently (on the fridge, for example, or on your laptop as he sits in your lap). Your realtor may be willing to take a few photos for you or you can try Googling your address-to-be — you might be able to see a street-level view of the house (or even spot it from space).

What to Expect the Second Year , Heidi Murkoff and Sharon Mazel. Caring for Your Baby and Young Child, 6th Edition: Birth to Age 5, American Academy of Pediatrics, 2014. Dr. Marion Newman, How to Become Smart and Good: A Blueprint for Parents, Caregivers and Teachers , 2014. National Institutes of Health U.S. National Library of Medicine, Medline Plus, Toddler Development , January 2019.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

How to Help Your Child Prepare for Your New Baby By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

Tips for Handling the First Days of Preschool

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Handle Toddler Tantrums When Leaving the Playground Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Divorce With Young Children By Heidi Murkoff

Losing a Pet — How to Help Your Toddler Deal With Death

How to Prepare Your Toddler to Share a Room With Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Crying at Drop-Off — Perfecting the Preschool Separation

4 Signs Your Toddler May Be Stressed Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Separation Anxiety in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Tips to Make Flying With a Toddler Go More Smoothly Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

When Your Toddler Tags Along on Your Doctor's Visit By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

From One Child to Two: 23 Secrets of Second-Time Parents Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window