Preventing Mold in Sippy Cups, Baby Teethers, Bottles and Bath Toys

preventing mold in sippy cups

Here's how to tell when your little one's things are past their prime.

Mold loves to put down roots on teethers, bottles, sippy cups and bath toys — which could become a when your little one puts everything in her mouth. That's why it's smart to make a habit of inspecting your baby's frequently used items for mold, particularly ones that collect moisture, and toss any that show signs of wear and tear. Here's what specifically to keep an eye on.

When should you throw out baby's sippy cups, bottles, teethers and toys?

In order to protect your baby from choking hazards or from coming into contact with mold and bacteria, it's important to routinely check all items that she handles and immediately toss any that have tears, chips, cracks, scratches or any loose or broken parts. Particularly unsafe items may include:

Anything with holes that can trap moisture

Nipples or teethers with holes, tears, leakage and/or increased flow

Bottles that are cloudy, scratched, cracked or have leaks

Silicone nipples that are sticky and have deteriorated from overuse

Sippy cups with valves and bottles with parts that can't be completely disassembled for cleaning and drying

Any item that cannot be easily washed, thoroughly dried and disinfected (or thoroughly cleaned according to manufacturers' instructions)

It's also a good idea to keep up to date on baby product recalls to make sure you don't have any unsafe baby toys or other essentials at home. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionRecallsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionRecallsSee All Sources

How to check for mold in teethers, bottles, sippy cups and toys

Parents have been concerned about mold in recent years, following reports of mold found growing in Sophie the Giraffe teething toys and Tommee Tippee sippy cups. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionTommee Tippee Sippee Spill-Proof Cups Recalled by Mayborn USA Due to Risk of Mold ExposureSee All Sources [2] The truth is: Any baby product or toy that comes into contact with a drooling child, other liquids, food and dirt and can trap moisture is at risk for growing mold. That's why it's so important to make sure these items are cleaned frequently and properly.

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionTommee Tippee Sippee Spill-Proof Cups Recalled by Mayborn USA Due to Risk of Mold ExposureSee All Sources

To check for mold, first examine the outside of the cup, bottle or toy plus all its interior parts for any black or off-color spots. Note any musty or mildew smells, as this could also indicate that mold may be growing inside. Submerge bath toys in water and squeeze: Is there blackish stuff coming out? That's likely mold.

Your best bet is to avoid purchasing toys or cups with holes that can trap moisture or to clean them regularly.

Why mold in baby cups and toys can be dangerous

Most children who drink from a sippy cup with mold (or use another item that's moldy) won't experience negative effects.

But in some children, it might cause an allergic reaction or respiratory problems (which is more likely due to inhaling mold rather than ingesting it). And certain molds can cause vomiting or diarrhea. As always, call your pediatrician if your child is having new or concerning symptoms.

What kinds of teethers, bottles, cups and toys are at risk for mold and other health issues?

Mold thrives in a damp, dark environment, meaning that any teether, bottle, sippy cup , bath toy or other baby product with holes that can trap moisture is susceptible to mold. An item may also be at risk for mold if it has parts that can't be completely detached, cleaned and 100 percent dried.

Toys that don't trap moisture or can be easily cleaned, dried and disinfected are generally safe.

What should I do if I find mold in items my baby has already used?

If you find mold in a cup, toy or other product, don't panic. Clean it, or toss it and replace it if needed. It's likely that your child won't have any problems, but check in with your pediatrician if you notice any new or concerning symptoms after mold exposure.

You don't have to make yourself crazy disinfecting your baby's items in an effort to prevent mold, but routinely cleaning and checking her things for wear and tear are good habits to get into. When cleaning cups, toys and feeding gear, take the item apart completely and allow all pieces to fully dry before putting it back together.

Though it's hard to say goodbye to a favorite teether or sippy cup, it's best for your baby if you replace them when they've run their course in an effort to keep your little one as safe and healthy as possible.

How to clean sippy cups to prevent mold

Disassemble the cup as much as you can before cleaning. Detach the handles, lid, sipping mechanism, valve, straw and so on so you can clean each part separately. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionHow to Clean, Sanitize, and Store Infant Feeding ItemsSee All Sources [3]

Follow the cup's instructions for cleaning each individual piece exactly. Some brands suggest washing the bigger pieces in the top shelf of the dishwasher. Others will recommend hand-washing everything.

Use soap and warm water if you're hand-washing.

Rinse each piece thoroughly with clean water to get rid of any residual soap.

Let each piece air-dry. This is especially important for valves and lids, which trap liquid and are more susceptible to mold.

Store them only once they're dry. Leave them disassembled and reassemble before use.