How to Prevent Cavities in Baby Teeth

baby with healthy teeth and no cavities

Offering up nutritious foods and following good habits will help your baby's teeth and prevent cavities as much as brushing.

Toothbrushing is vital to your baby's dental care, but those precious pearly whites need more than just cleanings to stay healthy. Here are nine ways to keep your child's teeth in tip-top shape for life.

Dish up foods rich in vitamins and minerals

Your baby needs the right building blocks to construct her pearly whites, and that means an adequate intake of calcium , phosphorus, fluoride, and other minerals and vitamins (particularly vitamin C , which is crucial for healthy gums).

Avoid grazing

Frequent snacking or grazing is a major source of tooth decay and can result in enamel erosion and cavities. When you or your toddler snack continuously, food sits on the teeth and saliva doesn't get the chance to clear it away.

When it is snacktime, focus on serving fresh fruits, crunchy vegetables and calcium-rich dairy products to give your little one a nutritious energy boost — and protect her teeth.

Serve sugar in moderation

It may seem impossible to completely avoid sugars in your baby's diet, but you'll want to limit them as much as possible — particularly refined sugars (which are found in, of all things, commercial teething biscuits) and sticky natural sugars (such as those in dried fruits).

The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry recommends less than 16 grams of sugar per day for children ages 4 to 8. The best way to stick to that guideline? Keep sweets to a minimum — no more than once or twice a day — and serve only with meals.

Stick to water

The American Academy of Pediatrics stresses that parents shouldn’t give their babies milk or other liquids besides water over prolonged periods of time. That's because natural or added sugars in the liquid or food are changed to acid by bacteria in the mouth. This acid then dissolves the outer part of the teeth, causing them to decay.

Juice should be an occasional treat, not all-purpose tummy filler. Try to skip the juice altogether to cut back on sugar. Offer fresh whole fruits instead, which contain filling fiber. When you do offer juice, make sure it's in watered-down form, and serve it with a healthy snack or meal.

What causes cavities in babies? It’s not just sugary snacks or lax brushing habits that promote tooth decay: The prime suspect is actually a type of bacteria that lives in the mouth and spreads easily from parent to child (and between children) via saliva. The bacteria, known as streptococcus mutans , feeds on sugar and other food debris in the mouth, producing acids that break down calcium in the teeth and lead to tooth decay.

The bottom line: If your dental history includes lots of cavities, you’re more likely to pass along cavity-causing bacteria to your little one. Reduce the risk by making sure not to share toothbrushes, spoons or other utensils with your baby, and try not to allow your little one to put her fingers in your mouth. And make sure you’re brushing and flossing, too!

Use a cup instead of a bottle

Your baby may still love her bottle, but you'll want to get her used to drinking from a cup . Bottles and sippy cups containing milk or juice have been associated with tooth decay because they allow the liquid to pool in the mouth and on the teeth.

Afraid your cutie will make too much of a mess drinking from a cup? Try a toddler cup with a valve seal that can be used from any angle. Dentists prefer it to traditional sippy cups because it helps to develop a child's oral muscles.

Brush before bedtime

If you offer your little one a bottle or the breast before bed, brush your baby's teeth or use gauze soaked in warm water to wipe off milk residue before you put her down. You can also moisten gauze in water mixed with powdered xylitol, a sugar substitute that can have a calming effect on babies.

Use fluoride toothpaste

The American Dental Association gives parents the go-ahead to use fluoride toothpaste as soon as your baby’s first tooth arrives — just make sure to use no more than a rice-grain size smear until your child is older than 3. Once your baby passes that milestone, you can give a fluoride supplement if your local water supply isn't fluoridated. Check with your local water district or even your baby's doctor if you're unsure.

Be wary; too much fluoride can be as bad for your baby's teeth as too little. If your child is getting fluoride from the local water and takes a supplement ( and gets some from a fluoridated toothpaste — which should be avoided in babies), a condition called fluorosis can develop that causes unattractive mottling of the teeth (and, in severe cases, pitting that contributes to tooth decay).

Keep bottles out of the bed

Although your baby may love the comfort her bottle provides, don't let her go to sleep with one. She may (and probably will) leave the nipple in her mouth, and the drips and drops of fluid that dribble out can be broken down into acid, which erode those newly minted teeth. Even if your child is still flashing gummy grins, ban the bottle for sleeping since it will only be that much harder to take away later.