Products to Make Pregnancy Sex More Comfortable

Best Products to Make Pregnancy Sex More Comfortable

There’s one thing that’s often true about pregnancy sex : It’s not always comfortable. You’re dealing with a whole range of pregnancy symptoms (including morning sickness , back pain , constipation , heartburn and gas ) that make simple, everyday activities difficult, let alone being physically intimate with another person. And as the weeks go on, you’re also managing an expanding baby bump that can make moving around more challenging.

“As the uterus grows, finding a comfortable position for sex can be a bit of a challenge,” explains Kameelah Phillips, M.D. , OB/GYN in New York City and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. “The weight of the uterus can cause pelvic pressure and limit an expecting mother’s mobility.”

Penetration itself might also be more tricky. The cervix softens during pregnancy and could be more sensitive, so penetration from a penis or toy that is too deep or forceful could be uncomfortable, says Staci Tanouye, M.D. , an OB/GYN in private practice in Jacksonville, Florida.

Despite the physical challenges of pregnancy sex, there are plenty of ways to find relief and alleviate discomfort. With items like pregnancy pillows to alleviate pressure and sex toys you can use externally to avoid penetration, you can find a way to make pregnancy sex comfortable — and highly enjoyable — for your changing body.

How we chose the best products for pregnancy sex

We spoke to Dr. Phillips, Dr. Tanouye and Lisa M. Valle, D.O. , founder of Oasis Women’s Sexual Function Center in Santa Monica, California to learn more about products that are safe to use while pregnant and will provide the most relief during pregnancy sex.

Per guidance from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), all body oils and lubricants featured are:

We considered feedback from parents in the What to Expect community regarding products they have tested and received overwhelmingly positive reviews, especially when it came to:

Other factors to consider

When shopping for products to use during pregnancy sex, there are a few other qualities to consider:

Supportiveness: It’s important to have items that provide physical comfortable by supporting you in different positions. Pillows or wedges can be used to support your knees, hips and lower back. Keep in mind that your body will continue to change throughout the trimesters and your go-to positions may vary, so you need pillows that can be versatile and provide help propping you up and keeping you comfy. Another key factor is the support of something like a bra. Your breast size will likely shift throughout pregnancy as you get closer to delivery, and something soft and comfortable that gives you a bit of a lift might help you feel best in your own skin.

Ingredients and materials: Anything you’re applying in or on your body while you’re pregnant should contain pregnancy-safe ingredients, while avoiding fragrances or chemical additives. When shopping for lubes to enhance your pleasure and cut back on friction that could irritate you during sex, Dr. Tanouye says to avoid ones that are scented or have “warming” or “cooling” properties. Because your vulva, vagina and cervix might be extra sensitive during pregnancy, any products with a scent or temperature-altering properties can intensify irritation. As far as materials go, Dr. Tanouye suggests using sex toys that are made of non-porous material. This way, you can easily clean them and avoid areas that may harbor infection-causing bacteria. Hormones may also make your skin sensitive during pregnancy , so you may want to look for pregnancy pillows with cases made of cotton that will be gentle on your skin.

Adjustability: When shopping for sexual wellness products, the ability to adjust based on your current size or comfort level is a plus. For example, a sex toy that has many different modes to switch between to find the right intensity level for your sensitive vulva and clitoris would be a win because you can adjust as needed throughout your pregnancy (and beyond). A pregnancy pillow that you can configure in multiple different positions would also be a great investment.

It’s worth noting that most toys and sex products that you used before getting pregnant should still be safe to use, as long as you feel comfortable using them and your doctor has confirmed that you have a low-risk pregnancy, according to Dr. Tanouye. Those experiencing a high-risk pregnancy or pregnancy complications, however, should check with their doctor before testing out a new toy or type of stimulation to make sure it’s safe to use.

Does sex feel different when pregnant?

“Sex during pregnancy can be both more pleasurable, due to increased circulation in the vulva and vagina, as well as more sensitive for the same reasons,” says Dr. Tanouye.

As we already mentioned, it can be harder to get comfortable during sex while pregnant because of your growing belly and pain spots like a sore back or tender breasts. And, a more sensitive cervix could mean having to be gentler with penetrative sex or sex with toys.

Yet, despite some potential hurdles to overcome, many pregnant people experience increased sexual desire. In fact, you may even have a better climax during pregnancy. “Many pregnant people report more intense orgasms due to increased blood circulation to the genitals,” Dr. Tanouye notes.

How can I get comfortable during sex while pregnant?

Try body oils, memory foam pillows and water-based lubricants. These products can help reduce discomfort during intimate sessions with another person or solo. Lubricants can help with vaginal dryness, a common symptom during pregnancy, while body oils are not only great for getting in the mood, but they can also help with dryness. Pregnancy pillows can be used to provide extra support during sex, especially if you’re in a position that might put pressure on a tender spot like your lower back.

Alter your penetration depth if needed. Because your cervix is softer during pregnancy, those who have penetrative sex may need to swap out some positions that involve deeper penetration (like doggy style) for something that involves getting on top of a partner. Dr. Tanouye adds that a ring or bumper can help prevent pain due to depth of penetration.

Use sex toys. Vibrators, dildos and massage wands can especially be helpful in later months when you may not be able to move as much during sex. If penetrative sex is uncomfortable for you, look for toys that you can use externally or internal sex toys in which you can control the depth of penetration.

Check in to see how your body feels. If you’re experiencing pain that has you concerned or vaginal bleeding during sex, check in with your doctor. These symptoms can be signs of more serious issues or may require expert advice to find a way to have sex more comfortably while you’re expecting.

Best Lubricant

H2Oh! Water-Based Lubricant

Compatible with toys and condoms

pregnancy-safe ingredients

travel-friendly size

Expensive

Why We Love It

Pregnancy hormones may lead to vaginal dryness, which can make sex uncomfortable. Lubrication can help decrease the friction caused by both dryness and engorgement, says Dr. Phillips. It’s best to stick with a lubricant that’s hypoallergenic so it doesn’t cause any irritation, especially if you’re already experiencing sensitivity or tenderness.

Pregnancy hormones may lead to vaginal dryness, which can make sex uncomfortable. Lubrication

can help decrease the friction caused by both dryness and engorgement, says Dr. Phillips. It’s best to stick with a lubricant that’s hypoallergenic so it doesn’t cause any irritation, especially if you’re already experiencing sensitivity or tenderness.

This one from H2Oh! comes highly recommended from What to Expect’s community of parents — one person says this is their go-to lube for pregnancy sex both with a partner and using a toy. It’s plant-based, hypoallergenic, and free from parabens and chemical preservatives, so you won’t have to worryg about irritation. It includes chia seed extract and plant cellulose, both of which are naturally hydrating to further reduce dryness. And, it’s tiny enough to stick in your nightstand for easy access or travel bag if you’re taking a babymoon.

Count per pack : 6

Material : Chia seed extract, plant cellulose

Community Reviews

ashleyr2011 "Best lube I like is water based and called h2oh. Me and hubby have probs with anything KY and such and this stuff is great. Toy safe also."

Best Wedge Pillow

Boppy Pregnancy Wedge

Can be used for multiple positions

compact and portable

machine washable cover

Foam might feel too firm for some people

Why We Love It

This Boppy pregnancy pillow’s unique wedge shape can support both the abdomen when you’re on your side and your back when lying down, making it easy to switch between positions. It’s compact, so you can travel with it, and the cover is machine-washable for easy post-coital cleaning.

unique wedge shape can support both the abdomen when you’re on your side and your back when lying down, making it easy to switch between positions. It’s compact, so you can travel with it, and the cover is machine-washable for easy post-coital cleaning.

Pregnant people in our community rave about the Boppy wedge because it doesn’t take up too much space on the bed but still provides plenty of support to the lower back, hips and knees. Several members add that they use the wedge in addition to a C-shaped or U-shaped pregnancy pillow for additional support.

Pregnant people in our community rave about the Boppy wedge because it doesn’t take up too much space on the bed but still provides plenty of support to the lower back, hips and knees. Several members add that they use the wedge

Material : Foam with organic cotton cover

Dimensions : 14 x 11.25 x 3.75 inches

Community Reviews

LOB2022 "I'm more comfortable with just a little wedge pillow under my belly or between my legs. I got the boppy wedge and it’s way cheaper and better for me."

Best Pregnancy Pillow

Leachco Snoogle Jersey Total Body Pillow

Full-body support

removable cover is machine washable and dryer-safe

May take up a lot of space on your bed

Why We Love It

If you’re looking for a full-body pregnancy support pillow and don’t care how much room it takes up, the Snoogle is your go-to.

Moms-to-be rave about the Snoogle and its soft cotton jersey cover that zips off on laundry day. The C-shape design allows the pillow to curve around your body for 360 degrees of support. You can prop up your belly or back and also squeeze the pillow in between your knees for added support. Because you can use this pillow to support several parts of your body, it’ll undoubtedly come in handy during sex. One What to Expect community member attests to the versatility of the Snoogle by saying that it’s “very comfy with multiple uses.” Into spooning positions? The Snoogle can help with that by providing some cushion for your belly or knees. Another What to Expect member turned it into a donut-style shape and used it for belly support during sex.

Material: Polyester fill, cotton jersey cover

Dimensions: 58.75 x 25.5 x 7.75 inches

Weight: 5 pounds

Community Reviews

"So I turned my Snoogle into a sex pillow on accident. I needed my back rubbed. I made the pillow into a donut style pillow. So I layed on it face down, with my belly in the hole…It’s so comfy for lazy doggy style. The pillow fully supported my weight."

"I love my Snoogle that I bought on amazon. My husband said it’s really comfortable too."

"Snoogle! Best thing to ever happen to me! My 7 year old loves it, I'm always finding her rolled up reading or watching her show in my bed with it, and my husband is always napping on it lol I think we should buy another one for their personal use!"

Best Body Oil

Pura D’or Organic Fractionated Coconut Oil

Organic

no chemicals

fragrance

or additives

non-comedogenic

Might stain clothes or sheets

Why We Love It

If pregnancy sex is too much on your body, you can still be intimate by receiving a prenatal massage from your partner. (Provided, of course, that your doctor says it’s ok and that you’re lying on your side during it.)

To up the intimacy, Dr. Valle recommends lathering up with Pura D’or’s coconut oil because, “It’s clean, has no solvents or chemicals and is a great moisturizer and safe to use during pregnancy.” It’s also good for your skin, helping to alleviate any pregnancy dryness and flakiness.

Ingredients: Coconut oil

Size: 16 fl oz.

Community Reviews

'jellens' "I would use coconut oil! I always have coconut oil on hand not as a lubricant but it would be safe for that. It’s a great massage oil and honestly I use it as a moisturizer for my entire body after my shower every single day!"

Best Sex Toy

Shibari Mini Halo Plus

Can be used anywhere on the body

for use with or without a partner

has 28 modes

Could be too small if you’re used to a larger wand

Why We Love It

Wands and clitoral stimulators can be especially great toys to use during pregnancy, especially if penetration is uncomfortable or if the idea of having vigorous sex is off putting.

But what makes Shibari’s vibrator standout from the rest? Well, it has 28 vibration modes, including 20 pulse modes and eight different strengths. This means you can easily adjust it throughout your pregnancy, as sensitivity and urges change.

The massage wand’s head is made from non-porous silicone, which is also easy to clean and won’t harbor bacteria which can cause infections. Bonus: It doubles as a neck or back massager so you can switch things up in the bedroom or use it to work out knots and sore muscles.

Material: Silicone

Dimensions: 7.8 x 1.6 x 1.6 inches

Batteries required: 1 lithium ion battery, included

Community Reviews

staniel "my favourite vibrator is the shibari on amazon! it was only around 30 dollars for a model of toy that usually costs double that if not more. its incredibly strong, easy to wash and rechargable with a battery that, in my experience, lasts about 4-6 months with regular use. ive had it for around two or three years now and its still my absolute favourite toy, my fiance likes using it when were together, too."

Best Sexy Maternity Bra

Momanda Nursing Lace Bra Bralette

Comes in 22 colorways and 30 different sizes

can be used for breastfeeding later on

May need to size up to accommodate size fluctuations while nursing

Why We Love It

Pregnancy has probably made your breasts swell , which means your go-to bras may no longer fit. This is all the more reason to purchase a maternity or nursing bra that’s designed to be more supportive of your breasts and can be used for easy breastfeeding or pumping access after baby is born.

Parents-to-be also love the Momanda nursing bra because it doesn’t exactly look like a nursing bra, making it perfect for when you want to feel sexy while also providing comfort to your tender breasts.

This lacy bra hasa flattering plunging neckline, wire-free support, and soft pads to hold you in place even through the night. The straps are adjustable too, so you can continue to wear it throughout all trimesters and postpartum. You may want to buy a size larger than your usual as you grow so that the bralette isn’t too tight on your chest or belly.

Materials: Polyamide, spandex

Size range: 32A to 40E

Best Penetration Buffer

Vibrating Ohnut Ring

Quiet motor

stretches and comes in two sizes

has seven patterns and intensities

rechargeable

May need to be adjusted during sex

takes 1.5 hours to charge

Why We Love It

Dr. Tanouye praises the OhNut ring for bring able to “control depth of penetration” for people who have a more sensitive cervix. Many reviewers agree, saying it helped to reduce pain during sex by limiting how deep their partner could go. The rings are made from stretchy polymer that you and your partner will both barely feel it during sex. In addition to the rings, there is a vibrator attached to increase stimulation, which might be especially welcome if you’re limited to specific positions during pregnancy due to comfort. The vibration settings are also adjustable: There are seven different speeds and patterns that you can switch between until you find one you like, which will be especially useful throughout pregnancy and beyond to accommodate your changing body. If you’re feeling too much friction, add silicone or water-based lube.

Dr. Tanouye praises the OhNut ring for bring able to

control depth of penetration” for people who have a more sensitive cervix. Many reviewers agree, saying it helped to reduce pain during sex by limiting how deep their partner could go. The rings are made from stretchy polymer that you and your partner will both barely feel it during sex. In addition to the rings, there is a vibrator attached to increase stimulation, which might be especially welcome if you’re limited to specific positions during pregnancy due to comfort. The vibration settings are also adjustable: There are seven different speeds and patterns that you can switch between until you find one you like, which will be especially useful throughout pregnancy and beyond to accommodate your changing body. If you’re feeling too much friction, add silicone or water-based lube.

It’s also easy to clean after you’re done: Just wash with some warm water and soap.

Materials: Polymer

Sizing: Comes in “classic” for those who wear standard size condoms and “wider” size for those who wear large size condoms

Community Reviews

mommaamo27 "Ok so I see a pelvic floor therapist and she recommended a silicone stacking ring for the male partner. It basically creates a cushion so penetration isn’t as deep. And apparently guys tend to like it too. Worth a shot."

kp1388 "Also there is a product out there that helps with your problem with sex! It’s like a stackable silicone ring that goes around the penis so that penetration doesn’t go as far in - I remember people swearing by it! (I know this has nothing really to do with what you asked but I feel like you and your partner would benefit from it)."

WhatToExpect.com, Pregnancy Sex Through the Trimesters , August 2021. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Toxic Chemicals: Steps to Stay Safer Before and During Pregnancy , October 2022. Kameelah Phillips, M.D. , OB/GYN, member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board, New York, New York. Staci Tanouye, M.D. , OB/GYN in private practice, Jacksonville, Florida. Lisa M. Valle, D.O. , Oasis Women’s Sexual Function Center, Santa Monica, California.

Your Next Read

Products to Make Postpartum Sex More Comfortable Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Why Pregnancy Can Make Sex Hurt — and Simple Ways to Find Relief Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

The Best Pregnancy Sex Positions Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

8 Pregnancy Sex Challenges — and How to Fix Them Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Your Questions About Sex During Pregnancy, Answered Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnancy Sex Through the Trimesters Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

What to Do When Your Partner Is Afraid of Sex During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Are Masturbation and Sex Toys Safe During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Pregnancy Orgasms: Are They Safe — And Do They Feel Different? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Find a Comfy Sleep Position During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Due Date's Here. Baby's Not. Should You Have Sex? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

Can a Certain Sex Position Help You Get Pregnant? Here’s What Science Says Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

How to Prevent Painful Sex in the Postpartum Period — and What to Do if It Happens Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Can Sex Really Bring on Labor? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window