Pros and Cons of Redshirting Kids

kids

When should your L.O. start kindergarten? It's a question many parents face — especially when their child's birthday falls near the school's cut-off date.

Holding children back from kindergarten — aka redshirting kids — is a growing trend in the US. And while another year of preschool might be a good thing for some little ones, there are also potential drawbacks to consider. So how do you know if your budding student would benefit from starting kindergarten a year later? There’s no one-size-fits-all answer, but considering these pros and cons may help you decide.

PROS:

He’ll be on better behavior. Holding kids back from kindergarten gives them another year to hone social skills like taking turns, sharing, and listening. If your child is still throwing the occasional tantrum at preschool, has trouble separating from you , or gets distracted following two- or three-step directions, another year of preschool might help him master the skills he’ll need in kindergarten. Note: Redshirting kids can be especially helpful for boys, who may be slower to develop language skills than girls.

He’ll be more likely to learn at his level. Kindergarten today is more like first grade was a decade ago — that is, it’s often a full day of academics, music, art, and gym. (Good-bye, show-and-tell and napping — hello, Spanish lessons and story problems!) Knowing when to start kindergarten — rather, when to hold off — can save some children (and their parents) unnecessary anguish: If your child isn’t ready to learn to read, write, or do simple math problems, he’ll end up frustrated and resentful, which may sway him to dislike school in the long term.

His motor skills will be more developed. A child who’s just turned five may not have the fine-motor skills required for kindergarten work — coloring , pasting, cutting, and holding a pencil properly. Kindergarten teachers also expect students to be able to fend for themselves (with minimal help) when it comes to hanging up jackets and backpacks, managing zippers and buttons, and tying their shoelaces.

CONS:

He may fall between the cracks. Depending on the cut-off date in your district, some children may start kindergarten when they’re still four, others when they’re nearly six. That leads to a huge range in cognitive, physical, and emotional maturity in one classroom, and that means a monumental challenge for any teacher.

Holding him back may mask learning issues. Sometimes kids who are redshirted for an apparent lack of maturity (they can’t sit still or focus for very long, for example) have genuine learning disabilities or other special needs that can go undetected outside of a classroom setting. If your child was in a classroom setting, then any speech, language, or motor issues would likely be more obvious and thus you’d have a chance to address them and intervene earlier.

He may hit some bumps down the road. Redshirting your kid in kindergarten means he’ll be redshirted every year. So a child who’s a year older than his peers in kindergarten is also going to be a year older in middle school, where he may tower over his classmates or hit puberty before they do. Feeling different can cause social problems in the teen years, when fitting in is so important to a child’s social and emotional well-being. Some studies even suggest that kids who are redshirted are more likely to drop out of high school.

He may only benefit in the short term. Research shows that redshirted kids and their younger peers tend to level out, academically, around third or fourth grade. So all your angst about whether to hold your child back from kindergarten may not be worth it in the long run. Still undecided about what’s best for your child? Most schools offer an annual team evaluation to help decide whether or not your kid is ready for kindergarten. By all means take advantage of those screenings — and trust your own gut feeling — when figuring out when to start kindergarten.

American Academy of Pediatrics, Is your child ready for school ?, November 2009. American Academy of Pediatrics, Social development in preschoolers , November 2009. Whattoexpect.com, Early learning: Time for ABCs and 123s ?, January 2019.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

Kids and iPads: The Pros and Cons By Heidi Murkoff

Developmental Delays in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Late Talking: Speech or Language Delays in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Lano, M.S., CCC-SLP

Tips for Handling the First Days of Preschool

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Benefits of Parallel Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Some Toddlers Are Shy — and How You Can Help Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Tell if Your Toddler Is Gifted Medically Reviewed by Florencia Segura, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Spacing Your Kids: The Pros & Cons of Every Age Gap Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Reading Books to Your Baby or Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's What to Do When Your Toddler Goes Through a Regression Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Toddler Overtired? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Eye Problems in Children Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Day Care 101: How to Choose the Best Day Care Facility for Your Family Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Choose the Best Child Care for Your Baby Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window