Pumping 101

Pumping might seem daunting at first (tubes and flanges and suction, oh my!), but it’s not complicated once you get the knack of it. Here's everything new parents need to know about pumping breast milk.

All About Pumping

How to feed your baby is a personal choice that’s different for every family, and there’s no “right” way to nourish your little one. Many moms pump as part of their breastfeeding journey (such as in combination with nursing or formula), and some others exclusively pump .

As with breastfeeding, pumping requires strength and discipline, and it’s incredibly time-intensive. If you’re a mom who pumps, know that you’re not alone. Consider this your complete guide to pumping breast milk, whether you're pumping exclusively, pumping when you return to work or pumping occasionally.

Pumping Basics

Everything you need to know to start your pumping journey, from how to get a breast pump through health insurance to choosing the right size flange for your nipples.

Exclusive Pumping

Exclusive pumping (also referred to as “EPing”) means that you make the choice to give your baby only breast milk that you express or pump. While many moms find it rewarding to be able to feed their babies breast milk they've expressed, EPing is not without its challenges. Here's what to know if you're planning on pumping exclusively.

many moms find it rewarding to be able to feed their babies breast milk they've expressed, EPing is not without its challenges. Here's what to know if you're planning on pumping exclusively.

Pumping Challenges and Solutions

Clogged ducts? Pain while pumping? Milk blebs or blisters? Baby refusing your pumped milk? Here are fixes for some of the most common pumping challenges you might encounter.

Cleaning, Storage and Safety

Learn how to clean your pump, how to store that precious liquid gold and answers to top pumping safety questions (like whether you really have to "pump and dump" and if it's okay to take vitamins, supplements, or medications while pumping or breastfeeding).

Best Pumping Gear

When it comes to pumping, the right gear can make all the difference — and a good breast pump is just the beginning of what you'll need.

How to Stop Pumping

At some point, you'll be ready to stop pumping and switch your baby to formula (if under 12 months) or cow's milk (for little ones 1 year and older). Here's how to make the transition easier on your body.

Go to Your Baby's Age

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window