Rajeev Fernando

Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

About Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

Dr. Rajeev Fernando is an infectious diseases specialist and an infectious diseases consultant at FEMA emergency field hospitals nationwide.

After graduating from Rajah Muttiah Medical College in India, Dr. Fernando did fellowships in infectious diseases at Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center in Hanover, New Hampshire, and at North Shore/Long Island Jewish Hospital in Long Island, New York.

Board certifications

Dr. Fernando is board-certified by the American Board of Internal Medicine, including its infectious disease division.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Fernando was formerly affiliated with Stony Brook Southampton Hospital and Eastern Long Island Hospital. He is now affiliated with FEMA emergency field hospitals.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Fernando was previously on the faculty of the Internal Medicine Residency Training Program at Southampton Hospital in New York. He has also been an assistant professor of medicine at SUNY Stony Brook. He is the past director of the Division of Infectious Diseases at Stony Brook Southampton Hospital in Stony Brook, New York.

He has served as an International Physician and on the Emergency Backup Team for Doctors Without Borders.

Dr. Fernando worked on treating babies with the Zika virus in Brazil and treated an outbreak of the Ebola virus in Sierra Leone. He is involved in getting out public health messages on the current Ebola virus outbreak at the Rwanda border and on the measles virus outbreak. He also worked on the frontlines of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Dr. Fernando is a member of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the American Medical Association and other organizations.

Awards

Dr. Fernando has been a Castle Connolly Top Doctor since 2014. He received the 2018 Heroes of the Year award from HSBC Bank.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window