Ready, Set, Go! Smart, Safe Travel Tips for Pregnant Moms

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnancy travel trips

Planning a vacation or business trip? Use these strategies to travel safely — and stay comfortable — during pregnancy.

Never again will your baby be as cooperative as she is now — so once you’ve gotten the green light from your practitioner and you’ve taken a few precautions, it’s possible to travel safely during pregnancy.

Sure, you’ll need to do a bit of planning to ensure a safe and comfortable trip; pregnancy symptoms like a very active bladder, on-and-off nausea, and sudden leg cramps can make the journey a bit more challenging than usual.

Use these tried-and-true tactics to make pregnancy travel easier and less stressful.

Key Takeaways

Having a healthy pregnancy? Travel is likely a go. However, your doctor should sign off first if you’re near the end of your pregnancy or there's some sort of outbreak in the region you're interested in traveling to.

Be careful along the way. Pick a safe destination, drink lots of water en route, get up to stretch often, and pack comfy clothes, whether you’re flying, driving, or taking a train.

Listen to your body. Head to the closest emergency department if you feel off in any way or you have cramping, contractions, swelling, or belly pain.

Can you travel while pregnant?

Before the COVID-19 pandemic, travel was rarely restricted during pregnancy unless a mom-to-be was nearing her due date, had certain pregnancy complications, or was planning to visit an area with a Zika or malaria risk. During the pandemic, travel restrictions were put into place. Since then, those have been lifted, but you should always consult your practitioner before traveling when you're pregnant.

One form of travel that should be carefully scrutinized: a cruise. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) advises pregnant women to avoid cruising to places with a risk of Zika or malaria. And keep in mind that the risk of contracting other viruses is higher in the close quarters found on cruise ships. Plus, many cruise lines don’t allow pregnant women on board if they’re farther along in their pregnancy; some restrict travel after week 23.

While the widespread COVID-19 travel bans from a few years ago are no longer in place, there are a few international destinations still off-limits to U.S. travelers due to unrest, so check for country-specific restrictions before planning your trip.

If you’re thinking about traveling while pregnant, talk to your practitioner about where you’d like to go and how to minimize any risks on your trip.

When should you stop traveling while pregnant?

If you’re having a healthy pregnancy with no complications, you can likely travel up until the month before your due date. However, if you’re at risk for preterm delivery, your doctor may advise against traveling at all in the third trimester.

Just because you’re feeling physically up to traveling, though, doesn’t necessarily mean you’ll be allowed to travel. Even in non-pandemic times, many cruise lines don’t allow moms-to-be to board the ship after week 23, for example, and some airlines only allow women to fly domestically until they’re about 36 weeks pregnant. If you’re taking an international flight, you may be prohibited from flying even earlier in your pregnancy.

In general, the best time to travel while pregnant is mid-pregnancy (weeks 14 through 18). During the first trimester, you may feel too nauseated and tired to withstand long trips — or enjoy yourself once you get where you’re going.

Hitting the road with your bump? Download the What to Expect app for expert advice, comforting reassurance, and smart tips from others who’ve traveled while pregnant.

How should you prepare for a trip during pregnancy?

Before you make any travel plans, talk to your practitioner, who may want to schedule a check-up before you leave. This is especially true for moms-to-be who are traveling internationally.

Here are a few other steps to take before traveling during pregnancy. (Again, keep any Zika, malaria, or other restrictions in mind, and get your practitioner's okay.)

Check with your airline. Call your airline to see if there are any special regulations regarding pregnant people. If you’re planning on traveling in the last trimester, check with your airline before you fly — some restrict how late in pregnancy you can board a plane (for some, the cut-off date is 34 weeks), while others require a note from your doctor that it’s safe for you to fly. Remember that restrictions may vary among different carriers and for domestic vs. international travel.

Be picky about your destination. Flying somewhere tropical? Before you book your reservations, make sure your hotel and transport are air-conditioned and that you stay hydrated and out of the sun. If you’re heading to a high altitude, get your practitioner’s okay first. Same goes before venturing into any areas that pose a risk of potentially dangerous infections (including water-, food- and mosquito-borne diseases like the Zika virus ). For information on travelers’ health, visit the CDC website .

Try to relax. When you’re pregnant, a single destination often beats a whirlwind tour that takes you to six cities in six days. A trip that lets you and your pregnant body set the pace is a lot better than one that’s set up by a group tour guide. A few hours of sightseeing, meetings, or visiting family should be alternated with time spent with your feet up.

Get insurance. Sign up for reliable travel insurance in case a pregnancy complication requires you to change your plans. Consider medical evacuation insurance if you’re traveling abroad, in case you need to return home quickly under medical supervision. Medical travel insurance may also be useful if your regular insurance plan does not include foreign medical care; be sure to check your policy ahead of time.

Have medical backup. If you’re traveling far, have the name of a local OB/GYN handy, just in case. You can locate a doctor while traveling in the U.S. at the American Medical Association’s (AMA) DoctorFinder tool . If you’re traveling abroad, contact the International Association for Medical Assistance to Travelers , which can provide you with a directory of English-speaking physicians throughout the world. Some major hotel chains can also provide you with this kind of information. If you find yourself in need of a doctor in a hurry and your hotel can’t provide you with one, call the local U.S. Embassy or the American Consulate for a recommendation. If you have medical travel insurance, there should be a number to call for help.

Pack a pregnancy medical kit. Make sure you take enough prenatal vitamins to last the trip. It’s also a good idea to carry a copy of your health records with you, especially if you’re leaving the country. Something to leave out of your kit: jet lag remedies (including melatonin) that aren’t practitioner-approved.

What to Expect Community parent DeklansMama says picking the right seat matters. “I flew at 27 weeks with my first pregnancy. I had to pee constantly and got a bit of motion sickness, so an aisle seat near the bathroom was a helpful choice,” she shares.

What do pregnant women need to know about travel and the Zika virus?

In 2015 and 2016, there were outbreaks of Zika — a virus spread by infected mosquitoes that, in pregnant women, can cause birth defects, including microcephaly — in the Western hemisphere, particularly in Brazil. Since then, however, the number of Zika cases worldwide has declined.

While there are no current Zika outbreaks in the world, the mosquitoes that cause the infection, Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus , are present in many countries , including those in the tropics and subtropics. If you’re pregnant (or even planning to get pregnant), talk to your doctor before making any plans to travel to an area where Zika can be transmitted. (You can also find Zika-related travel alerts from the CDC.)

There’s no vaccine that can prevent Zika, but you can reduce your risk of being infected with the virus by protecting yourself from mosquito bites . Wear long sleeves and pants and wear DEET- and picaridin-based mosquito repellent whenever you’re outside. DEET used topically is considered safe to use during pregnancy.

Travel tips for pregnant people

Whether you’re traveling by plane, train, or car, use these tips to stay comfortable and safe on your trip.

Pick your seat strategically. On flights, request a seat in the bulkhead, and always opt for the aisle spot to make frequent bathroom trips easier on you and your seatmate. If your seat is not reserved, ask for pre-boarding. If you’re driving, sit in the front to lessen your chances of experiencing motion sickness — the last thing you need when you’re already feeling green around the gills.

Stand up and stretch. Pregnant women are at higher risk for developing blood clots , so it’s important to avoid sitting still for long periods of time. Wear loose clothes and keep the blood flowing in your legs: Whether you’re flying or driving, take breaks to get up, walk around, and stretch every half hour or so. And even while you’re seated, flex and point your toes as often as you can. Remember, any movement counts. You might also want to check with your doctor about wearing compression/support stockings, which can keep the blood from pooling in your lower legs and minimize swelling in your feet and ankles .

Drink up. Staying hydrated can help prevent swelling of your hands, legs, and feet as well as help prevent blood clots. What's more, dehydration sets you up for jet lag symptoms like fatigue. Drinking non-caffeinated fluids like water and juice also helps reduce swelling in your nasal passages , a pregnancy symptom caused by hormones that can make you feel stuffy all the time.

Take healthy eating habits with you. Just because you’re away from home doesn’t mean that you shouldn’t try to eat regularly and well. If you’re in your second trimester, you may not be feeling so nauseous, but you still might get some queasies from pregnancy travel. Combat them by eating small amounts frequently throughout the day. Whole wheat crackers, pasteurized cheese sticks, fruit (dried or fresh), veggies, seeds and nuts, yogurt, granola bars, and whole grain cereals are all healthy choices that are easy to pack in your carry-on. Avoid eating fried or spicy foods on the day of travel — they can make nausea worse and cause gas (no fun when you’ve still got 1,000 miles to go). Do not eat unpasteurized dairy products or uncooked/cured meats or fish, and thoroughly wash fresh produce.

Try to stay regular on the road. Since changes in schedule can compound constipation problems, make sure you get plenty of the three most effective constipation fighters: fiber, fluids, and exercise.

When you gotta go, go. Don't encourage a urinary tract infection (UTI) or constipation by postponing trips to the bathroom. Go as soon as you feel the urge and can find a toilet.

Buckle up. If you’re driving, tuck the bottom strap of the seat belt under your baby bump for comfort and keep the top strap off to the side of your belly but across the center of your chest, where it would normally lay. If you’re on a plane and the belt doesn't fit, ask an attendant for a seat-belt extender. Don’t be shy or embarrassed — remember, you’re protecting yourself and your baby.

Take it easy. Use a rolling suitcase so you don’t have to lift heavy luggage. If you don’t already have a bag with wheels, pregnancy is a great excuse to buy one. Ask your partner or a flight attendant for help putting your belongings in the overhead bin or car trunk, and request wheelchair or electric-cart assistance in the airport if you’re feeling tired or you’re rushing to make a connection.

When should you seek medical care while traveling during pregnancy?

Go to the nearest hospital or medical clinic in the area you're visiting if you’re experiencing a pregnancy emergency while traveling or any of the following symptoms:

Pelvic or abdominal pain

Vaginal bleeding

Contractions

Your water breaks (rupture of the membranes)

A headache that won’t go away, vision changes, or facial or hand swelling, all of which are possible signs of preeclampsia

Leg pain or swelling

Severe vomiting or diarrhea

While traveling during pregnancy is generally considered safe for most moms-to-be, you’ll need to take some precautions before making any plans — and get the green light from your practitioner first.