Why I Chose Ritual Prenatal Vitamins for My Second Pregnancy

Ritual Prenatal Vitamin Review

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

What is it? Ritual Prenatal Vitamins

Why I love it: The nutrient-packed vitamins are easy to swallow and shipped right to your door, so you always have prenatals on hand.

How much is it? $39/month

Where to buy it: Ritual , Amazon and Target

Ritual Prenatal Sale : Get 40% off your first month of Ritual subscriptions — including the Essential Prenatal Vitamin — now through September 2.

I always assumed that, once you were ready to start trying to conceive, your OB/GYN would prescribe you a prenatal vitamin. As it turns out, doctors deem us completely capable of choosing one of the many over-the-counter prenatal vitamins . So when I became pregnant with my first child in 2020, I did what any indecisive journalist would do: I researched. In my internet exploration, I saw a lot of positive buzz about Ritual prenatal vitamins. And, given that I was pregnant during COVID-19, I liked that I could avoid stores and have vitamins sent to me. So I placed my order and never looked back.

Now, four years later, I’m taking Ritual prenatal vitamins again as I await the arrival of Baby #2. Suffice to say, this prenatal vitamin is well worth the hype (and higher price tag, but more on that later.)

What Are Ritual Prenatal Vitamins?

Ritual prenatal vitamins are one of the many vitamins offered by the popular supplement subscription service. In fact, Ritual was actually founded by a mom-to-be who struggled to find a prenatal vitamin she deemed to be free of “questionable ingredients.”

The brand prides itself on only using ingredients that can be traced right to the source, providing detailed descriptions about where each vitamin and mineral comes from so you know exactly what you're putting in your body. And, as an added assurance, all of the vitamins are made of GMO-free, plant-based ingredients. (Yes, vegans. You can enjoy these, too!)

Many moms-to-be praise Ritual’s prenatals for being easy to swallow and having little to no aftertaste — two things I can attest to. And, like me, Ritual subscribers appreciate the convenience of the vitamin being delivered to your door. Again, my first pregnancy was during the pandemic, so picking up anything at a pharmacy was tough. This time around, I have a toddler to manage and the delivery takes one thing off my plate.

Ritual Prenatal Vitamins at a Glance

Before I subscribed to Ritual’s Prenatal Vitamins, I talked to my friend who is a pharmacist and mom of two about the prenatals she used. Although she required prescription prenatals, she said Ritual’s prenatals were comparable to hers in amounts for all of the important vitamins. I also checked with my OB/GYN, who gave them the all clear.

Ritual’s prenatal vitamins contain choline and DHA, which aid in neural tube, brain and blood support. But not all prenatal vitamins contain them, requiring women to purchase and take separate supplements. They also contain 333% of your daily recommended value of vitamin D, which is a rarity in any multivitamin, let alone prenatals.

Ritual Prenatal Vitamins

It's worth noting that Ritual’s prenatal vitamins don't contain zinc or vitamins A or C, though your regular diet should provide enough of each nutrient. If not, talk to your doctor to see if you should be supplementing separately.

Another important consideration: Ritual vitamins contain folate, not folic acid . Although both are forms of vitamin B9, folic acid is the synthetic form of folate that's proven to help prevent major birth defects of baby's brain and spine. Ritual assures it contains enough folate to be absorbed and work like folic. If you have concerns, however, talk to your doctor.

Ritual Prenatal Vitamins Nutrient Breakdown

Vitamin D3: 50 micrograms (mcg) (333% DV)

Vitamin E: 7 mg (37% DV)

Folate: 1,000 mcg DFE (167% DV)

Vitamin B12: 8 mcg (286% DV)

Biotin: 150 mcg (429% DV)

Choline: 55 milligrams (mg) (10% DV)

Iron: 18 mg (67% DV)

Iodine: 150 mcg (52% DV)

Magnesium: 32 mg (8% DV)

Boron: 0.7 mg

DHA: 350 mg

Vitamin K2: 90 mcg

Pros

Convenient

I am the type who only realizes I am running low on something when it’s gone. Not ideal when it comes to a daily prenatal vitamin. So the fact that I can place an order once and be set for the next nine months is a true game-changer.

Of course, shipping delays can happen and you may want a backup supply on hand. Fortunately, Ritual’s prenatals are also sold at Amazon and Target. (You can actually set up a subscription through Amazon, and get a slightly reduced rate.)

I also want to take a moment to highlight Ritual’s amazing customer service. During my first pregnancy, I moved and forgot to update my address. I notified the company and they not only rerouted my order but also overnighted me an extra bottle free of charge so I wouldn't miss a pill.

Easy to Take

One of the things that drew me to Ritual’s prenatal vitamins were their size: They seemed smaller and more manageable than other prenatal vitamins, which were comparable to horse pills. Knowing I would have to take these daily. I needed something that would go down without issues. Plus, they are a softgel, which are easier to swallow than uncoated tablets.

Though I could tell the vitamins were smaller, I wasn’t sure what to expect taste-wise. Based on everything I read about prenatal vitamins, I was prepared for some chalky and fishy flavors. But Ritual’s vitamins were fine. Not the most delicious thing I’ve ever eaten, but better than what friends had warned me about. It probably helps that the vitamins are available in two flavors: citrus and mint. I opted for citrus both times (though, it was the only option during my first pregnancy) and found it to taste a lot like a vitamin C supplement. Each bottle comes with a little scent bar, so if you find the flavor too strong you can probably take that out as soon as your order arrives. This way the vitamins aren’t sitting with the flavor the entire month.

Minimal to No Side Effects

Prenatal vitamins can cause mild side effects, like constipation, nausea and vomiting. I, fortunately, haven’t had any issues with gas, nausea or fish breath. This may be in part because I take my prenatal at night before bed, which may help ease side effects. But many What to Expect community members had similar experiences, with one saying she, “takes them on an empty stomach and doesn’t feel bad at all.”

Considerations

One very obvious downside to Ritual vitamins is the cost. I pay a recurring $39 monthly charge by subscribing through Ritual, but you could pay almost $50 a bottle if you buy from another retailer. There are plenty of easy-to-swallow prenatal vitamins that pack just as much nutrition at a lower cost. Not to mention, you have to take two Ritual prenatals a day, whereas many other prenatals only require one a day.

Is Ritual a Good Prenatal Vitamin?

When I started my search for a prenatal vitamin, my doctor told me that unless I have any specific high risks or genetic factors — which I did not — the best prenatal vitamin was the one I would take daily. For me, that meant the vitamin had to be easy to swallow, have a tolerable taste and minimal to no side effects. Ritual’s prenatal vitamins checked all those boxes, and had that added convenience of being delivered to me monthly, so I would never run low.

Understandably, price may be a barrier for some moms-to-be. If that’s the case, there are plenty of comparable prenatal vitamins that cost less. But I was able to afford it, and the convenience of not having to think about ordering more before they ran out was worth the extra money. If price is not a barrier and you want a prenatal that’s easy to take and delivered to you, then Ritual’s prenatal vitamins may be it.

Your Next Read

The 9 Best Prenatal Vitamins That OB/GYNs Recommend — and Moms Actually Take Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Prenatal vs. Postnatal Vitamins: What’s Actually the Difference? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Can’t Stomach Your Prenatal? Try This Powder Instead By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

How Early Should You Start Taking Prenatal Vitamins? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Can You Take Prenatal Vitamins Without Being Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Do Fertility Supplements Really Work? What the Science Says Before You Try Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Which Vitamins Do I Need During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Can Prenatal Vitamins Really Help Your Hair Grow? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Free Baby Samples? Yes, Please! How to Score Diapers, Formula and More By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

How Much Vitamin C Do You Actually Need During Pregnancy? A Doctor-Approved Guide Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Pregnant and Low on Vitamin D? Here’s How to Boost Your Levels Safely Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Eating Vegetarian and Vegan During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Should You Eat Organic Foods When You're Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnancy Superfoods: Building Your Baby Bite by Bite Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window