Ruchi Gupta

Ruchi Gupta, M.D., M.P.H.

About Ruchi Gupta, M.D., M.P.H.

Ruchi Gupta, M.D., M.P.H., has 17 years of experience as a board-certified pediatrician and health researcher and serves as the founding director of the Center for Food Allergy & Asthma Research (CFAAR) at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine and Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago.

She completed her undergraduate and medical education at the University of Louisville and completed her medical residency at Children’s Hospital & Regional Medical Center, University of Washington in Seattle. She also completed her pediatric health services research fellowship at Boston Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, and went on to receive her Master of Public Health from the Harvard School of Public Health.

Dr. Gupta is world-renowned for her groundbreaking research in food allergy and asthma epidemiology, most notably for her research on the prevalence of pediatric and adult food allergy in the United States. She has also significantly contributed to academic research in the areas of food allergy prevention, socioeconomic disparities in care and the daily management of these conditions. To reduce the burden of these conditions and improve health equity, she and her team develop, evaluate and disseminate interventions for families and conduct work to inform local, national and international health policy.

Board certification

Dr. Gupta is board certified by the American Board of Pediatrics.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Gupta is affiliated with Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Gupta is a professor of pediatrics and medicine at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine and founding director of the Center for Food Allergy & Asthma Research (CFAAR). Dr. Gupta also serves as Chief Medical Officer for Public Health for Food Allergy Research & Education. She belongs to many professional organizations, including: Women in Bio (WIB), Psychosocial Aspects of Allergy Committee (WAO), Professional Membership for the Association of Asthma Educators, European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (EAACI) and American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin (AAPI). Dr. Gupta is a fellow of the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP); American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (ACAAI); and American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology (AAAAI).

Publications and research

Dr. Gupta is the author of the Food Allergy Experience and Food Without Fear , has written and co-authored over 150 peer-reviewed research manuscripts , and has had her work featured on major TV networks and in print media.

Awards

Dr. Gupta has received numerous awards, including

Equalize Pitch Competition – Overall Winner in Therapeutics 2021

Women in Bio Pitch Challenge – Audience Favorite 2020

Canadian Society of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (CSACI) Bram Rose Memorial Lectureship Award 2020

Food Allergy Research and Educations 20th Annual Food Allergy Ball "20 for 20" Award 2018

Awarded Chair: Mary Ann & J. Milburn Smith Senior Scientist in Child Health Research 2018

5 Fabulous Femmes 2015 Health Sciences Honoree, Demoiselle 2 Femme 2015

Steve Whitman Award, Chicago Consortium for Community Engagement 2014

Community-Engaged Research Partnership Award, Alliance for Research in Chicagoland Communities 2014

Edward J. Williams Leadership Award, BMO Harris Bank 2013

Public Voices Thought Leadership Fellowship, Northwestern University 2012–2013

Breaking Barriers Award, Chicago Foundation for Women’s Asian American Leadership Council 2012

Dept. of Pediatrics Award for Outstanding Contribution in Advocacy, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago 2010–Present

Dept. of Pediatrics Award for Outstanding Contribution in Scholarship & Research, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago 2007–Present

Dept. of Pediatrics Award for Outstanding Contribution in Clinical Activities, Children’s Memorial Hospital 2007–Present

Most Distinguished Resident/Fellow Award, American Association of Physicians of Indian Origin (AAPI) 2004

American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Leadership Award 2001

American Medical Association (AMA) National Leadership Award 2001

Fitzhugh Mullen Resident Leadership Award, National Consortium of Residents (NCR) 2000

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window