Safe vs. Unsafe Baby Sleep Environments: The Ultimate Guide

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

Safe vs unsafe baby sleep environments

We did a deep dive to help you understand what the latest safe sleep guidelines actually mean. Here’s where it’s safe — and where it isn’t — for your baby to sleep.

When you’re trying to soothe your baby to sleep, you might be willing to try just about anything — from holding her in a glider all night to rocking her in a bouncer until the wee hours of the morning.

But just because your baby nods off in your arms — or in a bouncer, or car seat, or swing — doesn’t mean she should sleep there all night. In fact, babies should only sleep alone, on their backs, and in either a crib, playard, or bassinet or bedside sleeper that meets the latest federal safety standards, according to the safe sleep guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSleep-Related Infant Deaths: Updated 2022 Recommendations for Reducing Infant Deaths in the Sleep EnvironmentSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSleep-Related Infant Deaths: Updated 2022 Recommendations for Reducing Infant Deaths in the Sleep EnvironmentSee All Sources

With so many baby products on the market — some of which were marketed to help your baby fall and stay asleep — it’s no wonder parents are confused about which ones are safe and which ones aren’t.

Here’s your guide to knowing which places and products are safe to lay your sleeping baby.

Key Takeaways

For safe sleep, babies should sleep alone, on their backs, on a firm, flat surface (a crib, bassinet, playard, or bedside sleeper) with no loose bedding, toys, or weighted products. Room-sharing (not bed-sharing) is safest.

Always use safe sleep products for babies. Newer cribs, bassinets, bedside sleepers, and playards that meet CPSC safety standards are considered safe, provided they’re empty, firm, and flat. Always check recalls before using hand-me-down gear.

Unsafe products for sleep include inclined sleepers, swings, bouncers, rockers, slings, nests/pods, adult beds, couches, car seats, and strollers for routine sleep — all pose risks of suffocation or SIDS.

Safe sleep for babies: The basics

First, a quick refresher: Here safe sleep rules to follow, according to sleep guidelines from the AAP.

Babies should always sleep on their backs. Studies suggest babies who sleep on their backs are less likely to die of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) than those who sleep on their stomachs or sides, increasing the likelihood of breathing their own exhaled air, leading to increased carbon dioxide levels and low-oxygen levels. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsWhere We Stand: Back To SleepSee All Sources [2]

Choose a firm, flat surface, like a crib, playard, or bassinet or bedside sleeper. Any sleep product that is at a 10-degree angle or more is unsafe for your baby to sleep on. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsInclined Sleepers, Soft Nursing Pillows, & Other Baby Products to AvoidSee All Sources [3]

Don’t let your baby sleep sitting up. You shouldn’t let your baby sleep in a swing, bouncer, rocker, or other chair, especially if she’s under 4 months old. If she falls asleep while sitting in one, move her to a safe location, like a crib. It’s fine if your child occasionally nods off in her car seat or stroller , but car seats and strollers should never be used for routine sleep.

It’s never safe for babies to sleep on a couch, chair, or cushion. The risks of sleep-related infant deaths are up to 67 times higher when your baby sleeps with someone on a couch, armchair, or cushion.

Don’t share a bed with your baby. Bed sharing increases the risk of sudden infant death syndrome — and if you’re fatigued, or have taken medications, drugs or alcohol, your baby’s risk of SIDS increases by 10 times. Babies who are younger than 4 months, and who were born premature or with low birth weight are even more vulnerable to SIDS while bed sharing. And while you might be tempted to bed share, telling yourself that you're doing it as safely as possible, it's important to remember that there is no "safe" way to bed share . Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources [4]

But do try to share a room with your baby. Sharing a room — but not a bed — decreases the risk of SIDS by as much as 50%. Sleeping near your baby makes it easier for you to feed, comfort, and watch over her.

Weighted swaddles and sleepers aren’t recommended by the AAP for babies. There’s a concern that adding weight to a newborn’s chest might compromise their breathing, says Michael H. Goodstein, M.D., a neonatologist in York, Pennsylvania. And, he adds, “if a baby were to roll over into a prone position with a weighted swaddle , that additional weight could make it more difficult for the infant to return to the back position.”

Safe baby sleep products

Cribs, playards, and bassinets and bedside sleepers are all safe places for your baby to sleep — if you’re using the right ones and following a few safe-sleep rules, that is.

You should always try to buy newer sleep products wherever possible, for example, since they’re more likely to conform to the current standards issued by the CPSC, and you should never put your baby to sleep with any loose bedding, toys or stuffed animals. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionBassinets and Cradles Business GuidanceSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionBassinets and Cradles Business GuidanceSee All Sources

Any time you inherit baby gear from a friend or family member, check the CPSC’s website to make sure it hasn’t been recalled .

safe baby sleep environments

Cribs

New cribs can be expensive, but they’re also a lot safer than a hand-me-down. Older models — particularly those sold before 2011, when the CPSC issued strict standards for all crib manufacturers — may not meet the current safety requirements for cribs. They may also be damaged, missing parts, or assembled incorrectly.

New crib models are no longer allowed to have drop-down sides, for example, and must also have more durable mattress supports, secure hardware that won’t fall off, and stronger wooden slats.

The crib should also be empty — never put a pillow, blanket, or even a teddy bear in the crib with your baby, since loose bedding or plush toys can be a suffocation hazard. You should also never use bumper pads, which are now banned for sale in the U.S., or other similar products that attach to the crib slats or sides.

Bassinets or bedside sleepers

Many babies sleep in a bassinet before they spend all night in a crib. Newer bassinets — including traditional freestanding models, bedside sleepers, travel bassinets, and sleep bassinets — must also meet strict safety standards from the CPSC, so try to avoid using a hand-me-down.

Bassinets’ sides, for example, tend to be made of mesh material that help guard against suffocation, and have to meet certain stability requirements that prevent them from tipping over. When you choose a model, make sure it has a firm mattress and tight-fitting mattress sheet. And don’t put anything in the bassinet with your baby — no loose bedding, blankets, pillows, or plush toys.

Remember, though, that bassinets come with weight limits — sometimes anywhere from 10 to 20 pounds — so you may have to transition your baby to a crib within a few months. You should also transition to a crib once your baby starts rolling.

Playards

Playards are the Swiss Army knives of baby gear — they can double as cribs, travel just about anywhere and are great for play. And, just like cribs and bassinets, newer playard models have to meet strict safety standards by the CPSC — the sides must be made of mesh or fabric, the mattress has to be secure, and the floors have to be sturdy.

The same safe sleep rules apply to playards, too — if you’re using one of these products for sleep, don’t put any toys, loose bedding, mattress toppers, or pillows in them.

Unsafe baby sleep products

Babies should only sleep on a firm, flat surface, according to the AAP’s guidelines. Any sleep product that inclines more than 10 degrees isn’t safe for a baby to sleep in. So while it’s perfectly fine for your little one to bounce in her bouncer or rock in her rocker, she should only do so if she’s being carefully watched.

“If they do fall asleep,” says Dr. Goodstein, “the recommendation is to remove them to an appropriate sleep environment.”

//images.agoramedia.com/wte3.0/gcms/unsafe-baby-sleep-environments-inline-2.jpg

Inclined sleepers

Inclined sleepers — products designed for babies to sleep at a 30-degree angle — have been linked to at least 94 deaths, according to the AAP, which is why they’re now prohibited for sale in the U.S. Babies who are placed in these sleepers can fall asleep with their chin resting on their chest, restricting their airway, or can be trapped when they roll from their stomach to their side while unrestrained. “The bigger the incline, the riskier it gets,” says Dr. Goodstein.

Many sleepers have been recalled, but they’re still available second-hand. If you bought one of these products at a garage sale or inherited it from a friend, stop using it right away.

Swings

Baby swings are what they sound like — small products that rock back and forth, which can soothe (or just entertain) your little one. One thing they aren’t designed for, though, is sleep. Putting babies, especially those younger than 4 months, to sleep in a sitting position can not only worsen their reflux, but can also make it harder for them to breathe.

Always make sure your baby is carefully supervised during her swing session. If your child does fall asleep in her swing, take her out of it and place her on her back in either a crib, bassinet, or playard.

Bouncers

Bouncers — also called bouncy chairs or bouncy seats — are fabric seats that feature three- or five-point harness straps and toy bars. Some of them also play music, vibrate, and swing back and forth. Bouncers are perfectly fine for your baby to play in (as long as she’s supervised and awake), but their inclined seats make them unsafe for sleep. So if your child nods off in one (a likely scenario), move her to a safe sleep environment for the rest of her catnap.

Rockers

Similar to a bouncer, a rocker is a fabric seat that can rock back and forth. They feature three- or five-point harness straps, and many also feature a toy bar where you can dangle plush toys for your baby to play with and grab.

Rockers aren’t, however, a safe place for your baby to sleep, since the inclined seats can put them at risk for suffocation. In June 2022, the CPSC warned parents of the risks of letting babies fall asleep in the Fisher-Price Infant-to-Toddler and Newborn-to-Toddler Rockers, which have been linked to at least 13 deaths between 2009 and 2021. You should only put your baby in a rocker if she’s supervised — and if she does fall asleep in it, move her to a flat, safe surface: a crib, bassinet, or playard. Rockers should never be used for sleep.

Baby slings and carriers

Slings and carriers can range from long swaths of fabric that wrap around your body to structured, backpack-like carriers that come with buckles and straps. And there’s no denying that, whether you’re on the go or just in the kitchen, they can help keep your baby close — without straining your back.

Babies who fall asleep in slings or carriers, however, are at risk for suffocation, according to the AAP, so if your little one falls asleep while she’s in one, take her out and place her on her back in a crib, bassinet, or playard.

Baby nests and pods

Also called sleep positioners, baby nests and pods can pose a suffocation hazard for babies if they roll onto their stomachs and onto the soft padding, where they can be unable to lift their heads and breathe. You shouldn’t let your baby sleep in a nest or pod, or leave her in one unsupervised.

An adult bed

Sharing a bed with your baby is dangerous. Not only can babies get trapped or wedged between the mattress and headboard or underneath a blanket or pillow, but you could also roll onto them (especially if you’re sleep deprived), increasing the risk of suffocation. Bed- or surface-sharing is linked to an increase in risk of SIDS — and this link goes up two to five times if your baby was born premature or with low birth weight.

If you have to take your baby out of her crib to feed or comfort her, always put her on her back in her own crib to fall asleep — and before you fall asleep.

A couch or armchair

Never put your baby to sleep on a couch or armchair. Babies who sleep in a couch or armchair could suffocate if they become trapped between the seat cushions or a person who may be holding them or sitting next to them.

What about car seats and strollers?

Many a parent has taken their little one on a midnight drive to soothe them to sleep — especially when nothing else has worked. But while a car seat is certainly the safest place for your child in the car — and fine for short stretches of sleep — it’s not the safest place for them to sleep for long periods , says Dr. Goodstein.

Not only is a car seat set at an incline, he says, but if the straps are loose, babies can also become tangled up, causing strangulation. Babies who can flip over may also roll into a side position if they aren’t buckled in correctly; if they get trapped in the padding of the car seat, they may not be able to breathe fresh air, which can cause asphyxiation.

Strollers also shouldn’t be used as regular sleep spaces for long stretches for time, and for similar reasons — many of them are also set at an incline, which can increase a baby’s risk of breathing difficulties. Plus, you want to put your baby to sleep in an open space, says Dr. Goodstein. “You don’t want them to bump against anything padded,” he says.

It’s okay if your baby falls asleep in her car seat or stroller if you’re on the go, but move her to a safe space when you’re able.

Have more questions about your baby's sleep? Open the What to Expect app to track your little one's sleep and see what’s typical at every age and stage, plus get answers to common sleep questions.

Sources

Sleep-Related Infant Deaths: Updated 2022 Recommendations for Reducing Infant Deaths in the Sleep Environment

Show in the article

Where We Stand: Back To Sleep

Show in the article

Inclined Sleepers, Soft Nursing Pillows, & Other Baby Products to Avoid

Show in the article

How to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy Explained

Show in the article

Bassinets and Cradles Business Guidance

Show in the article

Crib Safety

Moving Your Baby From a Bassinet to a Crib

Best Playards and Pack ‘n Plays

Co-Sleeping, Bed-Sharing and Room-Sharing: What’s Safe and What Isn’t?

Baby Sleeping on His Side? How to Encourage Your Little One to Sleep on His Back

Best Baby Swings, According to Parents Who’ve Tried and Loved Them

Play Yards Business Guidance & Small Entity Compliance Guide

Research on Back Sleeping And SIDS