Safe Sleep Tips for Babies

Updated with information about cradleboards, and updates to sources.

baby sleeping in crib, newborn and baby safe sleep practices

You want your baby to sleep well and be safe in her crib, but all the rules can be confusing for a new parent. Here's what you need to know about putting baby down to sleep safe and sound.

Whether you’re still pregnant and setting up your baby’s nursery or your little bundle has already arrived, you’re probably spending a lot of time thinking about how you’ll get your newborn to sleep .

Of course, you want your baby to sleep soundly. But it’s just as important that she sleeps safely. Smart, safe sleep practices can help protect infants from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS) and other sleep-related hazards, so it’s essential for every new parent to become familiar with safe sleep guidelines.

Don’t worry — they’re not complicated. In fact, when it comes to safe sleep for babies , simpler is often better. Here’s exactly what you need to know so that you and your baby can both rest easy.

Where should a newborn sleep?

What’s the safest sleep position for my baby? Can she have a blanket or pillow in her crib? And is it okay for her to sleep in bed with me?

Chances are, you have lots of questions about how to put your baby to sleep safely. Here are safe sleep tips for babies from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).

Share a room, but not a bed

Having your baby sleep in your room for the first six months can help lower the risk of SIDS by up to 50%. And of course, keeping her nearby makes for easier nighttime feedings if you're breastfeeding.

But you should avoid cosleeping (letting your baby sleep in your bed), says the AAP. Always keep her in her own bassinet or crib, since your bed's pillows and blankets could pose a danger. And there are the added risks of baby falling off the bed and of someone accidentally rolling onto her overnight.

Put your baby to sleep in a crib or bassinet

Whether your newborn sleeps in a bassinet or crib when you first bring her home is up to you. Baby can also sleep in a playard or portable crib . No matter what you choose, the product should meet the latest CPSC guidelines.

Your baby should not sleep on anything else — not a couch, armchair, recliner, bean bag chair, glider, infant pillow or inclined sleeper (like the Fisher-Price Rock ‘n Play, which was recalled in 2019 following reports of infant deaths).

Sleeping anywhere other than a crib, bassinet, playard or portable crib can increase the risk of suffocation and SIDS, even if your baby is sleeping in your arms.

As for bedside sleepers? Experts don’t have enough evidence to recommend whether you should use them, but it's best to avoid those and any other sleep products claiming to reduce SIDS risk, as they're not always safe, according to updated 2022 sleep guidelines by the AAP . If baby dozes off in a car seat, stroller, swing or infant sling, move her to a safe sleeping environment as soon as you can.

Some American Indian/Alaska Native communities have supported the use of cradleboards as acceptable infant sleep surfaces, according to the AAP. There's no data about the safety of cradleboards for baby sleep. However the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) has suggested that cradleboards are a culturally appropriate infant sleep surface. Be very careful that babies sleeping on them do not overheat because they're bundled up too warmly.

Want more tips on baby sleep? Find them in the What to Expect app .

How to choose a crib or bassinet

When you’re prepping baby’s nursery, keep the following factors in mind.

Footprint: A bassinet should have a wide, well-supported base so it won’t collapse or tip over.

Weight limit: Some bassinets may have a weight limit as low as 15 pounds, though most can accommodate up to 20 pounds. If you don't have the bassinet manual handy, err on the side of caution and move your baby to a crib when she's around 15 pounds. Most babies reach that weight by the time they’re 3 to 4 months old.

Age: The CPSC says to steer clear of new and used cribs made before June 2011. Old, antique or secondhand cribs could be broken, or may not meet current safety standards. They may have lead paint, cracked or splintered wood, or slats that are too far apart.

Slat width: The slats and corner posts of your crib should be no more than 2 3/8 inches apart (about the width of a soda can), since wider slats can pose an entrapment risk for little baby heads. Corner posts should be flush with the end panels (no more than 1/16 inch higher). If you’re buying a brand new crib, this likely isn’t something you need to worry about.

Condition: If you’re buying a used crib, there should be no peeling paint or splintered or cracked wood.

And when it comes to assembling baby’s sleep space, be sure to follow the manufacturer’s instructions to a T. Hardware including bolts, screws and brackets should be firmly secured, with no sharp edges, rough areas or spots that could pinch or otherwise hurt your baby.

Crib mattress safety tips

Follow these safety tips when it comes to choosing your crib mattress:

Crib mattresses should fit snugly. Make sure the mattress fits tightly and snugly against the inside of the crib. If you can fit more than two fingers between the mattress and the crib, it isn't up to safety standards. The harder it is for you to make the bed, the safer it is for your baby.

Use a standard-size mattress for a full-size crib that is firm and at least 27 1/4 inches by 51 1/4 inches and no more than 6 inches thick. Oval- or round-shaped cribs need mattresses that are specially designed to fit in them snugly.

For portable cribs and playards, use only the mattress that came with it. When these products are evaluated for safety, it’s only with the mattresses they’re sold with. Mattress toppers or thicker pads pose a suffocation risk.

When to lower the crib mattress

Many cribs have adjustable mattress heights that are designed to grow with your baby. Keep the mattress at the highest level when your little one is first born, when there’s no risk of her standing up and climbing out of the crib (and when you’ll be coming in to get her and put her back most often).

Once she’s able to sit up on her own (any time between 4 and 7 months) or pull herself up to a standing position, it’ll be time to lower the mattress so she can’t climb out.

How should a newborn sleep? Creating a safe sleep environment

Follow these additional safe sleep tips from the AAP when it comes to how your baby should sleep:

Put baby to sleep on her back

You should always put your baby to sleep flat on her back on a firm, flat surface at naptime and bedtime until her first birthday. Tummy sleeping puts infants at risk for suffocation or overheating and increases the chance of SIDS.

Once your baby is able to roll over on her own while she's sleeping, from stomach to back and from back to tummy, it’s fine to let her keep sleeping that way. Babies can typically roll over between 3 and 6 months, but it can happen earlier (or later), so keep a close eye on her.

If it seems like your newborn has rolled onto her side, that’s probably her reflexes at work. She’ll likely lose the ability to do that by the time she’s a month old.

Leave baby alone in the crib or bassinet

Baby should sleep alone on her back without bumpers, stuffed animals, blankets or pillows.

It’s okay to start using a pillow and blanket when your child is a toddler and old enough to move out of a crib and into a toddler bed — ideally between 2 and 3 years old.

If you’re worried about baby being too cold at night, then consider a wearable blanket (also called a sleep sack).

As for crib bumpers? Not only should you avoid bumpers because they're not safe, but they've recently been banned by the federal government as part of the Safe Sleep for Babies Act of 2021 .

Bumpers can increase the risk for suffocation and strangulation in younger babies and be used as steps to climb out of the crib in older babies and toddlers. And there's no solid evidence that they actually prevent injuries in the crib, either.

Don’t let your baby overheat

How should you dress baby for sleep ? Simple is safest. Put your baby in a base layer like a one-piece sleeper, and skip the socks, hats or other accessories. Instead of a blanket, use a sleep sack or swaddle. She’ll be warm enough — but not too warm. Never use weighted swaddles, sleep sacks or blankets for your baby.

A room temperature of 68 to 72 degrees Fahrenheit is best. To tell whether your baby is too warm, feel the nape of her neck. If she's sweating, she’s too hot.

Make sure your baby is in a smoke-free environment

Secondhand smoke increases the risk of SIDS, so avoid exposing your baby to any kind of smoke.

Keep the crib clear of anything baby can grab

Be sure baby can’t grab cords (from, say, a lamp or your baby monitor), curtains or anything else, which could pose a suffocation and strangulation risk.

It’s okay to hang a mobile over your newborn's crib if you’d like to — just be sure to hang it about 12 inches over the crib and remove the mobile once baby may be able to grab it (at around 4 to 6 months old or when she begins to push up on her hands and knees, whichever comes first).

Other safe sleep tips for babies

Don’t rely on "smart" baby monitors

Cardiorespiratory monitors, which alert you to changes in your baby’s breathing at night, haven’t been proven to protect against SIDS. Nor are they regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) because they're not considered medical devices, so they're often not safe to have around your baby at all.

Try a pacifier

Giving your baby a pacifier reduces the risk of SIDS. Though the exact reason why is unclear, experts theorize that babies with pacifiers don’t sleep as deeply and can therefore wake up more easily, or that sucking a pacifier might open up air space around a baby's mouth and nose. But don’t force it if she rejects it.

If you're breastfeeding, keep it up if possible

Research indicates that breastfeeding for two to four months reduces the risk of SIDS by 40%, and nursing for four to six months can slash SIDS risk by 60%.

Stop swaddling before baby rolls

Make sure to use the right swaddling technique (don’t worry, it’s easy once you get the hang of it!) and always put your swaddled baby to sleep on her back, though keep in mind that there's no evidence swaddling lowers the risk of SIDS.

You should stop by the time your baby is rolling over (or trying to), which usually starts around 3 or 4 months. Swaddling can create a strangulation or suffocation hazard for older babies who are mobile enough to potentially wriggle their way out.

Want to play it extra safe? Stop at 2 months, before your baby begins to get her roll on.

Safe sleep for babies is serious, but it doesn’t have to be scary. By following the expert-recommended safe sleep guidelines, you can keep your baby both safe and comfortable while she sleeps.