Sarah White

Sarah White, M.A., CCC-SLP

About Sarah White, M.A., CCC-SLP

Sarah White is a certified speech-language pathologist and co-owner of Speakology LLC, a practice located in the Farmington Valley region of Connecticut. She also has extensive training with feeding and swallowing disorders, tethered oral tissues and apraxia. White has experience working in therapy clinics as well as private accredited special education school programs across the state of Connecticut.

White earned both her Bachelor of Arts in Communication Disorders and her Master of Arts in Speech Language Pathology from the University of Connecticut in Storrs, Connecticut.

Board certifications

White is a member of the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association and maintains her Certificate of Clinical Competence (CCC). She also holds her Department of Public Health License from the state of Connecticut.

Other relevant positions

White is a Level 2 PROMPT trained speech-language pathologist, with additional trainings in the Kaufman Speech to Language Protocol, Dynamic Temporal and Tactile Cueing (DTTC), Beckman Oral Motor Protocol, Oral Placement Therapy, LSVT Loud, LAMP and Social Thinking (Michelle Garcia Winner). She is also trained in the Lindamood Bell Talkies® Program for Oral Language Comprehension & Expression as well as the Nancibell® Visualizing and Verbalizing® Program for Cognitive Development, Comprehension & Thinking.

In addition, White is an orofacial myofunctional therapist with training from the International Association of Orofacial Myology (IAOM) for the study and treatment of the oral and facial muscles.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window