Sarah Obican

Sarah Obican, M.D.

About Sarah Obican, M.D.

Dr. Sarah Gloria Obican is a board-certified OB/GYN who specializes in Maternal Fetal Medicine and works as a physician at Tampa General Hospital in Tampa, Florida.

Dr. Obican graduated with a psychobiology degree from the University of Miami in Miami, Florida. She earned her medical degree from the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine.

Dr. Obican did her residency in Obstetrics and Gynecology at George Washington University in Washington, D.C., where she stayed on as faculty in Obstetrics and Gynecology. During that time, she did a fellowship in Teratology and Reproductive Toxicology. Dr. Obican later pursued a fellowship in Maternal Fetal Medicine at Columbia University Medical Center in New York City. Since then, she has been a Maternal Fetal Medicine sub-specialist at the University of South Florida (USF).

Dr. Obican’s expertise includes caring for women with high-risk pregnancies.

Board certifications

Dr. Obican is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology and in the sub-specialty of Maternal Fetal Medicine.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Obican is affiliated with Tampa General Hospital in Tampa.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Obican is an assistant professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology in the Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine at USF.

She is also a member of the Fetal Care Center of Tampa Bay at USF. Through the university, Dr. Obican founded a Teratogen Information Service for the state of Florida and serves as its medical director.

She currently also serves on the board of directors for the Organization of Teratogen Information Specialist and the Reproductive Toxicology Center. Previously, she served on the board of directors for the Teratology Society.

Dr. Obican is a fellow of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and a member of the Society of Maternal Fetal Medicine.

Previously, Dr. Obican was an assistant professor at George Washington University.

She is the author of many articles and chapters in the field of Teratology and high-risk Obstetrics, and serves as a peer reviewer for some major obstetric journals.

Awards

Dr. Obican has been the recipient of a number of awards and honors over the years, including the F. Clark Fraser New Investigator Award from the Teratology Society, the Allan B. Weingold Award for Administrative Leadership and Teaching from George Washington University, and the Golden Apple Teaching Award, also from George Washington University.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window