Saying “I Do” While Expecting: Having a Comfortable Wedding When You're Pregnant

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

married

"I'm engaged to be married … and I just found out that I'm expecting! What should I know about planning a wedding during pregnancy?"

Wow, you’ve got a lot to celebrate! Either of those life events is huge on its own, so navigating both at the same time can be tricky … but definitely doable, especially with some smart prep work. Before you walk down the aisle, consider these tips on planning and hosting a wedding during pregnancy:

Key Takeaways

Time it right. The second trimester is the sweet spot for tying the knot when pregnant as morning sickness has eased and your energy has mostly returned.

Comfort rules. Don’t put up with too-high heels or a tight dress. Instead, pick flat shoes and an outfit with a loose generous cut made from breathable fabric.

Party with care. Be good to yourself on the big day by eating right, staying hydrated, and taking breaks from the dance floor to sit and relax.

Consider the timing

While there's no right or wrong time to get married when you're expecting, many engaged moms-to-be prefer to get hitched in the second trimester . The reason? Morning sickness should be gone by then (or at least eased up enough so you can face the buffet).

If you don't necessarily want everyone to know that you're expecting, getting hitched around the 16-week mark means you might not show yet. One more timing tip: If pregnancy fatigue hits you hardest at night, shoot for a daytime event (which is likely less expensive too!).

Download the What to Expect app for more expert tips and smart advice if you’re going down the aisle with a baby on board.

Search for comfortable wedding dress styles

Even if you’re not showing when you hit the bridal shop, let the consultant know how far along you’ll be when you tie the knot. She’ll advise you on which size will be best for your belly-to-be.

While you can wear any style you want, baby bumps can look especially elegant in an A-line or empire-waist silhouette, which is snug at the bustline and roomier in the belly.

No matter which design you prefer for your wedding during pregnancy, you’ll likely feel more comfortable in loose, light fabrics, such as chiffon and crepe. Stiff or heavy materials like taffeta and tulle can up your odds of overheating and dizziness .

If you'd rather keep the focus on you instead of your bump in the photos, opt for some strategic ruching or a big bouquet rather than corsets or shapewear, which aren't advised during pregnancy.

As far as shoes go, you may need to pump up your pump size to a half- or even a full-size bigger than your pre-pregnancy kicks, since edema can make your feet and ankles swell.

What to Expect Community parent theresalwayslaundry wasn’t a pregnant bride, but she did serve as an expectant bridesmaid recently and offers savvy advice about the dress she had to wear.

“I was in a wedding 7 months pregnant and I just bought the dress way too big, then altered it close to the wedding to fit whatever size I was,” she explains.

Try to stress less

From choosing the right caterer to picking the most fabulous flowers to perfecting your seating chart, wedding planning can be pretty nerve-racking. But stress and pregnancy isn’t a great combo, so consider toning down the party to something you can handle more easily. Or hire a wedding planner or ask a willing friend (or that fabulous fiancé or fiancée of yours) to take on some of the tougher tasks.

Celebrate smartly as a pregnant bride

Skip the champagne, but keep your water glass full since staying hydrated is important for you and your baby. You can always toast with a non-alcoholic bubbly (like ginger ale or sparkling apple cider) during the reception.

Another reason you’ll want a light, loose wedding dress: You’ll need to pee more than the average bride, and going to the bathroom in a ball gown is tough even without a baby bump.

No matter how busy you get greeting guests, don’t forget to eat. Enlighten your caterer about pregnancy-safe foods and, even if you’re queasy, be sure to eat a protein-and-complex carb snack (like cheese on whole grain crackers) so you’ll have the energy for that first dance as a married lady — and the many to follow.

Speaking of energy, take a load off every once in a while during the party — your guests will understand if you and your belly need a break between dances.

Here’s to a wonderful wedding — and a healthy baby to boot,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Fatigue During Pregnancy , August 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Easing the Quease: How to Cope With Morning Sickness During Pregnancy , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Your Guide to the Second Trimester of Pregnancy , August 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Dizziness During Pregnancy , September 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Edema (Swelling of the Ankles and Feet) During Pregnancy , October 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Hair Dye and Highlights During Pregnancy , January 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Stress During Pregnancy , January 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy , November 2022. KidsHealth From Nemours, Pregnancy Precautions: FAQs , January 2023. Kleinfeld Bridal, What to Know About Wedding Dress Sizes—Don’t Freak at the Number!

Updates history

December 2, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

How do you split housework?

How old were you when your last baby was born?

Husband has 0 exp with babies

There are 10,523 active discussions happening now in our Relationships community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

How to Support Your Partner During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

8 Pregnancy Sex Challenges — and How to Fix Them Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Working While Pregnant: Your Rights, Safety Steps, and Comfort Hacks Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

When to Tell People You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Your Guide to a Calmer, Cozier Holiday Season During Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Hot Days, Cool Mocktails, and a Baby Bump: What Summer Pregnancies Really Feel Like Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises That Keep You (and Baby!) Feeling Great Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Picture-Perfect Maternity Photo Ideas for Every Parent-to-Be Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Tell Your Boss You're Pregnant: What to Say and When Medically Reviewed by Kameelah Phillips, M.D.

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

When Is the Best Time to Have Your Baby Shower? Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler Fact Checked by Jill Malter

I Survived 3 Weddings Newly Postpartum. Here Are My Hacks to Actually Enjoy the Night By Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window