Searching for a Dashing Baby Boy Name? These 15 British Boy Names Deliver

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

british boy names

From Alfie to Wylie, you'll love these short, sweet and punchy British names for your baby boy.

Wondering if a British name is for you? If you prefer a shorter name, then you might want to check out this list of British boy names for one- and two-syllable options. Or perhaps you happen to love names that are sweet and punchy in a really adorable way — then, one of these baby boy names from England, Scotland and Wales might just be a perfect fit.

Want more British-inspired names for your baby-to-be? We’ve got brilliant options in the What to Expect app that are sure to suit your wee one.

Adney. It's different but not too out there; in fact, it's pretty close to the more popular Andy. This English name means "noble's island."

Alfie. Such a cute name for a little boy. It's a familiar form of the English name Alfred, meaning "wise counselor."

Beck. If you're into one-syllable names, this is a winner. It means "brook" in the English tradition.

Bowen. Owen is a super popular name these days — and here's a slightly different twist. It's a Welsh name that means "son of Owen."

Chance. If you suspect your son will be a bold and brave adventurer who isn't afraid to live life on his own terms, then consider this stunner. It's a familiar form of the English name Chancellor, which means "record keeper."

Dougal. This Scottish name means "dark stranger," and may give your son a hint of mystery.

Eddie. Is Edgar or Edward a family name? Then you might be drawn to this sweet, less formal alternative, which means "prosperous guardian."

Graham. Another masculine-sounding name that's short and sweet. It means "gray home" in the English tradition. You might also consider the Scottish spelling: Graeme.

Hamilton. How about this classic name — which means "proud estate" in the English tradition — for your baby boy? Tony or Ham would make cute and unexpected nicknames.

Jestin. Like the name Justin (which is a Latin name meaning "just")? So do a lot of people. Consider this Welsh version to make your son stand out from the crowd.

Kai. A great name to pair with a long last name. It's Welsh and means "keeper of the keys."

Ned. Here's another English familiar form of Edward. Plus, it's vintage-sounding, which might be perfect for your sweet baby boy.

Smith. Yes, Smith is one of the most common last names of all time. But how often is it used as a first name? It means "blacksmith" in the English tradition.

Tristan. If this name sounds like royalty to you, that's because there's a knight in the Arthurian legends named Tristan. It's Welsh and means "noise” or “tumult.”

Wylie. This is a very cool-sounding name, and it suggests that its bearer may be quite clever. It means "willow meadow."

Updates history

September 24, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,740 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

15 Oh-So-Charming British Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unique Baby Boy Names That Make a Statement Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

26 Baby Names Inspired by the British Royal Family Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

15 Charming Irish Baby Boy Names You May Not Have Heard Before Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Trendy Yet Timeless Welsh Baby Boy Names You’ll Cherish Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

20 Arabic Baby Boy Names With Profound Meaning Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

19 Uncommon Baby Names You May Not Have Heard but Will Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

17 Timeless Spanish Baby Boy Names Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

20 Strong Boy Names That Leave a Powerful Impression Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Cute, Quirky, and Easy to Say: 19 Adorable Welsh Baby Girl Names Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

16 Classic Yet Cool Italian Baby Boy Names for Your Bambino Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Boy Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

17 Epic Greek Baby Boy Names That Are Full of Character Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

50 Vintage Baby Names That Are Making a Comeback Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window