10 Best Second Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Baby Number Two (or Three!)

big brother announcement

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Seeing those two lines a second time around feels a little different — after all, this isn't your first rodeo. You've likely tackled countless diaper changes and braved a sleep regression or two, and now your family is expanding again!

From adorable personalized sweaters announcing a big sibling's newfound "promotion" to quirky Star Wars-themed digital templates, these second-time pregnancy announcements will help your nearest and dearest share in the joy.

1. Smocked big sis

smocked big sis

It doesn't get much cuter than this photo of big sister-to-be Cooper smiling with a sonogram showing her two (yes, two!) little brothers. We found a similar white and blue smocked bishop dress here if you want to copy her adorable ensemble.

2. Big brother loading …

b is for big brother

Is the big bro-to-be learning his ABCs ? Let him and your loved ones know that "B" is for big brother with this T-shirt from Etsy.

3. Life's a movie

life is a movie

Talk about main character energy. This customizable movie poster is a digital download that you can print or post to your social media accounts. Customize your names and all those little "production" details like the release date and ratings!

4. For the grandparents-to-be

announcement mug

Before you tell the world about baby number two, you'll need to tell your parents that they're becoming grandparents — again! Hand them coffee in these personalized mugs that say "Nana (or their own grandparent name) again, EST. 2024" the next time they stop by, and make sure you capture their reactions.

5. Big sis bliss

big sis bliss

We simply can't get enough of this hand-embroidered sweater trend, and you can order one to announce a big sibling's new title! This one that says "Big Sis" in pink, purple and yellow floral writing looks very similar to the one shown here.

6. Grogu #2

Grogu announcement

Digital pregnancy announcement templates give you the opportunity to share a curated, artistic flat-lay with just a few clicks. This Star Wars-inspired one , complete with a letter board stating "A Second Baby We Are Having" and various Star Wars baby items, is perfect for your Baby Yoda on the way.

7. Here we grow again

here we grow again

Puns and pregnancy go together like peanut butter and jelly — or in this case, gardens and overalls. We love this family portrait with a letterboard that says "Here We Grow Again," taken by @bayleerexphotography .

8. Expect the unexpected

expect the unexpected announcement

Oops … you did it again! This is another digital template that details your biggest surprise yet. The flat lay features a letterboard that says "Surprise! We're due with baby #2" and a personalized onesie with sparkling lights as the background.

9. Dear Daddy

dear daddy announcement

If you're bursting with excitement to tell your partner, consider holding off by ordering this surprise-in-a-box for Dad. The box includes an adorable onesie that says "Ready for Round 2?" and a little card that says "Daddy, we haven't met yet but I already know that I love you." And don't worry about keeping the secret for too long — it ships the day after you order.

10. Double the excitement

double the excitement announcement

You're about to be a mama times two, so you can celebrate accordingly by sporting this T-shirt that reads "Mama²" in your next Instagram post. Bonus points if you and your family are holding up your sonogram in the photo!

Updates history

6/6/24 - Olivia, major overhaul: all new copy and images

Your Next Read

10 Twin Pregnancy Announcements for a Doubly Sweet Surprise Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

11 Surprise Pregnancy Announcements to Drop Your Unexpected Baby News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Pregnancy Announcement Templates to Personalize Your Big News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

How to Share Your Baby News With Grandparents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Thanksgiving Pregnancy Announcements That All Parents-to-Be Will Fall For Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

9 Creative DIY Pregnancy Announcements for Crafty Parents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Funny Pregnancy Announcements That Are Sure to Amuse Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

11 Fall Pregnancy Announcements That Are Pure Autumnal Bliss Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Dog Pregnancy Announcements for Human Parents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Halloween Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your New Boo Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Stuck on What to Say? 50 Pregnancy Announcement Captions for Every Kind of Reveal Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

When to Tell People You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

30 Gender Reveal Ideas for Celebrating Your Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From One Child to Two: 23 Secrets of Second-Time Parents Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window