Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know

Self-tanners during pregnancy

Tanning doesn't come without risks, even when it comes out of a bottle.

Pregnancy can come with a surprising number of photo opportunities: baby showers , gender reveal parties , babymoons and more. You’re already glowing thanks to changing hormones, but if you’re used to sporting a more bronzed look, you might wonder if your usual tanning routine is safe. Many women need to swap out certain skincare products during pregnancy, as your skin is more vulnerable at this time. Nowadays, you don’t need to sunbathe to achieve a realistic glow — but is there really such a thing as a "safe" tan?

"I tell my patients to really be cautious," says Anthony Rossi, M.D., a dermatologist in New York City. "Pregnancy is a sensitive time."

Here’s what you should consider before hitting the store, the tanning bed or the beach.

Key Takeaways

Self-tanner is generally safe to use during pregnancy , but it's best to check with your doctor first.

Avoid tanning beds and spray tans if you're pregnant.

Wear pregnancy-safe sunscreen and protective clothing when you're spending time in the sun.

Is it safe to use self-tanners during pregnancy?

Self-tanner is generally safe to use during pregnancy — but that’s "safe" with an asterisk, not an exclamation point. The main ingredient in self-tanners, a sugar named dihydroxyacetone (DHA), is approved by the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) for external use only. Trusted SourceFood and Drug Administration Sunless Tanners & BronzersSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceFood and Drug Administration Sunless Tanners & BronzersSee All Sources

DHA darkens your appearance by causing a chemical reaction on the outermost layer of your skin, and only a negligible amount of DHA is absorbed by the body. However, DHA is not approved for use near the eyes, nose or lips, and when it comes to your little one, there are currently no studies on whether it can impact a developing baby.

Be cautious ... Pregnancy is a sensitive time.

Anthony Rossi, M.D.

Even if DHA is safe, self-tanning products can include other ingredients that aren’t okay for you or your baby. It’s always best to check with a doctor beforehand about whether a product is safe for you. And even if you have a tried-and-true tanner you trust, it’s good to do a patch test first — now that your skin is more sensitive, it might react differently from what you remember. Dab a quarter-sized amount on your arm and allow it to fully develop (according to your tanner’s instructions) before rinsing off. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Dermatology AssociationHow to Test Skincare ProductsSee All Sources [2] If a rash or irritation develops, put your tanner on the shelf for now.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Dermatology AssociationHow to Test Skincare ProductsSee All Sources

Get all your pregnancy beauty questions answered on the What to Expect app — along with advice from experts, daily tips, and a supportive community of moms-to-be.

And one more thing: A fake tan does not provide UV protection and won't prevent a sunburn, so you’ll still want to wear sunscreen or protective clothing outside.

Which self-tanners can you use during pregnancy?

Before you use any self-tanner during pregnancy, check its ingredients and application method. Skip any mists or aerosols since you can accidentally inhale them. Tanning pills are also a no-go, as they are not approved by the FDA. Stick to lotions, foams and tanning drops that you can apply by hand (or with a glove or brush).

Some self-tanner brands — including Coola, Coco & Eve and Bondi Sands — market their products as "pregnancy safe" because they don't contain potentially harmful ingredients like retinoids, hydroquinone (a skin-lightening agent), salicylic acid, chemical sunscreens, parabens and phthalates. Trusted SourceFood and Drug AdministrationCosmetics & PregnancySee All Sources [3] However, there isn't a government agency or any third party that can back up these claims and whether these products are really okay during pregnancy.

Trusted SourceFood and Drug AdministrationCosmetics & PregnancySee All Sources

Because the ingredients in the tanners aren't tested on pregnant women, there's no evidence to show whether they're safe or not, Dr. Rossi says.

Can you get a spray tan during pregnancy?

Spray tans might seem like the perfect option for later in pregnancy, when you can barely bend over, let alone rub lotion on your legs. But it's hard to avoid sensitive areas like the eyes and lips during spray tans, and even harder to avoid breathing the product in. For these reasons, you shouldn’t get a spray tan during pregnancy. Instead, consider asking a friend or loved one to have your back — literally — by covering any areas you can’t reach with a self-tanning lotion.

Can you use tanning beds while pregnant?

Dermatologists recommend avoiding tanning beds whether you’re pregnant or not as the UV exposure increases your risk of skin cancer. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionReducing Risk for Skin CancerSee All Sources [4] But pregnant women have even more to think about: Lying in a tanning bed can raise your core temperature and put you at risk of overheating, which can cause birth defects and other problems for you and your baby, especially during the first trimester. Trusted SourceNorthwestern MedicineQuick Dose: How Long Can Pregnant Women Stay Out in the Sun?See All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionReducing Risk for Skin CancerSee All Sources

Trusted SourceNorthwestern MedicineQuick Dose: How Long Can Pregnant Women Stay Out in the Sun?See All Sources

Can you sunbathe while pregnant?

Getting fresh air is a good thing, and sunlight is a great source of vitamin D . But just like tanning beds, sunbathing increases your risk of skin cancer and pregnancy complications caused by overheating. You're also more susceptible to heat when you’re pregnant, and therefore more vulnerable to dehydration, heat exhaustion, heat rash , cramps and heat stroke. UV exposure can also intensify melasma and other types of hyperpigmentations — and that’s likely not what you’re going for.

When outside, be sure to wear a pregnancy-safe, broad-spectrum mineral or physical sunscreen of SPF 30 or higher . You can also protect yourself by wearing a broad-brimmed hat, sunglasses, long-sleeve shirts or sun-protective (UPF) clothing.

"What’s nice about [UPF clothing] is that you can’t sweat them off, as you can with other types of sunscreen," says Anne Chapas, M.D., a dermatologist in New York City. "You can really go all day without worrying about burning your skin."

Everyone deserves to look and feel their best during pregnancy, but your skin (and overall health) is more vulnerable right now. If you’re intent on sporting a tan, go for a non-aerosol self-tanner, and check with a doctor beforehand to ensure the product you pick is a safe option for you.