September’s Birth Flowers and What They Might Say About Your Baby

Updates to sourcing and fact-checked for accuracy.

aster and morning glory

This month’s flowers, aster and morning glory, represent children with hearts of gold.

Come autumn, the weather may be getting cooler, but according to your September baby's birth flowers , this month may actually be warming up in the best way possible. If you have a September child, some say they're likely to be warm and affectionate, with a strong moral compass.

Key Takeaways

Aster and morning glory are September's birth flowers, symbolizing love, innocence, affection, and a bright, warm-hearted personality.

are September's birth flowers, symbolizing love, innocence, affection, and a bright, warm-hearted personality.

Asters are said to represent justice and starry-eyed optimism, while morning glories reflect daily joy and a child’s ever-curious spirit.

and starry-eyed optimism, while morning glories reflect daily joy and a child’s ever-curious spirit.

Celebrate your baby’s September birth flowers through gardens, nursery décor, and crafts like suncatchers, wallpaper, or paper flower projects.

through gardens, nursery décor, and crafts like suncatchers, wallpaper, or paper flower projects.

What are the September birth flowers?

The birth flowers for September are the starry aster and the radiant morning glory. These colorful flowers brighten the garden, and when it comes to predicting (or celebrating) your young one's personality , you can expect the same: an inquisitive child who will light up your day with each of her discoveries and a heart of gold to boot.

"I'm excited for another September baby," says What to Expect Community user personalpenguin. "Aster and morning glory are beautiful birth flowers for september at well."

Aster: A symbol of love, justice and innocence

According to Greek mythology, when Astraea, the goddess of justice and innocence, realized that there were no stars on earth, she began to cry, and in place of her tears, fields of wild aster flowers burst into bloom. Trusted SourceThe Royal Horticultural SocietyAsterSee All Sources [1] Asters are native to Eurasia, Northwest Africa, Canada, and parts of the U.S. Trusted SourceNC State ExtensionAsterSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceThe Royal Horticultural SocietyAsterSee All Sources

Aster

Their star-shaped purple flowers bloom in late summer and early fall. While they look celestial, asters are easy to grow here on earth and are a fan favorite of pollinators and butterflies alike. The Victorians may have associated asters with love and daintiness, but their mythical connection to justice and innocence may have an important role to play in your little one’s personality. Trusted SourceFlora's Interpreter and Fortuna FloraChina AsterSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceFlora's Interpreter and Fortuna FloraChina AsterSee All Sources

Some say you can expect your September baby to be starry-eyed and loving from the get-go, as she develops into a bright child with strong moral values. Just watch out for the toddler (and teen!) years. While her heart is always in the right place, she’ll probably try to push buttons and get away with mischief scot-free.

Morning Glory: Each day brings something new to love

Morning glories are best known for their silky, deep blue flowers that open with the morning light. Their delicate, trumpet-shaped blooms only last a single day, but morning glory vines will continue to bloom and produce new flowers up until the first frost of the season. Perhaps this is why morning glories are often associated with affection and everlasting love — each day brings something new. Trusted SourceGeorgia Department of Natural ResourcesOut My Backdoor: Misunderstood Morning GloriesSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceGeorgia Department of Natural ResourcesOut My Backdoor: Misunderstood Morning GloriesSee All Sources

Morning glory children are affectionate, huggable and a joy to be around. Don’t be surprised if she’s up with the sun and ready to explore — maybe you can join her! You will love seeing each new day through her eyes.

Looking for information about birth flowers for other months of the year? The What to Expect app has tons of birth month-inspired ideas, information on Zodiac signs, plus a Community of parents to chat to about these topics and much more.

Incorporating asters and morning glories into your family's life

There's nothing sweeter than using your child's birth flowers, especially if they're the aster and morning glory, to brighten up areas around your home. From traditional gardening to decor and crafting, here are some ways to add these beautiful flowers to your space:

Plant a magical garden. Both asters and morning glories are easy-going plants that will bloom beyond summer and into fall — though make sure to choose a non-invasive variety of morning glories. Morning glories add a touch of magic to any trellis or fence or try planting different shades of purple asters to create a garden bed fit for fairies.

Create a bouquet of stars. While wild asters and morning glories are too delicate for bouquets once they're picked, Chinese asters make lush bouquets with little effort. Just pick your color combo and watch them shine!

Go blue and purple. Between asters and morning glories, you have some of the most beautiful and relaxing hues of all time — blue and purple, that is. These colors are perfect for your little one's nursery , as they'll (hopefully) put them right to sleep at bedtime.

Try your hand at making a suncatcher. Catch the morning light in cascading blues and greens with a morning glory-patterned suncatcher . There are many easy-to-DIY templates and kits online. This flower art will look lovely (out of reach) in your child’s window, or, let’s be honest, in any window in your home.

Don't forget the endless peel and stick options. Your little one will love exploring the patterns and shapes of a morning glory peel and stick wallpaper accent wall. Check out your favorite made-to-print wallpaper sites for some vibrant options.

Take your crafting skills to the next level. Looking for a DIY project or fun baby shower project to celebrate your little one? Try out these paper morning glories . Hang them in your child’s room or group in everlasting bouquets. And if you really want to step it up a notch, try your hand at some 3-D morning glory embroidery .

Looking for more fun insights about your baby? Discover the astrological traits of your baby with our free Birth Chart Calculator .

Sources

Aster

Show in the article

Aster

Show in the article

China Aster

Show in the article

Out My Backdoor: Misunderstood Morning Glories

Show in the article

What Is Your Baby's Birth Flower?