Shari I Lusskin

Shari I. Lusskin, M.D.

About Shari I. Lusskin, M.D.

Dr. Shari Lusskin is a psychiatrist at Mount Sinai Medical Center and a clinical professor of Psychiatry, Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Science at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.

Dr. Lusskin completed her internship and residency in Psychiatry at New York University Medical Center and Bellevue Hospital in New York City.

She graduated from Williams College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa honor society, before receiving her M.D. from the New York University School of Medicine.

Board certifications

Dr. Lusskin is board-certified by the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Lusskin is affiliated with Mount Sinai Hospital in New York, New York.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Lusskin is the Director of Psychopharmacologic Agents for the Reproductive Toxicology Center, a nonprofit agency that operates Reprotox®, a computerized database on the reproductive and developmental effects of drugs including during pregnancy and lactation.

She founded the Reproductive Psychiatry Program at the New York University School of Medicine, where she served on the faculty through 2012. In 2013, she founded the Mount Sinai Reproductive Psychiatry Journal Club, which she continues to lead.

She is also an expert consultant to the New York State Department of Health Office of Professional Medical Conduct, a fellow of the American Psychiatric Association and a member of the Advisory Board of The Postpartum Resource Center of New York, Inc.

Dr Lusskin has been a member of the President's Advisory Board of Postpartum Support International from 2005–2019. She has given lectures in Europe, Russia, India, Brazil, Israel and Canada, and mentored physicians from around the world.

Publications and research

Dr. Lusskin was an original co-author of the Perinatal Psychiatry sections of UpToDate, and she now serves as a peer reviewer for the textbook.

She has published on topics in reproductive psychiatry and perinatal psychopharmacology in major medical journals and is a peer reviewer for Birth Defects Research, Archives of Women’s Mental Health , and Journal of Women’s Health, among others.

Awards

Dr. Lusskin has been a Castle Connolly Top Doctor since 2018 and was honored as an Exceptional Woman in Medicine by Castle Connolly.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window