Shigella in Babies and Toddlers

shigella in babies and toddlers, pastel-colored pieces of licorice on teal blue background

Learn more about this bacterial infection that can resemble a stomach bug in babies and toddlers, including symptoms, treatments, and how long it lasts.

Poop is a constant in a parent’s life (diapers, potting training), and exposure to it can sometimes make kids sick. One very common and contagious illness, shigellosis , is caused by the shigella bacteria and can lead to diarrhea . Fortunately, shigella is very treatable in babies and toddlers and usually lasts about five to seven days.

Here’s more about shigella bacterial infections, including symptoms to look for, treatments, ways to prevent it, and when to call the doctor.

What is shigella?

Shigella is an illness of the intestinal tract caused by the bacteria of the same name. In fact, there are four types of this bacteria that can infect the gastrointestinal lining.

Kids under the age of 5 are the most susceptible to shigellosis, though anyone can come down with it.

Shigella symptoms in babies and toddlers

Wonder if your tot has a shigella infection? Here are the most common symptoms to watch for: Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionShigella %u2013 ShigellosisSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionShigella %u2013 ShigellosisSee All Sources

Diarrhea, often with blood or mucus in it

Belly pain, tenderness, cramping

Fever

Nausea, vomiting

How do babies and toddlers catch shigella?

Kids can get shigella by touching something contaminated with infected poop. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursShigella Infections (Shigellosis)See All Sources [2] It’s very contagious in close quarters, such as at home, day care, or preschool.

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursShigella Infections (Shigellosis)See All Sources

Shigella bacteria may lurk in bathrooms, on toys or in food if someone with shigellosis makes the meal. Drinking contaminated water or gulping it when swimming with an infected person can also lead to illness.

How long does shigella last in kids?

The symptoms of shigella usually last for about five to seven days, though diarrhea (whether or not it has blood in it) can continue for longer in some cases.

It’s also possible to have shigellosis and not show signs of it, but the bacteria in an infected person’s stool can still linger for up to four weeks.

Children with weakened immune systems are more likely to stay sick for longer, and may need to see a doctor if they're dehydrated or if their symptoms are more severe.

Are you contagious when you have shigella?

Yes, shigella is quite contagious and easily spreads, as it takes exposure to just a little bit of the bacteria to infect another person. And a shigella infection can be passed to others for several weeks, even after the main symptom of diarrhea has subsided.

Shigella treatments for babies and toddlers

Shigella treatments may depend on the severity of the case, though kids generally improve rather quickly without medication (your child’s doctor will help you decide).

Here’s how to address and ease the symptoms, as well as some of the common ways shigella is treated:

Fluid replacement. Increasing the amount of water your child drinks may be all that’s needed for a mild case of shigella infection to prevent dehydration . But if diarrhea is frequent and watery, an over-the-counter rehydration product like Pedialyte might work best to replace the body’s salts. You can make a solution at home, but get some guidance from the pediatrician first.

Rest. Being sick is no fun, but extra sleep or longer naps may help your tot feel better.

Antibiotics. If your child’s shigella infection is more severe, a prescription for an antibiotic may be given in order to kill the bacteria, ease the diarrhea and reduce the risk of spreading it. Antibiotics can shorten the length of time your child has a fever and diarrhea by about two days.

Skip antidiarrheals. Don’t be tempted to try an OTC antidiarrheal medication . This treatment may work for adults, but in children it may worsen a case of shigellosis.

What’s the difference between shigella and norovirus?

While shigella and norovirus seem very similar (they’re spread the same way and they both cause gastrointestinal illness, including diarrhea, stomach pain and nausea), there’s one significant difference between the two. Shigella is brought on by a bacterium and norovirus is a virus.

As a result, shigella can be treated with antibiotics, but that’s not the case with norovirus. It also means the two illnesses are diagnosed differently. A shigella infection can be diagnosed via a lab test that identifies the bacteria in the stool of the sick person. Norovirus tends to be diagnosed by assessing the child's symptoms.

infection can be diagnosed via a lab test that identifies the bacteria in the stool of the sick person. Norovirus tends to be diagnosed by assessing the child's symptoms.

Ways to prevent shigella in your baby or toddler

To prevent shigella in little ones, work to reduce the risk in the first place. Here’s how:

Suds up. Make sure everyone washes hands well with soap and water after using the bathroom, changing diapers and before having a snack or eating or preparing a meal.

Wash surfaces. Scrub and disinfect surfaces like the toilet, playthings, the car seat and the changing table if there’s a case of shigellosis at home.

Stay home. Skip school and day care settings while your child recovers.

Stay on land. Swimming and water parks will have to wait. Since shigella can be transferred via water, avoid these activities for one week after diarrhea has ended.

When to call the doctor

Get in touch with your child’s pediatrician if you notice the telltale symptoms of shigella listed above. And be sure to report signs of dehydration , which require quick attention, including urinating less than usual, no tears when crying, a dry mouth and dizziness or drowsiness.

Hang in there if your child comes down with a shigella infection. With the right treatment and plenty of replacement fluids, your little one will feel better in a matter of days.