Should I Worry About Skin Tags During Pregnancy?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

skin tags during pregnancy

Find out what causes skin tags to pop up and what to do — and not do — about them.

You may be thrown for a loop if a skin tag (or several) forms during pregnancy, but there's no need to worry. While these nubby little pieces of flesh may be annoying or unsightly, they’re harmless. And you’re far from alone. Most adults develop a skin tag in their lifetime.

Key Takeaways

Skin tags during pregnancy are common and harmless. As many as 50% to 60% of adults get skin tags at some point, and they’re especially common during pregnancy due to hormonal changes. They're noncancerous, usually painless, and don’t grow or change over time.

Hormones, weight gain, and friction play a role. Pregnancy hormones, added weight, and skin rubbing against skin or clothing can trigger skin tags. They typically appear in areas like the neck, armpits, under breasts, and inner thighs.

They often go away after birth — but can be easily removed if needed. Many skin tags shrink or disappear after pregnancy or breastfeeding. If they don’t, a dermatologist can remove them quickly and safely. Never try to remove them yourself.

What are pregnancy skin tags?

A skin tag is a small growth of tissue that extends beyond the surface of the skin. Skin tags are noncancerous and typically don't grow or change over time. If you’re unsure whether you have a skin tag or something else, consult a dermatologist.

Luckily, skin tags are usually painless. However, they can become irritated if clothing or jewelry rubs against them, causing twisting, inflammation, or discomfort. In some cases, they can catch on clothing and bleed, Trusted SourceStatPearlsSkin TagsSee All Sources [1] which may be a reason to have them removed by a dermatologist (with a simple in-office procedure).

Skin Tags

"I'm going to get them removed after birth because, being on my neck, they rub on my shirts often," says What to Expect Community mom kbaiken.

What causes skin tags during pregnancy?

Skin tags form due to the overgrowth of the outer layer of skin. They’re most prevalent in older people and expectant mothers, likely spurred on by hormonal changes (and you’ve got plenty of those going on right now).

Pregnancy weight gain may also contribute, as can genetics — people with a family history of skin tags are more likely to develop them. Unfortunately, there's no proven way to prevent them.

"I have gotten so many on my neck and a few between my boobs," says Community mom Kmbt25. "Pregnancy symptoms are so weird."

Noticing new spots in your second trimester or third trimester? The What to Expect app’s My Journal tool lets you easily log when skin tags appear, where they’re located, any irritation, and whether they change. It’s a simple way to keep track — and helpful if you discuss them with your provider.

What do skin tags look like?

A skin tag is a flesh-colored (or slightly darker) growth that may hang from a short, thin stalk. Most are small, between 1 and 5 millimeters. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicSkin Tags (Acrochordons)See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicSkin Tags (Acrochordons)See All Sources

pregnancy skin tags

These excess skin growths usually appear in warm, moist skin surfaces and often on places where there’s friction from skin rubbing against skin or clothing. So they may sprout in the folds of your neck, armpits, torso, inner thighs, under your breasts, or on your genitals. If you touch the skin tag, it will be soft and easy to move back and forth.

Will skin tags that developed during pregnancy go away?

There's a good chance they will. Many skin tags shrink or disappear on their own after you give birth. If they don’t go away completely, they often become smaller and easier to remove (should you choose to do so).

"I got sooooo many last pregnancy, and they all disappeared a few months after birth!" says Community mom Brantnor.

"I've heard some people's will disappear after giving birth, but mine didn't after my first pregnancy so I had my doctor remove them," says Community member laadeedaa.

How are skin tags removed?

If your skin tags are bothersome (they become irritated or persistent after pregnancy), your doctor can easily remove them using methods such as:

Freezing with liquid nitrogen

Cauterizing

Snipping them off with scissors (a quick procedure)

Once removed, a skin tag usually won’t return in the same spot, though new ones can form elsewhere.

Note that while it’s possible to safely remove skin tags during pregnancy, experts often recommend waiting until after you’re finished breastfeeding , since the skin tags may go away on their own.

Just because it’s simple for your dermatologist to remove a skin tag doesn't mean you should give it a try yourself. Never attempt to cut off a skin tag on your own, as this can cause bleeding or infection. And avoid DIY products that claim to burn off skin tags — these are unregulated and can be unsafe. Your best option is to leave skin tag removal up to your doctor.

"I've had a handful appear during both pregnancies," says Community mom pregmama13. "After my first, I got some removed and plan to do it again after I give birth this time. It's quick and simple in my experience."

When to talk to your doctor about skin tags

Talk to your doctor if you'd like a skin tag removed. And see your doctor or a dermatologist if a skin tag:

Becomes painful

Changes color or is a different color than the surrounding skin

Bleeds or has raw areas

Also seek medical advice if a skin growth feels firm and doesn't move easily, as it may not be a skin tag.