Should Your Baby Get the Hepatitis A Vaccine?

Updates to sourcing.

A baby lies in a crib with a bandage on the leg

From how many doses your little love needs to why this shot is such a big win for their health, here's the scoop on the HepA vaccine.

Your child's pediatrician may have mentioned the hepatitis A vaccine during one of your little one's well visits. Here's everything you need to know about this important vaccine, including the number of doses your baby will get.

What is hepatitis A?

Hepatitis A is a very contagious liver infection that is common in many parts of the world. The good news is that thanks to the HepA vaccine, new cases of hepatitis A are estimated to have fallen to around 3,300 a year in the United States, a significant drop from about 31,000 annually when the vaccine was first recommended in 1996. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionHepatitis A SurveillanceSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionHepatitis A SurveillanceSee All Sources

The hepatitis A virus is spread through close contact with an infected person, through contact with the feces of an infected person, by touching items or objects with the virus on them (one more reason to wash your hands frequently!), and by eating or drinking contaminated food or water. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicHepatitis ASee All Sources [2]

Hepatitis A

"Hep A can be in foods that we buy," says Gina Posner , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "This disease can make you very sick and can even kill. The vaccine prevents against it."

KEY TAKEAWAYS

Hepatitis A is a very contagious liver infection. Though it's less common now in the United States thanks to the vaccine, there are still thousands of cases each year.

Some people with hepatitis A have mild or no symptoms , as well as no long-term effects. But this infection can be very dangerous and even deadly for others, which is why childhood vaccination is critical.

Luckily, the HepA vaccine is safe and effective. Your child will get a first dose between 12 and 23 months at a check-up followed by a second dose six months later.

Hepatitis A can last a few weeks to several months, and most people recover without any long-term effects. However, don't let the relatively short duration fool you, because for some people, the infection can lead to liver failure and even death.

Symptoms of the illness can include:

Fever

Loss of appetite

Stomach pain

Vomiting

Jaundice (yellow skin or eyes)

Dark urine

Clay-colored bowel movements

The tricky part with Hepatitis A is that not everyone shows symptoms, including young children, which makes it very easy for the virus to go undetected and spread.

When should babies get the hepatitis A vaccine?

The hepatitis A vaccine is safe and effective and provides long-term protection. This vaccine only protects against hepatitis A, but there’s a separate vaccine for hepatitis B . Right now, there isn’t a vaccine for hepatitis C.

The first HepA vaccine dose should be given between 12 and 23 months at one of your child’s well-baby visits . The second dose should be given at least six months later.

This disease can make you very sick and can even kill. The vaccine prevents against it.

Gina Posner, M.D.

Those who were older than 1 at the time when the hepatitis A vaccine was routinely recommended should also complete the two-dose vaccination schedule, especially before international travel.

Your doctor should be able to address any concerns you may have about the HepA vaccine, its symptoms, and the protection it provides. Keep in mind that the vaccine is crucial to your baby's health as well as the health of your family, friends, and community.