Should You Keep Your Baby’s Name a Secret? Why Some Parents Wait — and Others Don’t

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

heidi murkoff

"My partner and I have picked out a few names for our baby, and now it seems the world wants to know what they are. We'd like to keep this our little secret until our little bundle arrives — is that okay?"

Yes, absolutely, no matter how often the interrogators in your family and friend circles tell you otherwise. There’s nothing wrong with keeping your baby’s name secret while you're pregnant, if that’s the route you want to go. Plenty of expectant parents wait until their baby is born to announce the name.

Of course, there are arguments to be made for revealing your chosen baby name (or names) sooner than that, so you will ultimately have to weigh the pros and cons of keeping the name a secret or sharing it, then make a decision.

Here's why you may want to keep your baby name a secret until after your new arrival is born and why you might decide to tell the world your choice before the big day.

Key Takeaways:

Keeping your baby’s name a secret can help you avoid unwanted opinions. Waiting until after birth lets you steer clear of feedback from (well-meaning) family and friends. Plus, it’s something special you and your partner can keep just for the two of you during your pregnancy.

Sharing the name before birth can help loved ones feel more connected. It invites excitement, personalization, and a deeper bond with your baby even before they arrive.

Ultimately, there’s no right or wrong choice. Whether you share or keep it secret, what matters most is choosing what feels right for you and your growing family.

Reasons to keep your baby's name a secret

Other family members may be offended

Sharing the moniker you’ve chosen before your baby boy is born gives your Uncle Arthur IV months to nag you about why you should go with Arthur V instead. Or if you’ve chosen to name your daughter after your mother, your mother-in-law will have time to stew over why she was overlooked.

But when you wait until the baby’s arrival, the name takes a backseat to how adorable and perfect the new grandchild/niece/nephew is — and relatives will probably get over their gripes a whole lot faster.

Names come with baggage

People always have associations with a name — a nasty ex, say, or a boring co-worker — that makes them automatically critical of it. And if you love the name you’ve chosen, do you really want to hear about a bully of the same name who teased your best friend in third grade?

"My sister-in-law is also pregnant and she loves the name Fiona. I was sharing that with someone today and they were instantly like, 'Nooo, that name will just make people think of Fiona from Shrek,'" says What to Expect Community mom hdonae. "That made me reconsider telling people our favorite names for our baby. It’s hard enough to find a name my husband and I agree with … let alone the agreement/opinions of other people."

Once your baby is born, the name will be his and his alone, and all those reminders will be forgotten.

A secret baby name builds anticipation

Especially if you’re sharing the baby’s sex with family and friends, it might be nice to let the name be a surprise. After nine months, they'll be dying to know what you picked and excited about the big reveal.

Having your own little secret is special

When it feels like everyone has an opinion or advice about every aspect of your pregnancy — "You’re carrying big !", "It’s definitely a girl!", and "You are going to breastfeed, right?" — it’s nice to have something that’s just for you.

Family and friends will feel more included

Your family and friends will not only be touched that you shared your baby name with them ahead of time, but they may even feel more connected to your pregnancy and baby. Picture your mom talking to your baby in utero: "Hi, Austin. Grandma loves you!"

“In my culture we name the baby as soon as we find out the gender and the name is shared as a decision made, not as an idea open for feedback. I think it’s very nice because everyone connects more with the child,” says What to Expect Community mom khpmom34.

Monogrammed baby gear

You’ll get plenty of personalized towels, blankets, diaper bags and clothes as baby-shower gifts if you share the name in advance. This may seem like a trivial point (and, okay, it is), but baby items with your child’s name on them will usually be the ones you save as keepsakes.

You claim dibs

If you and a few of your friends are all pregnant around the same time, announcing the baby name you picked puts it off-limits (or at least makes it yours first) for anyone who might deliver before you — especially if the name is pretty popular. He might not be the only Finn in your crowd, but he’ll be the first.

People won’t have to guess

Or needle you by whining, "What’s the big deal? It’s just a name!" Or say things like, "As long as you don’t name him Rufus!" when indeed that’s the name you’ve chosen.

Once everyone holds your beautiful baby, they will all agree that his name — whether or not you shared it beforehand — suits him perfectly. That’s the thing about names: Children make them what they are, not the other way around.

Still deciding whether to share your baby’s name or keep it a surprise? Get guidance, support, and real parent insights in the What to Expect app .

Here’s to your baby’s beautiful name, secret or not,

Heidi Murkoff

Baby Name Finder

Get inspiration to find for the perfect baby name.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Baby Names , 2025. WhatToExpect.com, 8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name , September 2025. Social Security Administration, Top 10 Baby Names of 2024 , 2025.

Updates history

September 29, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,923 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

When to Tell People You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

I Waited Until Birth to Find Out Boy or Girl — the Surprise Was Harder Than I Expected Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Why You Don't Have to Wait Until 12 Weeks to Reveal Your Pregnancy Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Traditional Baby Naming Ceremonies Are Getting a Modern Twist — Here's How to Plan Your Own Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

What to Write in a Baby Birth Announcement Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

Does Your Toddler Know You’re Pregnant Before You Do? Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

I Wish I Never Told Anyone My Due Date — Here’s Why Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

30 Gender Reveal Ideas for Celebrating Your Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Why Your Family Health History Matters Before Baby Arrives Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

How to Share Your Baby News With Grandparents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

How to Plan the Ultimate Gender Reveal Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Will Baby Be Your Clone or a Total Plot Twist? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Not Sure If You’re Ready For a Baby? The Big Questions to Ask Before You Start Trying Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window