Should You Take Vitamins or Supplements While Breastfeeding?

breastfeeding vitamins and supplements

Are vitamins and supplements such as biotin, collagen and melatonin safe to take while breastfeeding or pumping? Learn which vitamins are considered safe for nursing moms (and which should be avoided).

You scrutinized every product label and ingredient list while you were pregnant. So do you need to keep up the caution while you’re breastfeeding or pumping?

If you're nursing, the good news is that many of the rules are more relaxed than they were when your baby was in utero. (Sushi and a glass of wine are now okay!)

But when it comes to supplements, conservatism is still the name of the game. While certain vitamins may be recommended by your doctor if you aren’t able to meet your nutritional needs through foods, herbal pills and potions generally should be avoided unless your practitioner specifically suggests them.

Here’s more on the vitamins and supplements that are generally considered safe to take while you're nursing (and what you’re better off avoiding), and remember to always ask your practitioner if you have any questions.

Should you take vitamins while breastfeeding?

A nutritious diet was vital while you were growing your baby, and now that you’re making milk for her, it’s just as important. But does that mean you need to pop a vitamin? Not necessarily.

While it’s worth paying attention to make sure you’re getting enough of nutrients like calcium, folic acid, magnesium, vitamin B12 and DHA while breastfeeding, supplements aren’t a must for everyone.

Breastfeeding women, like all people, should aim to meet their nutritional needs primarily through healthy food choices . Think plenty of lean protein, whole grains, low-fat dairy, and fresh fruits and vegetables.

That said, a daily multivitamin (or the prenatal vitamin you took while you were pregnant) can act as an insurance policy to help fill in any nutritional gaps. And it’s a must for breastfeeding moms who are struggling with getting enough of certain nutrients.

Women who are vegetarian and vegan, in particular, should take a vitamin B12 supplement, since the nutrient is found in animal-based foods, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

The bottom line? A healthy, well-rounded diet is the ideal way to meet your nutritional needs. But ideal and real are two different things. So if you’re having trouble packing all those vitamins and minerals in, talk with your doctor. Together, you can decide whether taking a vitamin is right for you while you're nursing.

Always do your research to ensure you’re buying a safe product, only purchase supplements that have been certified by NSF International or USP, and speak to your doctor first.

Which vitamins and supplements are safe to take while breastfeeding?

Daily multivitamins or prenatal vitamins are often recommended for breastfeeding mothers who aren’t able to meet their nutritional needs through food alone. But what about standalone vitamins or herbal supplements — are they safe for nursing moms?

Ultimately, it depends on what you’re thinking about taking. If you and your doctor determine you need more of an individual vitamin or nutrient, supplementing is usually safe, provided you stick with the recommended amount and avoid very high doses, which could have negative health effects (that goes for anyone, not just people who are breastfeeding!).

As for herbs or other supplements? Though herbal products may be natural, that doesn’t necessarily make them safe. Most herbal supplements haven’t been well researched in pregnant or breastfeeding women and nursing babies, so experts don't know for sure what the effects or risks might be.

And, unlike pharmaceuticals, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) doesn’t require supplements be tested or proven safe before they go to market. For these reasons, you’re generally better off playing it safe and steering clear altogether.

If you must take an herbal or homeopathic supplement, talk with your doctor first and err on the side of caution. Take the smallest dose you can, and take the supplement immediately after nursing to minimize the amount of the supplement that could potentially end up in your breast milk, recommends the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).

Have a specific vitamin or supplement in mind? Here are some of the most common ones that breastfeeding moms wonder about — and whether they’re okay to take.

Biotin

Biotin, or vitamin B7, is an essential nutrient that plays a key role in metabolic function and is found in foods like beef, salmon and eggs. (But despite what you might have heard, research shows that it probably won’t help your hair regain its pregnancy glory.) And in fact, many women have lower levels of biotin while breastfeeding, though experts don’t fully understand why.

Supplementing is usually considered safe if you’re having trouble getting your biotin fill, provided you get the green light from your doctor first. Just stick with an option that delivers the recommended 35 mcg daily and avoid taking very high doses.

Collagen

Thinking about trying this trendy supplement to give your skin or nails a boost? Studies have shown collagen to be safe for the general population, but there’s not much research specifically looking at breastfeeding or pregnant women. So your safest bet is to hold off until after you’ve weaned.

Echinacea

The herbal remedy is commonly touted as a cold- and flu-fighter, since it’s thought that echinacea could potentially help the immune system stave off infections. But hold off on taking it for now: There hasn’t been enough research conducted to determine whether echinacea is safe while breastfeeding or during pregnancy, according to the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health (NCCIH).

Elderberry

Another herbal remedy thought to potentially help fight off cold or flu symptoms, it also hasn’t been studied adequately in pregnant or breastfeeding women, the NCCIH says. For that reason, you’re better off steering clear.

Magnesium

Magnesium plays a role in more than 300 biochemical roles in the body — including getting calcium into your bones. It’s important to make sure you’re getting the recommended 310 mg (for 19- to 30-year-olds) to 320 mg (for 31-year-olds and up) daily while breastfeeding, though lactating women aren’t at particularly high risk for deficiency, according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH).

What’s more, supplemental magnesium can be harmful in high doses. So try to get your fill of the mineral from foods like nuts, seeds, whole grains, peanut butter and black beans. If your doctor determines that you’re falling short, you can discuss options for supplementing safely.

Melatonin

Having trouble following that old advice to sleep when the baby sleeps (even though you’re exhausted)? Though melatonin is often used as a sleep aid, try to stick with non-supplement sleep strategies to help you doze off. There’s not enough research on melatonin to say whether it’s safe for breastfeeding or pregnant women, the NCCIH says.

Turmeric

Add a spoonful of ground turmeric to your cooking, if you’d like. But steer clear of taking turmeric capsules or supplements for a health boost until after you’ve weaned. While culinary doses of the spice are generally considered safe for nursing moms, not much is known about the safety or risks of popping turmeric pills, the NCCIH says.

Vitamin B12

It’s crucial to get your fill of this nutrient both during pregnancy and while breastfeeding, since falling short could contribute to infant neural tube defects, anemia or failure to thrive.

If you’re having trouble getting the recommended 2.8 mcg daily through foods, talk to your doctor about supplementing. That’s especially important if you’re vegetarian or vegan, since vitamin B12 is primarily found in animal-based foods like meat, poultry, dairy and eggs.

Vitamin C

Vitamin C plays an important role in tissue repair and helping with iron absorption, so getting the recommended 120 mg daily while breastfeeding is a must.

Most women can make that happen by eating a variety of fresh fruits and vegetables — a single medium orange and 1/2 cup of cooked broccoli gives you all the C you need for the day. If you need to supplement, check with your doctor first. While high doses of vitamin C generally aren’t considered harmful, they could cause gastrointestinal discomfort.

Vitamin D

There’s no debating that vitamin D, found in foods like milk, egg yolks and salmon, plays a key role in calcium absorption, which is a must for healthy bones for both your baby and you. So if a blood test shows that your levels are low, supplementing may be a good idea. Just talk with your doctor first to determine how much you actually need.

Zinc

Breastfeeding can deplete your body’s stores of zinc — one reason why it’s recommended that lactating women get 12 mg daily. As with other vitamins and minerals, food (like oysters, beef, pork, pumpkin seeds and beans) should be your primary source. But if you’re falling short, talk with your doctor about supplementing. It’s generally considered safe to do so, provided you stay well below the upper limit of 40 mg daily, which can be toxic.

Other vitamins and supplements to avoid while breastfeeding

The fact is, most herbs and supplements haven’t been extensively studied in breastfeeding moms, so it’s hard to say with certainty whether they’re safe for you or your baby. In other words? Experts don’t know what they don’t know.

If a supplement hasn’t been proven safe for lactating women, your best bet is to avoid it altogether until you’ve weaned. If that’s not an option, talk with your doctor to learn more about the possible risks. Together, you can decide whether the benefits of trying a certain supplement are worth it, or if you’re ultimately better waiting until you’ve stopped breastfeeding.