Should You Get the Flu Shot When You're Pregnant?

Updated with latest expert recommendations.

pregnant woman getting flu shot

Getting the flu shot while you’re pregnant is not only safe — it’s a very smart move. Learn how getting a flu shot during pregnancy protects both you and your baby.

Time to roll up your sleeve for your flu shot! Getting the flu shot each year is a must for everyone, but this seasonal vaccine is especially important for moms-to-be, says the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsThe Flu Vaccine and PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsThe Flu Vaccine and PregnancySee All Sources

That’s because if you come down with influenza (aka the flu) when you’re expecting, you’re at greater risk of developing serious complications like pneumonia or other acute respiratory illnesses, which could land you in the hospital. Another huge reason to get the flu shot during pregnancy is that it helps protect your baby after she’s born and until she’s old enough for her own shot at 6 months old.

"One of the most important things a pregnant woman can do to protect herself and her baby during flu season is to get vaccinated," says Shannon Smith , M.D., a board-certified OB/GYN and partner at Brigham Faulkner Ob/Gyn Associates in Boston, Massachusetts, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

Read on for some of the most common questions and answers about the flu shot and pregnancy, including the best time to receive yours.

Key Takeaways

The flu shot is safe during pregnancy and strongly recommended by experts. ACOG recommends annual flu vaccination for moms-to-be, and millions of pregnant women have received it safely over the years.

It helps protect both you and your baby. Pregnancy makes you more vulnerable to serious flu complications, including pneumonia and hospitalization. Getting vaccinated can lower those risks and help pass protective antibodies to your little one, offering protection after birth.

Get vaccinated early in flu season if you can , but it’s never too late. The best time is by October, though getting your shot later still provides important protection for you and your growing baby.

Is the flu shot during pregnancy safe?

Yes, the flu shot during pregnancy is safe and effective. The seasonal flu shot has been given safely to millions of pregnant women over many years and has not been shown to cause harm to expecting moms or their babies. What’s more, it offers critical protection to you and baby at a time when you’re both more vulnerable to complications from the flu.

After your baby is born, it’s also safe and strongly recommended to get the flu shot if you’re breastfeeding. In fact, women who get the flu vaccine while pregnant or breastfeeding also develop antibodies against flu that they can share with their infants through their breast milk.

“I got [the flu shot] during my pregnancy last year,” says What to Expect Community user secondtimearound2026. “It’s safe and recommended. I’m exclusively breastfeeding now and I’ll get it this fall as well.”

Track pregnancy vaccine and appointment reminders in the What to Expect app , where you can get trimester-specific health guidance and connect with other expectant moms.

Should I get the flu shot while I'm pregnant?

You should definitely get the flu shot when you’re pregnant. The flu can be dangerous during pregnancy, since pregnant women are at a higher risk of (and more likely to be hospitalized with) serious flu complications like pneumonia.

"Pregnancy naturally weakens the immune system and places increased demands on the heart and lungs, making expectant mothers more vulnerable to severe illness from the flu," Dr. Smith explains. "This can lead to serious complications such as pneumonia, hospitalization, and even preterm delivery."

Getting the flu shot each year, including when you’re pregnant, offers the greatest protection against the influenza viruses that are expected to cause the most problems in a particular year. It also significantly increases the chance that you will escape the season flu-free.

Plus, on the off-chance that you get the vaccine and still get sick with the flu, having the flu shot means your symptoms will probably be milder and you'll be less likely to develop complications that require hospitalization.

What's more, getting the flu shot during pregnancy isn’t just for your own protection: Your growing baby benefits too, even after you've given birth. Plenty of research shows that babies whose moms got the flu vaccine during pregnancy are less likely to catch the virus after they're born, and they have some protection against the virus until they’re old enough to get their own shot at 6 months. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsRecommendations for Prevention and Control of Influenza in Children, 2025-2026: Policy StatementSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsRecommendations for Prevention and Control of Influenza in Children, 2025-2026: Policy StatementSee All Sources

In addition, babies whose moms got the flu shot while pregnant are also less likely to be born prematurely, are bigger and healthier, and are even less likely to be hospitalized from the flu or its complications during the first year compared to babies whose moms weren't vaccinated.

“I got mine,” says What to Expect Community user smallfry1228. “It’s safe for baby and I want to be protected heading into flu season.”

Where can I get a flu shot when I'm pregnant?

Many OB/GYN, midwife, and family medicine practices offer the flu shot to pregnant patients. You can also stop by a flu shot clinic at your local pharmacy or supermarket.

Keep in mind that you’ll have to stick with the needle when it comes to your seasonal flu vaccine, since the nasal spray vaccine (which is made from live flu virus) is not approved for pregnant women.

When should I get a flu shot during pregnancy?

Flu season can last from as early as October until as late as May. ACOG recommends getting a flu shot as early in each flu season as possible (preferably early fall) so you’re protected from the start. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists2026 Maternal Immunization ScheduleSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists2026 Maternal Immunization ScheduleSee All Sources

But it’s never too late to get immunized. So if you haven’t yet been vaccinated against the flu this year, go now! And remember: The vaccine is updated yearly, and immunity wanes with time — so even if you got the flu shot last year, you need to get one again this season.

Even if you’ve never gotten the flu vaccine before or haven’t been seriously ill from the flu in the past, pregnancy is a critical time to take extra precautions.

Dr. Shannon Smith, an OB/GYN in Boston and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

Does the flu shot have mercury in it?

Only some multi-dose flu vaccines contain a tiny amount of thimerosal, an ethyl mercury-based compound that’s used to prevent the growth of harmful bacteria in multi-dose vials. Research has repeatedly proven that exposure to thimerosal in this (or any) vaccine is not harmful, although it may cause minor redness and swelling at the injection site.

ACOG says that thimerosal is safe for pregnant women and doesn't cause any harm to them or their growing babies. But if you’re still uneasy about it, you can ask for a thimerosal-free flu shot. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsVaccine Safety During PregnancySee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsVaccine Safety During PregnancySee All Sources

Bottom line: It’s understandable if you have concerns about the flu shot during pregnancy. But there are many reasons to get this seasonal vaccine when you’re pregnant. The flu shot helps keep you and your little one safe at a time when you’re both more susceptible to dangerous flu complications.

"Even if you’ve never gotten the flu vaccine before or haven’t been seriously ill from the flu in the past, pregnancy is a critical time to take extra precautions," Dr. Smith says. "Getting vaccinated is a simple but powerful way to protect both you and your baby."

As always, if you still have any questions or concerns, discuss them with your doctor. Hopefully, they’ll be able to reassure you and help ease any doubts you might have.