Should I Play Music for My Baby in the Womb?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Paper illustration of a violin shape

Fetal hearing kicks in by the second trimester, so feel free to chat, read, and play soft tunes (sans the belly speakers).

All parents want the best for their child — even before that child is born. That's human (or human parent) nature. But in trying to supply your baby-to-be with the best, it's important to keep some perspective — and keep your motives in mind before switching on the Mozart.

Key Takeaways:

Fetal hearing develops in the second trimester, but Mozart won't make a prodigy. There's no proof that prenatal music boosts intelligence, and loud or frequent music could even disrupt your baby's natural sleep patterns.

Use music and words to bond — not to "boost." Talk or read to your bump (no speakers needed) so your baby learns your voice, and remember the soothing benefits of music are even stronger after birth.

Keep it gentle, simple, and baby-centered. Play music at a moderate volume, skip amplification on your belly, and focus on connecting with your baby over giving him a brain boost.

As you know, the fetus' ability to hear begins to develop during the second trimester. But whether an in-utero concerto gives the baby a head start in education (or on a musical career) hasn't been proven.

Some experts even worry that it can be harmful if it signals the beginning of a very premature pushy-parent, which places too much emphasis on achievement at a too-early age.

Babyhood (including fetushood) and childhood should be a time of simple pleasures, they say. There's also the theoretical risk that parents may unwittingly disrupt the natural sleep patterns of their fetus as they attempt to turn the womb into a classroom — actually hampering development instead of nurturing it.

That said, there's probably nothing wrong with providing a uterine environment that's rich in music and language, and it's an easy way for parents to bond with their baby-to-be.

"My baby loves music and I love playing it for him!' says What to Expect Community mom ChambrayMama2024. "Sometimes I turn up my phone or turn the radio up loud when I'm driving. In both cases, he wakes up and wiggles and kicks, and it makes me so happy."

Speaking or reading to your baby while he's in the womb (no amplification necessary) will guarantee that your baby will know your voice at birth. (Of course, such recognition is probable even if you just spend a lot of time talking in general.)

From talking to your bump to first cuddles, make every moment count. Get the What to Expect app for expert bonding advice, playtime prompts, and newborn soothing strategies.

Playing classical music may increase the likelihood that your newborn will appreciate, and even be soothed by, these sounds — though it's been shown that exposure to music and literature has a much more significant effect once your baby is actually born than it does prenatally (so keep the Mozart handy once baby's arrived ).

And don't underestimate the power of touch. Since this sense also begins to develop in utero, stroking your abdomen may also help strengthen the bond between you and your baby.

So turn on the Mozart, bring on the Bach — pull out those dusty Shakespeare sonnets and read away to your belly if you like. Just make sure you're doing it all to get closer to your baby — not to get your baby closer to an Ivy League degree.

Hoping you and your baby make beautiful music together!

Heidi Murkoff

What To Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Your Baby's Tiny Ears Are Tuning In — Here's When Hearing Develops in the Womb , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Musical Play for Babies and Toddlers , September 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, https://publications.aap.org/pediatriccare/book/342/chapter-abstract/5741811/Promoting-Healthy-Development , January 2017. PLoS One , A Description of Externally Recorded Womb Sounds in Human Subjects During Gestation , May 2018.

Updates history

October 28, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Your Baby’s Tiny Ears Are Tuning In — Here’s When Hearing Develops in the Womb Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Is Loud Music Dangerous When Pregnant? Here's How to Keep Your Baby's Ears Safe Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Musical Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Can Your Baby Feel It When You Rub Your Belly? The Sweet Science Will Melt You Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Thump-Thump! Here's When You'll Hear Your Baby's Heartbeat and Every Amazing Week-by-Week Change Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

When Does Your Baby Develop a Brain? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Do Babies Taste Food in the Womb? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

How Can I Get My Baby to Move in Utero? Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

Fetal Heart Monitors During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Tiny Fingers, Big Impact: How Your Baby’s Sense of Touch Develops in Utero Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

20 Baby Lullaby Songs to Help Your Little One Fall Asleep Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Can White Noise Help Your Baby Sleep Better? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Best Activities for a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The Best Toddler Songs to Sing Together Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Reading Books to Your Baby or Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window