Should I Be Worried If I Don't Have Breast Tenderness in Early Pregnancy?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

Pregnant but no breast pain yet? Here's what you need to know.

"I am 6 weeks pregnant and my breasts are not sore at all. Should I be worried?"

Most moms-to-be will worry about something over the course of their pregnancy. For some women, a lack of symptoms can seem like a cause for concern too.

"I just had my first baby last year and my breasts were so sore first trimester, I wanted to cry when they were touched," says What to Expect Community user preggomom2b22. "This time I have no soreness at all and I’ve been very concerned."

Key Takeaways

Not all pregnant women experience breast soreness early on. While tenderness is a common symptom caused by hormonal changes, fat buildup, and increased blood flow, its timing and intensity vary widely.

Every pregnancy is different. Some women feel breast pain right after conception, while others don’t notice any changes until much later — or not at all.

Lack of soreness isn’t usually a cause for concern. Symptoms fluctuate, and it’s normal not to “feel pregnant” early on — but you can always check with your doctor for reassurance.

In general, breast growth and the pain that can come with it are common early pregnancy symptoms, caused by surging hormones, a build-up of fat, and an increased blood flow to the area. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsChanges During PregnancySee All Sources [1] But because every pregnancy is different, it's important to remember that every pregnant woman's symptoms are different too, especially when it comes to pregnancy breast changes.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsChanges During PregnancySee All Sources

Some women notice breast tenderness as soon as a few days after conception, whereas others don't experience it until weeks later. For some, the soreness starts early and stays late. For others, it starts late and doesn't last very long at all. Some moms-to-be have nipples that feel more tender and may protrude more than usual; many women notice that their areolas become darker, bigger, and possibly spotted. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources

Bottom line? It's really hard to "feel" pregnant in the early months before you're showing and feeling the baby move . So I completely understand your concern!

Soon enough, you'll start feeling some symptoms (in other words, be careful what you wish for!). But if you need more reassurance, you can always check in with your doctor. And remember: You can always keep track of symptoms throughout your pregnancy using the My Journal tool in the What to Expect app , plus get tips for managing other symptoms.

All the best,

Heidi Murkoff

Sources

Changes During Pregnancy

Show in the article

Skin Conditions During Pregnancy

Show in the article

Breast Tenderness and Changes During Pregnancy

Pregnancy Symptoms: 14 Early Signs of Pregnancy

Breast Pain (Mastalgia)

Breast Pain: 10 Reasons Your Breasts May Hurt