Should I Use Sunscreen When I'm Pregnant?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

pregnant woman in bikini sitting on swimming pool steps in the sun, sunscreen and sun protection during pregnancy

Daily sun protection is a must during pregnancy. Here's how to choose a safe sunscreen and protect your more-sensitive skin from sun damage and discoloration.

It's important to use sunscreen whenever you're outside — especially during pregnancy, when your skin tends to be more sensitive than usual. Sunscreen will help protect you from long-term skin damage and also help minimize discoloration that often shows up during pregnancy.

Read on to learn more about how to choose the best sunscreen and why it's important to apply it diligently.

Key Takeaways

Sun protection matters more during pregnancy. Increased skin sensitivity can make you more prone to conditions like melasma and hyperpigmentation, so consistent sunscreen use helps prevent discoloration as well as long-term sun damage.

Choose mineral, broad-spectrum protection. Look for sunscreens with SPF 30 or higher that protect against both UVA and UVB rays. Formulas with zinc oxide or titanium dioxide are a top pick during pregnancy because they sit on the skin and are less likely to irritate sensitive skin.

Smart sun habits go beyond sunscreen. Stay in the shade during peak hours, reapply sunscreen every two hours, wear protective clothing and accessories, and stay hydrated to reduce your risk of overheating and sun-related complications.

Why is using sunscreen especially important when I'm pregnant?

Not only will sunscreen protect you from skin cancer, but it will also shield your skin from discoloration and other pregnancy-related conditions that can be exacerbated by sun exposure.

Because your skin is more sensitive when you're pregnant, melasma and other forms of hyperpigmentation — blotches, patches, dots, or lines that can vary in color from reddish-purple to brown, blue, or gray — are more likely and can become more pronounced when you're exposed to the sun.

"I wear SPF on my face every day as part of my normal skincare routine," says What to Expect Community member lols1305. "I'm also going on a beach holiday in a couple of weeks' time and will be wearing all-over body sunscreen."

Which sunscreens are pregnancy safe?

When choosing a sunscreen during pregnancy , look for broad-spectrum sunscreens, which offer protection against both UVA and UVB rays. Make sure they also have a sun protection factor (SPF) of 30 or higher.

Products in which the active ingredient is zinc oxide and/or titanium dioxide — also called mineral or physical sunscreens — are a good choice for pregnant women. They're hypoallergenic and sit on the top of the skin rather than being absorbed. Choose formulas labeled water-resistant, even if you don't plan on taking a dip.

While you'll want to avoid harsh chemicals, don't worry too much about every ingredient. If you're unsure about whether a particular sunscreen is safe during pregnancy, check the label and talk to your doctor.

Another tip: Don’t use sunscreen made with insect repellent , since it's less effective. If you need repellent, buy it separately and apply it after sunscreen.

How can I stay safe in the sun when I'm pregnant?

If you're planning to spend a lot of time outdoors during your pregnancy, protect yourself from the sun by taking the following steps:

Try to stay inside during peak sun hours, from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., if you can. "If we go outside, we mostly go out after 4 p.m. or 5 p.m., when the sun is further away from us, the heat has settled out, and we have some shade in our yard," says Community mom hopeful4xrnbwmom.

Seek shade whenever possible, especially when the sun is strongest.

Apply sunscreen at least 15 minutes before you go outside. Use about 1 ounce (a shot glass-worth), and thoroughly cover all exposed skin. Reapply every two hours.

Use lip balm with an SPF of 30 or higher . Your lips can get sunburned, too.

Cover as much skin as possible, and choose lightweight, breathable fabric with a tight weave. Hold it up to the light — the less that passes through, the better.

Wear a wide-brimmed hat and sunglasses, ideally ones that block 99% of both UVA and UVB rays.

Stay cool. In addition to seeking shade and wearing protective clothing, stay hydrated . Pregnant women are more susceptible to heat exhaustion , so if you feel lightheaded or dizzy, drink some water and find air conditioning as soon as possible.

Remember, you don't have to stay inside just because you’re pregnant. By all means, get out there and have fun! Just be sure to make sun protection a priority.

And while you’re soaking up safe sunshine, let the What to Expect app keep you covered with daily tips and pregnancy-safe product guides, so you can feel confident and cared for throughout your pregnancy.