Should You Worry About Forever Chemicals During Your Pregnancy?

Minor copy changes.

pregnant woman drinking from a water bottle

These toxins, called PFAS, can be tough to avoid, but there are things worth doing to lower your exposure.

When it comes to having a healthy pregnancy, there's a whole list of shoulds and should-nots that are constantly crossing your mind. (Daily walks , yes! Sushi , no!) But what about forever chemicals, or what experts call PFAS?

The toxins, which are present in our food supply and the environment at large, have been getting a lot of press lately, and they've been linked to health problems in babies as well as adults. "Different people may have different levels of exposure, and we should all, as a society, be concerned," says Rachel Urrutia , M.D., an associate professor of obstetrics, gynecology and midwifery at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine in Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

Yet there are no official recommendations for whether pregnant women should steer clear — and as it turns out, avoiding PFAS completely may not be possible. But there are good reasons to try to limit your exposure to protect your baby and yourself. Here's what the experts recommend.

Key takeaways

PFAS, short for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, are a group of synthetic chemicals that appear in many consumer products and in the environment.

PFAS are linked to a wide range of negative health effects, including higher blood pressure in pregnancy.

It's almost impossible to avoid PFAS entirely, but you can reduce your exposure by checking your water supply and avoiding certain types of products.

What are forever chemicals?

PFAS, which is short for per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, are a group of synthetic chemicals that have been used in a wide range of consumer products since the 1950s. Trusted SourceNational Institute of Environmental Health SciencesPerfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS)See All Sources [1] They're sometimes referred to as forever chemicals because they take a very, very long time to break down in the environment, according to the National Institute of Environmental and Health Sciences (NIEHS).

Trusted SourceNational Institute of Environmental Health SciencesPerfluoroalkyl and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS)See All Sources

Control the things you can control, and focus on the healthy behaviors you can take to have a healthy pregnancy.

Matt Simcik, Ph.D.

There are thousands of different PFAS. They're used in things like food packaging, nonstick cookware, stain-resistant carpeting, water-resistant clothing and firefighting foam, to name a few. And because PFAS are used in so many different manufacturing processes, they're also in the environment, including in drinking water , the soil used to grow food and even in fish .

As a result, virtually all of us have low levels of the chemicals in our bloodstream. "Most of us have been exposed to them because they're everywhere," Dr. Urrutia says.

How can forever chemicals affect your health?

Most of what we know about PFAS comes from epidemiological studies (which track whether certain health problems are more common in groups known to have high PFAS exposures) as well as animal studies. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionWhat Are the Health Effects of PFAS?See All Sources [2] We haven't been able to study the direct effects in children or pregnant moms, since purposefully exposing humans to PFAS to see what happens to them would be unethical, explains Matt Simcik, Ph.D., a professor in the division of environmental health sciences at the University of Minnesota in Minneapolis.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionWhat Are the Health Effects of PFAS?See All Sources

What scientists have learned: PFAS are linked to a wide range of negative health effects. They're connected to higher blood pressure and preeclampsia in pregnancy. In babies and children, they're associated with low birth weight , accelerated puberty, and behavioral changes, notes the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). They may also raise the risk for high cholesterol, liver problems, and kidney and testicular cancer, per the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Is it possible to avoid forever chemicals during pregnancy?

Experts widely acknowledge that it's almost impossible to avoid PFAS. "Maybe if you grew all of your own food and only drank filtered water, but that's not how we exist in communities, so it's not feasible or advisable," Dr. Urrutia says. In fact, around 97% of Americans have some amount of PFAS in their bloodstream, one report found. Trusted SourceInternational Journal of Environmental Research and Public HealthSerum Biomarkers of Exposure to Perfluoroalkyl Substances in Relation to Serum Testosterone and Measures of Thyroid Function among Adults and Adolescents from NHANES 2011%u20132012See All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceInternational Journal of Environmental Research and Public HealthSerum Biomarkers of Exposure to Perfluoroalkyl Substances in Relation to Serum Testosterone and Measures of Thyroid Function among Adults and Adolescents from NHANES 2011%u20132012See All Sources

What's more, PFAS tend to accumulate in the body since we're continually exposed to them and they don't break down. So even if you were to find a way to completely avoid PFAS from now on, experts don't know if that would reduce the amount in your body that's already there, Dr. Urrutia explains.

The situation isn't hopeless though. Rather than trying to steer clear of PFAS 100%, "we want to talk about how we can minimize our future exposure," Simcik says. And that's something that everyone can do to some degree.

Is it worth reducing your exposure to forever chemicals during pregnancy?

Limiting PFAS exposure can help protect both your health and the health of your baby, say the EPA and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsToxic Chemicals: Steps to Stay Safer Before and During PregnancySee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsToxic Chemicals: Steps to Stay Safer Before and During PregnancySee All Sources

The key is focusing on meaningful changes that are within your power, instead of trying to do the impossible (like trying to make lifestyle changes you can't sustain or attempting to avoid PFAS altogether).

"What we don't want to do is cause undue stress [to pregnant moms], since stress on a fetus is not good either," Simcik says. "Control the things you can control, and focus on the healthy behaviors you can take to have a healthy pregnancy." Think: Eating a healthy pregnancy diet , exercising regularly , getting enough sleep , going to your prenatal appointments and shoring up your support network.

How to reduce your exposure to forever chemicals

When it comes to curbing your exposure to PFAS both now and once your baby is born, experts at the EPA, CDC and American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) agree that these steps have the biggest impact.

Find out about PFAS in your water. A possible first step is to look into your local water system. Trusted SourceEnvironmental Protection AgencyMeaningful and Achievable Steps You Can Take to Reduce Your RiskSee All Sources [5] You can identify your water supplier by checking the EPA's Consumer Confidence Report , and then contact them to learn more about whether PFAS are a concern. If you get your water from a private source (like a well), you can get it tested by a state-certified laboratory using EPA-developed testing methods in drinking water. Your state health or environmental agency should have a list of labs in your area.

Consider investing in a water filter. If you're concerned about PFAS in your tap water, you can buy a filter that's certified to remove PFAS. (Not every filter can.) The NSF maintains a list of filters that reduce PFOA and PFOS (two types of PFAS).

Be choosy about food containers. Fast food packaging and takeout containers, especially ones designed to be grease-proof (like burger wrappers and French fry boxes) are often coated with PFAS, so cut back on takeout when you can. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsPFAS: Limiting Children's Exposure to 'Forever Chemicals'See All Sources [6] Store food in glass or metal containers when possible.

Skip microwaved popcorn. Microwave popcorn bags are often treated with PFAS (again, to keep grease from seeping through). If you like to microwave popcorn, pop the kernels in a plain paper bag and add butter and salt after the popcorn is cooked, Simcik recommends.

Consider your cookware. Nonstick pots and pans typically contain PFAS, which can leach into your food, especially if the pans are cracked or chipped. Use cast iron or stainless steel instead.

Protect your baby's nursery. When putting in new carpets or adding new upholstered furniture (like a rocker or glider ), avoid those billed as stain-resistant, since PFAS are needed to help fabrics repel stains. Trusted SourceNatural Resources Defense Council"Forever Chemicals" Called PFAS Show Up in Your Food, Clothes and HomeSee All Sources [7]

Dust often. PFAS and other chemicals can build up in household dust, so try to give surfaces a weekly wipe down.

Check local fish advisories. Freshwater fish may have high levels of PFAS. The EPA has a list of local contacts you can reach out to, to find out if fish in your area are known to contain high levels of PFAS.

PFAS are concerning, and experts agree that more needs to be done to limit the public's exposure to them. But the chemicals are far from the only thing that will determine the health of your pregnancy and baby. "Try to focus on the positive things you can do to support the health of your baby," Dr. Urrutia says. "Remember, there are so many beneficial things you can do that have nothing to do with PFAS."