What Is Sleep Regression in Toddlers?

sleep regression in toddlers, smiling toddler under covers

Toddlers experience sleep setbacks as they grow and develop, just the way infants do. Learn more about sleep regression at this age and how to handle it.

You probably thought your sleep regression days were over once your baby days were behind you. And yet, toddlers can also go through these same phases, in part because of their near-constant growth and development. From building on their gross motor skills and potty training to cultivating a much broader vocabulary, the ages between 1 and 3 are an exciting time — too exciting to sleep through!

And sleep regression can be trickier to manage during the toddler years than in infancy, as bigger kids are that much more capable of speech and movement. But with patience and a commitment to a solid bedtime routine, this sleep setback can be fixed.

Here’s more about what toddler sleep regression is, plus common causes and ways to get your tot back on the right sleep track.

What is a toddler sleep regression?

A toddler sleep regression is an interruption in your child’s regular napping and nighttime schedule, causing him to skip or shortchange a nap, repeatedly wake up during the night or rise extra early in the morning.

While toddler sleep regression is temporary, usually lasting only a few weeks, it’s also quite common and can occur at 12 months , 15 months and 18 months , as well as at the 2-year and 3-year marks.

Signs of toddler sleep regression

There are lots of clues you can watch for if you suspect a toddler sleep regression, such as:

Fighting the nap. If a string of “no's” accompanies the nap put-down, or your tot misses an afternoon snooze, it could be signaling a sleep regression.

Night waking . Suddenly waking up again overnight is another sign of a sleep regression.

More fussiness. Toddlers need between 11 and 14 hours of sleep a night, so if your tot is super cranky, he could be sleep-deprived and going through a regression.

More clinging. Your child may be extra clingy and grab ahold of you when you try to leave his room to express separation anxiety .

Climbing out of bed. Whether your tot scales his crib sides or simply rolls out of his new toddler bed, these escape tactics may indicate a sleep regression.

Waking up too early . If your toddler is suddenly up at the crack of dawn, it could mean he's going through a sleep regression.

What causes toddler sleep regression?

As for what causes sleep regression in toddlers, the answers can usually be connected to the physical skills your tot is mastering and certain developmental phases. Here’s a look:

Separation anxiety . Toddlers go through this phase like they did when they were babies, which is one cause of sleep regression and means clinging to and crying for their favorite people (namely Mom and Dad).

Physical achievements. Pulling up and then not knowing how to get back down, plus cruising, walking and climbing are just a few neat tricks your kid is practicing that can cause him to go through a sleep regression.

Cutting teeth . Your toddler’s pearly whites are causing pain and disrupting his sleep, thanks to the appearance of the canines and upper and lower molars.

Nap issues. Most toddlers move from two naps a day at age 1 to one nap by the end of the second year. This process can mean missed naps or ones that are short-changed.

More words. From just a couple of words at age 1 to up to 200 by age 3, your toddler’s language skills are being put to good use at night and during his nap. You’ll no doubt hear your name called (over and over) and the demand “me up now!”

Potty training. Transitioning from diapers to the potty is another factor behind a toddler sleep regression.

Nightmares . A better imagination and a greater understanding of stories and TV shows may prompt a fear of the dark , nightmares or even night terrors in toddlers.

Screen time . While only small amounts of supervised TV are recommended for toddlers 18 months and older, life definitely gets in the way. An older sibling’s show or the news might be glimpsed by your toddler, causing worry, fear or anxiety over the content. Screens also emit a blue light that counteracts the body's natural melatonin production, and makes your internal clock think it's daylight.

Life changes. A sleep regression may also be pinned to the birth of a sibling, moving to a new house, a different babysitter or the start of preschool or day care.

Sleepwalking. While it’s harmless in most cases, sleepwalking can start if a tot has an irregular sleep schedule or is overtired, and it can occur alongside sleep apnea and night terrors .

Illness. Check to see whether a fever, cold or ear infection might be keeping your toddler up.

A new bed. Transitioning from the crib to a big bed is kind of huge for toddlers. And since getting up from this new sleep spot is easy, you’ll no doubt have many visitations.

How long will my toddler’s sleep regression last?

If you’re wondering when sleep regressions end in toddlers, these phases can actually vary from child to child, lasting one or two weeks or up to six weeks. The length of a sleep regression largely depends on how quickly the particular issue is discovered and then dealt with.

For example, a child who’s in the process of switching from a crib to a toddler bed may take a few weeks before he learns he has to stay put at night. But one who’s afraid of the dark or something in the closet may be comforted quickly with a light in the hall or new lovey to clutch in his bed.

Tips for dealing with toddler sleep regression

Take a deep breath as you figure out how to handle your toddler’s sleep regression. It may take some trial and error and certainly a good dose of patience. Here’s where to start:

Keep your cool. Getting upset, trying to negotiate or bribing a toddler to stay in bed isn’t recommended. Your best bet is to return your tot to his room with little fanfare every time he gets up.

Let a nap go. If the morning nap seems unnecessary, phase it out. Most toddlers do still take one nap in the afternoon, though.

Review the routine. Be sure to stick with your regular tuck-in schedule and even lengthen it a bit to help your busy toddler slow down at the end of the day. An extra story or longer bath may be all he needs to relax and head to bed without a fuss.

Add a light. A soft glow in the corner or leaving the closet light on with the door ajar may allay a fear of the dark.

Limit TV. Be careful with TV close to bedtime and vet the subject matter carefully. Screens should go off at least two hours before bedtime.

Nix drinks. Set your tot up for potty success by limiting liquids in the early evening. A travel potty chair set up in his bedroom may help too.

Offer a bite. A small snack before bed is usually fine, especially if your child is waking up early because he’s hungry. Try yogurt and fruit or a piece of toast with peanut butter.

When to call the doctor

Call the doctor if your child has interruptions that last more than a few days to a week, especially if he was previously potty trained and now has accidents or you hear snoring or loud breathing at night.

A call is also recommended if your tot is sleepy during the day because of too few Zzzs at night or he’s having trouble separating from you or displaying behavioral problems.

And if nightmares are very disruptive, this issue should also be discussed with the pediatrician, as it could be related to a sleep disorder, anxiety or another concern. Speaking with your health care provider can also ease your worries as you’ll learn that many of these sleep issues are very normal in toddlers and should get better over time.