Signs of Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease in Your Baby or Toddler and What to Do

Updates throughout to sourcing, copy, and formatting/features.

baby toddler with hand food and mouth disease coxsackie virus

Learn about this common, contagious condition (especially during outbreaks in your area) and how you can treat and protect your baby or toddler.

Did you get a note home from your baby or toddler's day care telling you that another child came down with a case of hand, foot, and mouth disease? Take a deep breath.

Hand, foot, and mouth disease (often caused by coxsackieviruses) is very common in babies, toddlers, and preschoolers under age 5. Even though it spreads like wildfire — especially in day care settings — the infection is usually mild.

Here's everything you need to know about hand, foot, and mouth, including how to spot the signs, what to do if your baby catches it, and how to manage it.

Key Takeaways

Hand, foot, and mouth disease is common — and usually mild. While it spreads easily in babies, toddlers, and preschoolers, most kids recover on their own in about a week.

Watch for telltale symptoms. A low-grade fever often comes first, followed by mouth sores and a rash or blisters on the hands, feet, and sometimes other areas.

Comfort and care are key. Keep your little one hydrated, offer soft foods, and disinfect surfaces and toys to help prevent the virus from spreading.

What is hand, foot, and mouth disease (coxsackievirus)?

Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) is an infection usually caused by coxsackievirus (usually types A and B), part of the enterovirus family. Doctors see it most during the summer and fall, although cases happen year-round. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Hand, Foot, and Mouth DiseaseSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Hand, Foot, and Mouth DiseaseSee All Sources

While it usually isn't serious, hand, foot, and mouth can make young children (and their parents) pretty miserable.

The telltale sign of hand, foot, and mouth is a painful, bumpy, red rash or blisters in places you probably already guessed — the palms of the hands, soles of the feet, and insides of the mouth.

"My daughter (now 3) got it when she was 18 months at day care," says What to Expect Community mom mammab23. "She has blisters all over her mouth and a few on her hands and feet."

The virus is spread from person to person typically through respiratory droplets, unwashed hands, nasal secretions, and/or fluid from blisters, to name a few ways. It can also cling to surfaces, where it can live for several days. Get your disinfectant ready!

By the way, don't confuse HFMD with "foot and mouth disease," which is only seen in farm animals (usually cows and pigs). Foot and mouth disease can't be passed to people.

What causes hand, foot, and mouth?

Babies or toddlers can catch hand, foot, and mouth disease from other babies, children, or adults who have the virus. It's commonly caused by several different viruses and strains of the coxsackievirus.

Here's how hand, foot, and mouth disease is transmitted:

Direct person-to-person contact

Exposure to the virus comes from direct contact with an infected person — especially if that person coughs or sneezes on your little one or gives her a hug or a high-five.

This also includes contact with open sores of an infected child or adult. Parents and caregivers should be extra careful about washing their hands after any possible contact with a baby's open sores.

Respiratory contact (i.e., saliva, sneezing, coughing)

What baby or toddler isn't known for putting just about everything into her mouth? Despite parents' best efforts, the baby/toddler stages are prime for contracting viruses and spreading them.

Young babies under 6 months old are less likely to catch hand, foot, and mouth because they're not moving around and grabbing objects as much, but an infant can become infected if a person carrying the virus touches the baby's hands or face.

Stool contact

In day care settings, many young children are together over the course of frequent diaper changes and possible accidents. In addition to hand, foot, and mouth, contact with poop increases the risk of so many other viruses and infections.

Contaminated surfaces

That toy your toddler had in her mouth, the countertop she touched after sucking her thumb, or the cellphone she just drooled all over in the grocery checkout line are examples of contaminated surfaces if your child has hand, foot, and mouth disease.

Symptoms of hand, foot, and mouth disease

Symptoms of hand, foot, and mouth are progressive and typically appear three to six days after you or your child was first exposed to the virus. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHand, Foot, & Mouth Disease: Parent FAQsSee All Sources [2] They include the following:

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHand, Foot, & Mouth Disease: Parent FAQsSee All Sources

Fever. This virus may first appear as a low-grade fever for a day or two. Your child may also have common cold symptoms such as fatigue, a runny nose, and a sore throat. If your baby's temperature climbs to 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit or higher, you should call your doctor immediately if your little one is under 3 months old. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsFever Without Fear: Information for ParentsSee All Sources [3] Regardless, you should call your pediatrician if your child has a fever of 100.4 or higher because you'll want to rule out other viruses like the flu or COVID-19. Some children who get hand, foot, and mouth don't have a fever at all.

Mouth sores. After a day or two of fever, sores usually appear on the roof of the mouth, gums, tongue, and lips. The sores often make eating and drinking difficult and may cause loss of appetite. Babies and toddlers may be extra fussy and refuse to nurse or drink from a bottle or cup because their mouths hurt. You might also notice more drool. Watch your child for signs of dehydration, which include dry mouth and fewer wet diapers or trips to the potty. In some children, hand, foot, and mouth symptoms end at this point.

Body spots. Over the next day or so, the rash and red blisters may appear on various other parts of the body, such as fingers, palms of the hands, soles of the feet, elbows, knees, the genital area, and the bottom. The spots can vary; some might be tiny, flat, and barely noticeable, while others may be more raised, sometimes with small fluid-filled blisters that may break open and crust over. Fortunately, they usually don't itch, but sometimes, depending on their location, they can be painful.

Symptoms usually run their course for about a week. You may notice the skin on the fingers and toes peeling after a week or two, but it's not something to worry about.

"I feel like it looked worse than it was — she definitely didn’t feel good (loss of appetite, very clingy and fussy), but there were only 2ish 'bad' days and then she felt better," says mammab23. "The rash took a couple weeks to fully go away."

If your child's fever lasts more than three days, she isn't drinking liquids, or becomes dehydrated, call the pediatrician right away.

The symptoms of hand, foot, and mouth in adults and older children are the same as the symptoms seen in babies and toddlers, but they tend to be milder because they have stronger immune systems.

Pregnant moms who have been exposed to hand, foot, and mouth disease may experience any of these symptoms and should let their doctors know right away. Fever in pregnancy can be harmful to a fetus, especially in the first trimester.

Is hand, foot, and mouth contagious?

Yes, the virus is very contagious. Hand, foot, and mouth spreads easily through families and day cares as the virus can live in an infected person's body for weeks or even months after symptoms have gone away.

Children, including babies and toddlers, are usually considered contagious two days before a rash or sores appear and until two days after they go away.

Check the policy at your child's day care or preschool. Most say children can return once they feel well enough to participate, their blisters have dried up, and they're fever-free for 24 hours.

Hand, foot and mouth might sound scary, but most cases are mild and manageable at home. The What to Expect app is full of expert-backed guidance, tips for keeping your little one comfortable, and a Community of parents who’ve been through it too.

Can my child get hand, foot, and mouth disease again?

Unfortunately, yes. The body will create immunity to the particular strain of the virus that caused your child's first bout of hand, foot, and mouth. However, there are many different strains that could cause symptoms a second (and third) time.

"My 3-year-old got it once at 9-10 months and again at 18 months," says What to Expect Community member hellotasha. "There are 3-4 different strains, so while uncommon to get the same one twice, you can get it more than once from other strains. ... First time it was mild — just a few dots on his hand and sore throat, less appetite. Second time he had a rash all over, but decent appetite."

How is coxsackievirus diagnosed?

If you think your child may have hand, foot, and mouth, call your pediatrician. Typically, they'll be able to diagnose your child by examining her and getting a read on her symptoms.

If your child is diagnosed with hand, foot, and mouth disease, make sure to inform the day care or school. Your privacy will be protected, but they do need to alert other parents and staff members to watch for symptoms and do their part to fully disinfect.

How to treat hand, foot, and mouth

In general, mild cases of hand, foot, and mouth disease can be managed at home. (And no, you don't need antibiotics because it's caused by a virus, not a bacteria.)

Here are some home remedies for treating hand, foot, and mouth:

Over-the-counter pain and fever medicine

You can give acetaminophen (Tylenol) to a feverish baby who is 3 months or older and ibuprofen (Motrin or Advil) to a child 6 months or older. Follow the dosing instructions on the label, and never give medication to babies under 2 years old without consulting your pediatrician first.

If your child's mouth is sore, it might be a good idea to offer the medication 30 minutes before mealtime to help make eating and drinking less painful.

Plenty of liquids

Dehydration is a risk for little ones with hand, foot, and mouth disease. Offer your sick child plenty of fluids to stay hydrated. For breastfed and formula-fed babies under 6 months old, that will mean offering more frequent (and possibly smaller) feeds.

For babies older than 6 months, give water between nursing sessions or bottle feedings. And for children over a year old, you can offer water or a rehydration fluid like Pedialyte. You may need to give your toddler frequent sips of one or the other every 15 minutes. Check with your doctor.

Colder, softer foods

Think about what foods you'd want if your mouth or throat were sore. Ice cream, Popsicles, pudding, and smoothies can be very soothing, along with warmer soft foods like mac-and-cheese and mashed potatoes. If your baby isn't eating solid foods yet, you can actually make breast milk ice pops if you want to.

Avoid giving your older baby or toddler salty, citrusy, or spicy foods, along with acidic or citrusy drinks, as those can make mouth and throat sores more painful.

More sleep

Make sure your baby or toddler gets extra sleep and rest, as that can help her recover. Give your little one more chances to rest and sleep during the day if she's having a harder time getting comfortable at night. (This treatment works for parents too!)

More snuggles and cuddles

There's nothing wrong with being a couch potato for the time it takes for your little one to recoup. Sometimes a little bit of TLC from Mom or Dad is enough to make her feel a little better.

How do you disinfect after hand, foot, and mouth disease?

Disinfecting for viruses that can cause hand, foot, and mouth disease and other diseases involves the following steps:

Put on gloves

Gloves can be disposable ones you throw away after one use or reusable gloves you have in your kitchen for various household cleaning and chores.

Scrub with soap and water

Any household cleaner and water does the trick. Because hand, foot, and mouth disease can live on surfaces like toys, it's helpful to have a bin for the ones you see your teething baby or toddler munching on.

Keep the bin out of your child's reach, and wash the toys when you have time.

Disinfect

When it comes to disinfecting small toys , dishwashers are handy and effective. No dishwasher? No problem. Over-the-counter cleaning products containing bleach work well too.

You can make your own disinfectant by diluting household bleach. Prepare a bleach solution by mixing 5 tablespoons (roughly a third of a cup) bleach per gallon of water, or 4 teaspoons bleach per quart of water. (If you go the DIY route, know that homemade bleach solutions are only effective at disinfecting for 24 hours. Only make what you plan to use that day.)

Wash hands, and safely store products when finished cleaning

This step is important for removing any chemicals that may have made their way to your hands in the process. Also be sure to store all cleaning products out of reach of your baby or toddler when you're done, in a high cabinet with a safety latch.

Call your child's day care or preschool

Ask your child's day care or preschool what methods they use for cleaning and disinfecting. Make sure they're using disposable gloves and have protocols in place to sanitize hands and changing areas from one child to the next.

Is there any way to prevent hand, foot, and mouth disease?

It's very difficult to prevent your child from catching hand, foot, and mouth disease. What you can do is reduce your little one's risk by practicing good hygiene, plus modeling healthy habits in the following ways:

Wash hands frequently (especially before meals and after changing diapers).

Don't share cups or eating utensils — even within the family.

Carry hand sanitizer around for times when a sink may be unavailable.

Discourage your child from touching her eyes, nose, or mouth.

Regularly clean and disinfect toys and surfaces.

Avoid close contact with other children and adults who appear under the weather.

While any threat to your baby or toddler's health is scary, know that hand, foot, and mouth disease is a common condition that can easily be monitored and managed by your pediatrician. It will most likely go away on its own within a week.

So don't stress too much. By keeping your child hydrated and comfortable, you're doing a great job, and your little one will be back to herself in no time.