Silverettes Saved My Breastfeeding Journey as a First-Time Mom

Silverette Nursing Cups Review

From relieving itchiness to keeping thrush at bay, these hyped nursing cups were worth every penny.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

When my baby girl Lou made her big debut this past September, I thought I was ready for everything that comes with breastfeeding a newborn . As a first-time mom, I had done all the homework. I’d grilled my mom friends on their experiences, spent late nights lurking in parenting forums, binged lactation consultant podcasts and inhaled every nursing research article I could find. The takeaway? Breastfeeding is unpredictable. The only tools I could rely on were an open mind, a willingness to adapt and a commitment to keeping both Lou and myself happy (and sane). So, when I encouraged her to latch for the first time — an experience equal parts strange and awkward — I promised myself I’d give it my all, no matter where the journey led.

Spoiler alert: it led me through a particularly harrowing bout of mastitis , recurring clogged ducts and a surprise lanolin allergy I mistook for nipple thrush (fun!). And while no single product can make or break your ability to breastfeed, there are some out there that can make the bump-filled ride a bit more comfortable. For me, that product was Silverette nursing cups .

What Are Silverette Nursing Cups?

I stumbled across Silverettes during one of my many late-night rabbit holes in the What to Expect community forums . Moms were raving about these nursing cups, with more than a few reviewers referring to them as a “godsend.” Made in Italy from hypoallergenic 925 sterling silver (fancy, no?), these little wonders fit snugly over your nipples, providing healing relief and promoting airflow between feedings. Silverette’s contoured design ensures a comfortable fit for any nipple (offered in both regular and extra-large sizes) and is suitable for long-term use, thanks to folded edges that prevent chafing.

Silverette Nursing Cups

I bought mine off Amazon , where they boast over 6,000 reviews and an impressive 4.5 out of 5 stars. At first, I was baffled. Were they nipple shields ? (Nope.) Was I supposed to wear them while nursing? (Also no.) And wait — they’re made of actual sterling silver? (Yep!) Once I wrapped my head around their purpose, I couldn’t resist giving them a try.

How Do Silverette Nursing Cups Work?

The magic lies in the silver itself, which has been found to have natural antibacterial, antifungal and anti-inflammatory properties . And using them couldn’t be easier: rinse, dry, and slip them on under your nursing bra to protect and heal your nipples between feeding sessions.

After each nursing session, I’d usually pat my nipples dry before letting the Silverettes do their thing. Many moms in the What to Expect community also swear by expressing a drop or two of breast milk into the cups before wearing them. Apparently, breast milk enhances healing , and while I didn’t try this every time, the science checks out — it’s nature’s original superfood, after all.

My tip : skip lanolin-based nipple creams while using Silverettes. I learned the hard way that the cream’s barrier can interfere with their healing properties, and in my case, it even caused a bout of thrush. Once I ditched the creams and relied solely on the Silverettes, the soreness and itchiness vanished. As the saying goes, less is more.

For care maintenance , the brand recommends a quick rinse with warm water between feedings. I chose to clean mine once in the morning and again at night, occasionally using baby bottle soap. If the cups tarnish — a normal part of silver’s oxidation, although mine did not — you can easily polish them with a baking soda paste. Just steer clear of harsh detergents or anything bleach-based to keep them in shiny shape.

Do Silverette Nursing Cups Actually Help?

For me (and many other moms in the What to Expect Community ) absolutely, yes. While I was lucky enough to avoid cracked nipples, I wasn’t spared the persistent soreness that hits during the first month of feeding. Silverettes offered immediate relief after every session; a cooling, protective shield nestled discreetly inside my nursing bras. Whenever I removed them, my nipples were noticeably less inflamed and far less sensitive to touch.

An unexpected bonus: They created a much-needed barrier between my tender skin and any fabric I was wearing. Plus, they helped manage leaks while my milk supply was stabilizing — a perk I hadn’t anticipated but really appreciated. They’re also incredibly lightweight and easy to carry. I kept mine in a little fabric pouch, which I could discreetly toss on a table or in my purse when on the go.

Now, did they prevent the horrific bout of mastitis I faced in week two? Sadly, no. (Mastitis is a beast no silver cup can conquer alone.) However, I felt they sped up my recovery. The antibacterial properties seemed to reduce lingering inflammation, kept clogged ducts from becoming a recurring nightmare and even helped keep thrush at bay once I ditched the lanolin creams.

Silverette Nursing Cups

Ease breastfeeding soreness

Are Silverette Nursing Cups Worth It?

At $60 to $70, these little silver shields are a bit of a splurge, but they’re reusable, durable, and practically zero-maintenance. When you think about how much you’d spend on creams and disposable nursing pads over time, the price tag feels a lot more justifiable. Plus, when you’re done nursing, Silverette offers a recycling program that turns your cups into a “keepsake pendant.” While I’m not sure I’ll go that route, I do plan to reuse them in future pregnancies, as many other WTE moms have done.

The Verdict

Breastfeeding is not painless, but Silverette’s nursing cups made my journey a whole lot more comfortable by soothing my sore, sensitive nipples, catching unpredictable leaks and, ultimately, giving me one less thing to lose sleep over.

Silverette Nursing Cups

Where to Buy Silverette Nursing Cups

I bought my Silverettes on Amazon ($60), meaning you can easily add them to your registry. They are also available at Ingrid + Isabel ($60), as well as the Silverette website ($60). And, a bit of inside info, Silverettes are HSA- and FSA-eligible , so you can buy them with your pre-tax dollars, if you have one of those accounts.

Your Next Read

Haakaa Silicone Breast Pump Review By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

The Best Nipple Creams to Help You Find Relief While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

7 Best Nipple Shields to Help With Latching and Minimize Pain Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Moms Love These Wearable Breast Pumps — And They're Less Than $200 By Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Best Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

How to Use a Nipple Shield When Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Breastfeeding Trick That Saved My Sanity With a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

7 Best Wearable Breast Pumps That Let You Pump While Doing (Literally) Anything Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Treat Sore Nipples and Breastfeeding Pain Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

Most Common Breastfeeding Problems and Solutions Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Breastfeeding With Flat or Inverted Nipples Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window