Benefits of a Sitz Bath After Birth

sitz bath, towel next to the bathtub

Postpartum perineal pain can seriously sting. Luckily, a sitz bath can help bring some relief.

Feeling tender down there? Of course you are — you just had a baby! Even if you didn’t tear or have an episiotomy, and especially if you did, you can expect some (or lots) of pain in your perineum post-delivery. One way to soothe the ache is to soak in a sitz bath.

What is a sitz bath?

Unlike a bubble bath with suds up to your chin, a sitz bath is a pool of water that you sit in with only your hips and bottom submerged. The name comes from the German word "sitzen," which means (you guessed it) to sit.

You can purchase a shallow basin designed for this purpose that fits securely on a toilet seat, or you can fill up your bathtub with several inches of warm water and create a sitz bath that way.

What are the benefits of using a sitz bath for pain relief after birth?

Sitz baths offer a number of benefits during the postpartum period. They're known to:

Increase blood flow to the perineal area, which reduces swelling and inflammation and promotes healing.

Relax the muscles in the perineum, which can relieve the pain of a tear or episiotomy.

Soothe the soreness that comes from childbirth .

Relieve the itching that often accompanies stitches.

Keep things clean down there.

A sitz bath can also help ease pain and itching from hemorrhoids — another common pregnancy and postpartum symptom.

Instructions on how to use a sitz bath

Here’s how to set up and use a sitz bath when you need a little relief:

Fill a cleaned sitz bath basin or tub with 2 to 3 inches of water. You want the water level to reach only your hips when you sit down.

Use warm (not hot) water. Some women prefer cool water in their sitz bath — especially since cool water tends to reduce swelling more effectively than warm water.

Add Epsom salts, witch hazel, lavender oil or chamomile oil if you desire. Some people say they offer extra relief, though there isn’t much evidence that they help with healing or pain.

Soak once a day for up to 20 minutes. If there are stitches in the perineum, too much soaking can cause the stitches to fall apart, so ask your practitioner for a recommendation before taking a sitz bath.

Gently pat the area dry with a clean towel when you're done, or use a hairdryer on the cool setting. (You'll want to keep the area dry, especially if you have stitches). Avoid rubbing as that can increase soreness.

Are there any risks associated with using a sitz bath?

Sitz baths or tubs that aren’t cleaned well before using may spread bacteria, so be sure yours has passed the hygiene test before use.

Adding bubble bath gel or other soaps to the sitz bath is also considered unsafe, so don’t be tempted to draw yourself a sitz bubble bath. And make sure that the water isn’t too hot. The last thing you want to do right after you’ve delivered is to scald yourself down there!

When to call the doctor

It's time to get in touch with your practitioner if you notice:

Worsening pain in the perineal area

Increased redness, swelling or oozing fluids from your stitches (if you have them)

Discharge that smells badly

Soaking in a sitz bath after you’ve delivered can bring some much needed relief during this postpartum period. Adding it to your routine can go a long way in helping you heal and recover after having a baby .