The Gadget That Saved My Sanity as a Busy Mom of Two

Skylight Calendar Review_15-Inch Calendar

The Skylight Calendar promises a centralized system that keeps you organized. But does it deliver?

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

I found the Skylight the way many overwhelmed parents do: strategically served Instagram ads.

The mental load of parenting is no joke, and it’s become heavier as my kids have gotten older. Appointments. School schedules. Playdates. Meals. Errands. Plus, as a neurodivergent household, managing everyday tasks does not come easily to any of us. But, like most moms, I became the default keeper of all the information, and it was not sustainable. I needed help, and the Skylight seemed to offer that.

I tried cheaper solutions first. I streamed a calendar app to our smart TV, wrote out lists for everyone, and looked into an Echo Show. But I needed one place where scheduling, tasks, and meals could live together and be visible to everyone in the house.

The Skylight promised a centralized, visual system that did not rely on me remembering to check my phone. That’s what sold me.

Quick Summary

What it is: The Skylight Calendar (15-inch touchscreen)

Who it’s for: Busy families, multi-caregiver households, neurodivergent families

Why I love it: It’s expensive, but the easy-to-use interface genuinely reduces mental load and keeps everyone organized

Price: $149.99 to $599.99 (depending on size)

Where to buy: Skylight , Amazon , Target

Exclusive promo: Use code WTE20 for $20 off the 15-inch calendar from now through 3/9 at Skylight

What It’s Like Using the Skylight Calendar

Part of Skylight’s appeal is its easy-to-use design. A large display screen and clearly labeled tabs make toggling between tasks simple — so much so, even younger family members can get in on the action. I, however, prefer to use the accompanying app so I can add and edit things on the go.

Pro tip: Put your Skylight in a highly trafficked area so no one misses out — ours lives on the kitchen wall, where the family frequently hangs.

On top of the intuitive display, Skylight has several features that add to its appeal.

Calendar and Scheduling

Skylight Calendar_Calendar Mode

Rather than being another calendar to maintain, Skylight syncs with existing Google, Apple, and other major calendar platforms. This means everyone’s individual calendars come together in one place for easier scheduling. Plus, each family member has a color-coded profile, so it's clear who is busy and when.

Tasks and Routines

The Tasks feature was the real game-changer for our family.

Using the same color-coded system, you can designate one-time or recurring “chores” to a person. (You can even assign them a time of day to help develop routines.) Sounds simple, but some elements make it more appealing than a written checklist, especially for kids.

Skylight Calendar_Chores Mode

To start, parents can award a star value to tasks and corresponding rewards. Skylight tracks the number of stars so kids know when they can cash them in. Additionally, tasks can be labeled with large emojis, so children who aren’t reading yet still have some autonomy over their to-do list. This has also taken a lot of pressure off me to manage everything verbally.

My 3-year-old is noticeably more motivated to complete her routine now that she can check them off herself and watch the celebration animation at the end when everything is complete.

Meal Planning

Meals appear directly on the calendar with their own label and color. I no longer have to remember what we planned or open another app to check.

Recipes can be attached to meals, and ingredients can be added to a grocery list if you want everything in one place.

Worth Noting

One downside of Skylight is having to toggle between the calendar and tasks tab. Since only one can be displayed, we sometimes miss tasks if the calendar is front and center.

Another minor annoyance: Tasks with due dates only appear on the day they are due, which can be limiting for things that require advance prep. Skylight releases frequent updates and is responsive to user feedback, so these feel like solvable issues rather than dealbreakers.

Skylight Calendar

$20 off w/code WTE20

Is the Premium Subscription Worth It?

The Skylight works great without a subscription, providing you with calendar functionality and a streamlined version of the task feature. But the paid Calendar Plus plan unlocks its best features, like reward charts, meal planning, and photo albums.

The $79/year subscription also gives you access to Sidekick, which uses AI to turn emails, PDFs, photos, and voice notes into calendar events or task lists. I forward daycare emails, upload school supply lists, and dictate packing lists, and everything appears automatically on the screen.

For me, the subscription is worth it for Sidekick alone.

Is the Skylight Calendar Worth It?

The Skylight Calendar is an investment, but it’s one I would make again. It’s taken a significant amount of mental load off my plate, making household responsibilities visible to everyone. Our home feels calmer, and I no longer feel solely responsible for remembering everything.

If shared calendars and basic to-do lists work for your family, this may be more than you need. But if you are juggling too much information across too many places and need a centralized family command center, the Skylight Calendar is worth considering, especially with the limited-time WTE20 code for $20 off the 15-inch model from now through 3/9 at Skylight .

Your Next Read

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

15 Products That Leave Moms Saying 'TikTok Made Me Buy It' Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

You're Going to Need to Track Your Baby’s Feedings, Diaper Changes, Sleep, and More. Here's How Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

20 Advent Calendars for Preschoolers That Are Bound to Sell Out Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

I’d Pay Double for This $24 Travel Toy By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Space-Saving Tips for Baby’s Nursery By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window