Why Is My Toddler Talking in Her Sleep?

toddler sleep talking, toddler boy talking in sleep

Does your toddler talk in her sleep? Learn to spot the signs of sleep talking in toddlers, why it happens and how you can help your child.

Getting kids to stop chattering is hard enough when you’re trying to get them to go to sleep — but what about when they start talking when they’re actually asleep?

Children can talk in their sleep almost as soon as they’ve learned to speak , and a reported 50 percent of little kids will sleep talk at some point. The behavior is more common in toddlers whose parents were sleep talkers themselves — so if you or your partner talked in your sleep when you were little, chances are your child might too.

Your toddler can strike up a conversation at any stage of sleep — it’s still unknown whether talking is linked to dreaming. It’s also unclear why the brains of sleep talkers signal their mouths to get moving, but rest assured, sleep talking will not prevent your little one from getting the sleep she needs.

What is sleep talking?

Sleep talking occurs when your toddler talks, laughs, cries out or moans while she's sleeping. Your toddler doesn’t know she’s talking in her sleep and likely won’t remember her ramblings come morning. It may begin around age 2, and can occur up until early adolescence.

If your child is talking in her sleep less than once a week, it's considered mild. A more pronounced case would involve a toddler sleep talking every night and for longer than a month straight. If she shares her room with a sibling or parent, the sleep talking would be prolonged enough to seriously disturb the roommate's sleep.

Signs your toddler is talking in her sleep

The most obvious sign that your toddler is sleep talking is that you hear her babbling away one to three hours after she’s fallen asleep. Tip-offs that she’s still asleep — and hasn’t just woken up — include:

She’s talking clearly, but her words don’t make sense.

She’s talking, but her speech sounds are mumbled.

She’s talking without any emotion.

It goes on for one to five minutes, then stops as your child falls back into a deep sleep.

Her eyes may be wide open, but she doesn’t realize you’re there.

She doesn’t remember any of this the next morning, or after she’s woken up from a nap.

Causes of sleep talking in toddlers and children

There doesn’t necessarily seem to be a specific underlying cause of sleep talking in kids. But there may be a few reasons why your little one is more likely to experience it, including:

Genetics

She's overtired

Stress

Fever

Sleep apnea

Nightmares or night terrors

Although sleep talking is often genetic, it can be caused by fatigue and lack of sleep or a stressful event in the child's life, so make sure your child has a consistent bedtime routine and is getting the right amount of quality sleep she needs (11 to 14 hours between naps and nighttime at this age).

Sleep talking can also happen in conjunction with nightmares, night terrors, other vivid dreams, fevers and sleep apnea.

What to do about sleep talking in kids

You may wonder how to stop sleep talking in your toddler. The short answer is, you don’t have to. Sleep talking is normal and not a sign on its own that anything is physically or emotionally wrong. Here are some things to keep in mind:

Don’t wake your child up. You can’t stop a sleep talking episode. Your little one is in a deep sleep, so it will be hard to fully wake her. If you do, she may just get upset.

Let others know. If you have a babysitter one evening, or your toddler is sleeping at Grandma’s, explain to them that she sleep talks, and that it’s normal. This is particularly true if there’s a sleepover, as sleep talking is more common in a strange environment. The last thing you want is your mother-in-law calling you in a panic while you’re out at a romantic dinner with your partner.

If your toddler’s sleep talking wakes up siblings, you can have them wear earplugs or use a white noise machine to help drown out sound.

Encourage healthy sleep habits. Toddlers need 11 to 14 hours of sleep a night, including naps. Keep bedtime, naptime and wake-up times the same each day, to help your child feel secure and comfortable. Try to set and stick to a consistent bedtime routine, like taking a bath, brushing teeth, reading a book, singing some songs and getting into bed. This can be done anywhere, so your little one can nod off even if she’s not in her usual environment (like at her grandparents' house or on vacation).

When to call the doctor about your toddler’s sleep talking

No need to worry if your tot occasionally sleep talks. However, do call the doctor if:

Your little one’s sleep talking episodes increase in frequency.

Her conversations are accompanied by limb movements.

She seems excessively sleepy during the daytime.

She seems very agitated during these episodes.

If the behavior continues as your cutie ages, it may be related to other sleep issues, and a consultation with the doctor and a sleep specialist may be in order. But though these nighttime chats can wake — or keep — you up, it’s likely that they will run their course and be short-lived.