Sleep Training Twins: How to Get Your Babies on the Same Schedule

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

boy and girl twin babies sleeping, setting up your twins sleep schedule and sleep training twins

Putting your twins on the same timetable and sleep training them may take a bit of doing, but it’s worth the effort in the end. Here’s how to set up a routine so they’re both sleeping blissfully at the same time.

Two babies are double the love, of course, but they also require extra work at every age and stage. Sleep training twins so they can be on the same sleep schedule is one area that new parents are often eager to tackle, since syncing both babies’ nighttime routines can mean more shut-eye for everyone.

Keep in mind that more than half of twins are born prematurely , and while they may sleep more overall than full-term infants (up to 22 hours a day), they do so for shorter periods of time. If your babies are eating every four hours, let them snooze — and when they’re ready for sleep training, here’s how to do it.

Key Takeaways:

Timing matters, but it’s all about your babies’ readiness. Sleep training twins typically starts between 4 and 6 months for full-term babies, but if your twins were born prematurely, go by their adjusted age to know when they’re ready.

Syncing schedules starts with feeding. To get your twins sleeping at the same time, start by aligning their feeding schedules. Babies who eat together often sleep together, too.

Patience — and flexibility — are key. Be open to trial and error, consider separating your babies temporarily if needed, and celebrate small wins along the way.

When can you start sleep training twins and putting them on a schedule?

Sleep training twins isn’t very different from that of single babies, as long as your little ones are healthy. For full-term infants, the sweet spot to start sleep training is between 4 and 6 months, as this is when babies are old enough to self-soothe and fall asleep independently. You can start getting them on something of a schedule around 3 months.

If your twins arrived prematurely (before 37 weeks of pregnancy), you may need to go by their adjusted age to determine when it’s an appropriate time to sleep train and get them on a schedule.

Should you sleep train twins in the same room?

Your home’s size will dictate whether you’re able to sleep train your twins in the same room, as not every house has extra bedrooms to accommodate nightly separation.

If your end goal is to have your twins share a room, then it’s fine to sleep train them together, especially if they’ve already been sharing the same space and are used to it.

“In the beginning we thought there was noooo way they could sleep in the same room with each other’s crying. But we had to make it work because they’re sharing a nursery! We sleep trained at 5 months and it was rough for the first week, but now they sleep so well!” says What to Expect Community mom kbanana13.

Keep in mind, however, that in most sets of multiples, there’s often one who’s a better sleeper than the other. And even if your twins end up displaying similar sleep patterns , there will likely be nights when your babies will wake each other up.

You might find as you delve into twin sleep training that one baby doesn’t wake up the other very often — and if that’s the case, lucky you! But if a sibling is inconsolable or the two of them keep waking each other no matter what you try, then you can take the better sleeper out of the room if you have some extra space and sleep train them separately.

Tips for sleep training twins and getting them on the same sleep schedule

You’ll need to tap into your patience reserves when sleep training twins and trying to sync their schedules, but know that with time and practice, you can definitely be successful. Try these smart tips related to feeding, naps, and bedtime routines that can impact twins’ sleep schedules:

Do double-duty feedings. The key to a twin sleep schedule is to get your cuties on a feeding schedule first, since babies who eat at the same time will likely become drowsy at the same time too.

Watch for sleep signs. After you’ve fed, burped, and changed your twins, check them both for sleep cues, such as yawning and eye rubbing. Next, put them down drowsy but awake and always follow safe sleep guidelines (place baby on back, on a firm surface, with each twin in his own crib or bassinet) to lower the risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).

Coordinate twin naps (safely). Twins should sleep on separate surfaces to help guard against SIDS, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends. You can put them down for naps simultaneously as long as they're not in the same crib or on the same sleep surface, even if one twin takes longer (with back rubs or soft lullabies) to drift off to dreamland.

Wake a sleeping twin … if the other is up for a feeding. Yes, it kills you to purposely rouse a peaceful baby. But if you don’t, you’ll be playing leapfrog with your tiny, tuckered-out tadpoles all night — and no one will get quality Zzzs. After a few nights, your twins should start to get hungry at the same time and doze off in (relative) sync.

Create a solid bedtime routine. Consistent bedtime routines are important for all babies, but especially so for twins. Start off with bathtime and then dim the lights, play some lullabies, read books, and offer a cozy before-bed feeding. Repeat the same routine every night so your babies will know bedtime is coming soon.

Add white noise. A sound machine that plays a repetitive rhythm can help lull a baby to sleep, and it’s a savvy addition when sleep training twins. The reason? White noise can help block out nighttime wailing, preventing the fussy baby from waking the one who’s sound asleep. “We have our girls in the same room with a sound machine between the cribs. Works wonders, they don’t wake one another up at all,” says What to Expect Community mom DonnaDrap.

Set small goals. Since many twins are born at lower weights than singletons, it can take longer to reach sleep training and schedule milestones, especially if you’re nursing on-demand at night. Instead, celebrate small achievements: dropping a nighttime feeding, teaching your twins to soothe themselves with a pacifier, both sleeping for four hours in a row (woo-hoo!).

Divide and conquer. If one twin is sleeping through the night , let him snooze temporarily in a different room from his sibling, even if it means moving his playard or crib into the kitchen or bathroom. That way, the nighttime wakings of the other twin won’t give him a case of the midnight cranks too.

Need help tracking your twins' sleep schedules?

Stay on top of your twins’ routines and get personalized tips tailored to their age and development in What to Expect app to make sleep training a little less overwhelming.

Sleep training twins and getting them on the same sleep schedule demands a flexible approach, so be ready to shift when you need to and try different tactics. It may take longer for twins to sleep train, but take heart and know that your sweet babies will catch up to their singleton peers, and they’ll soon snooze like champs — together.