The Best Smash Cake Ideas for Your Baby's First Birthday Party

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Smash cake photos

Planning to have a "smash cake" at your baby's first birthday party? These smash cake ideas can help you pinpoint the perfect choice.

If it feels like just yesterday you were seeing that first heartbeat on the monitor and now you're suddenly planning a first birthday party for your baby (who's not such a baby anymore), you're not alone. That first year of parenthood flies by for everyone — in a diaper-filled, sleep-deprived blur of excitement and exhaustion.

The good news? You made it! And now, it's time to celebrate. If you're looking for unique ways to ring in toddlerhood, a smash cake might be just the thing.

Smash cakes are a fun (and messy!) way to celebrate a baby's first birthday . Get inspired with more information about the smash cake trend, along with adorable smash cake photos and recipes.

What is a smash cake?

In case you're unfamiliar, a smash cake is basically a tiny cake meant to be relished by your kiddo on her first birthday. And since 1-year-olds are pretty much lawless, that means she'll likely dig in by using her fingers, or "smashing" her face into it the second it’s placed in front of her. (There are no rules here!)

The moment she does, any photographer who's on-hand can capture the moment in all its Instagram-worthy glory.

Not only are smash cakes super cute and pretty hilarious, but they make for the perfect end to any first birthday bash.

Don't worry, though — there will still be plenty of regular birthday cake to be had by guests, sans baby slobber. Smash cakes are usually kid-sized for a reason, and are meant to be only for the birthday boy or girl to devour (or destroy) all on their own.

After your little one has had her fun with her own smaller cake, you can slice up a completely separate, larger cake for guests.

If you're not so sure about letting your newly-minted toddler get all messy at her birthday party (because it will get messy!), there are some steps you can take in effort to contain the chaos. The best, though not exactly most photogenic, way: Strip your baby down to her birthday suit. (Keep the diaper on!) Alternatively, you can put your baby in a full-coverage bib — the kind that resembles an art smock. They even come in some cute colors and patterns. Another good idea: Put a towel, cloth or splat mat under the high chair.

And if you're really mess-averse, you can always schedule a separate cake smash shoot with a professional photographer — a trend that's growing in popularity — who can create a backdrop and may provide the cake.

Whatever route you choose, you really can't go wrong — your baby is guaranteed to have fun, and the resulting smash cake pictures will be unforgettable.

What size should a smash cake be?

The size of a first birthday cake — the one your guests indulge in — depends on how many people are attending the event. But there's a more standard size for a smash cake.

Round smash cakes typically have a diameter of 4 inches. A square smash cake might measure 6 inches per side.

The small size fits nicely on a high chair, but your baby won't definitely won't eat the whole thing. The smash cake is meant more as a fun photo op than an oversized, sugary treat for your baby to gobble down in its entirety.

Smash cake ideas

Your baby's first birthday is a big deal. Narrowing in on a theme for the party can help ensure that everything from the decor to the first birthday cake ties together nicely.

Here are a few clever ideas to get your wheels turning:

Watercolor smash cake

Watercolor Smash Cakes

This sweet little treat has an ombre-like design that adds a trendy vibe to a delicious-looking cake. You might regret letting your tot get his hands on it!

Flower smash cake

Secret Garden Smash Cake

This smash cake looks almost too good to eat! (Key word: Almost.) Use fresh flowers to style your cake for the photos— just remember to remove them before your baby digs in!

Fruit smash cake

Fruit Smash Cake

This pint-sized smash cake boasts beautiful fruit and aromatics. It's the perfect choice for a fall or winter celebration.

Pink smash cake

Pretty in Pink Smash Cake

Even if you're not a whiz at baking, icing florets can easily mask imperfections and make any cake look polished. Think pink for a princess-themed party — or customize the color to your liking.

Woodland smash cake

Woodland Smash Cake

Love all things rustic and outdoorsy? This woodland-inspired cake is so creative — it looks just like a birch log. For even more fun, top it with some forest-dwelling animals, like bear, fox and deer figurines.

Mermaid smash cake

Little Mermaid Smash Cake

If you're digging an under-the-sea party theme, this mermaid smash cake is perfect. There's nothing quite like edible art, is there?

"Star Wars" smash cake

Star Wars Smash Cake

Star Wars fans, this one’s for you! While there are few things cuter than an R2D2 smash cake, it really ups the ante when the birthday babe is fully decked out in Jedi gear, don't you think?

Snowflake smash cake

Snowflake Smash Cake

Baby, it's cold outside, but that won't stop your little one from celebrating her first trip around the sun. This smash cake, which looks just like glistening snow, is perfect for a Winter Onederland party .

Airplane smash cake

Airplane Smash Cake

Delicate, simple and delicious, this eye-catching cake will take your dessert spread to new heights. Buy or make a fun airplane topper, and frost the cake to look like layers of blue sky.

Starbucks smash cake

Starbucks Smash Cake

Okay, so your baby might not love Starbucks (yet), but this theme is funny for any parent who has a slight caffeine addiction. The only challenge: finding a baker skilled enough to make a giant Frappuccino cake (and also not devouring it first yourself).

Sprinkle smash cake

Sprinkle Mania Smash Cake

Every kid loves sprinkles! And lucky for you, this sprinkle-covered smash cake isn't just fun to look at — it also comes with easy-to-follow directions from food blogger Karli Bitner of Cooking with Karli. ( Check out the tutorial here .)

Polka-dot smash cake

Polka Dot Smash Cake

This duo (for twins!) may have the precision of a pro baker's touch, but it's a look that's totally doable to take on yourself. Customize it with any flavor and color scheme of your choice — the sky's the limit.

"Hole in One" golf smash cake

Golf Smash Cake

This tiny smash cake pairs perfectly with the adult-size cake meant for party guests. Watch and laugh as your little Tiger Woods-in-training bites into the "golf ball" and destroys the grass.

Thing 1 and Thing 2 smash cake

Thing 1 Thing 2 Smash Cake

If you're ringing in not just one first birthday, but two, a Thing 1 and Thing 2 theme is ideal. Not only is the color palette gender-neutral, but each child will get their very own cake to destroy.

"Game of Thrones" smash cake

Game of Thrones Smash Cake

Just can't get over the fact that Game of Thrones is over? Help the series live on with a GOT-inspired first birthday bash! Your mini Jon Snow will have a ball digging into a dragon-themed smash cake, complete with three dragon "eggs."

Easy smash cake

All In Bloom Smash Cake

If you're looking for something sweet and simple, you can top a lightly frosted cake with just about anything. Fresh flowers or greenery are a good place to start. Edible gold flecks take the whole thing up a notch too.

Baseball smash cake

Baseball Smash Cake

Batter up! Baseball fans will get a kick out of a game day party theme — and your tot will certainly enjoy a baseball-shaped cake.

"Happ-bee birthday" smash cake

Bee Smash Cake

Lean into a bumblebee theme with a smash cake reminiscent of a hive and decorated with tiny edible bees. The whole party is sure to be buzzing about it.

Strawberry smash cake

Strawberry Smash Cake

From the pink frosting and fresh strawberry to the matching cake topper, this option is sweet in every way. And it's perfect for a summer Berry First Birthday celebration.

Giant cupcake smash cake

Giant Cupcake Smash Cake

Smash cakes that look like oversized cupcakes are a popular trend right now — and for obvious reasons. It's insanely cute to watch baby smash a cupcake as big as her head, and it makes for some pretty great photos. This option would work especially well for a Sweet One-themed party .

Royal smash cake

Royal Smash Cake

Give your little princess or prince the royal treatment with a smash cake topped with — what else? — a crown.

Cookie Monster smash cake

Cookie Monster Smash Cake

If Sesame Street is already your little one's go-to, why not feature one of the show's most beloved characters at the party? This Cookie-Monster-inspired smash cake looks like the big guy himself — caught munching hungrily on a great big cookie!

Fox smash cake

Foxy Smash Cake

Is there anything more sweet than, well, a cake shaped just like one of the cutest woodland creatures around? This fox smash cake is a great choice for any party with a rustic theme.

What to Expect the First Year, 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes , December 2023. WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a First Birthday Party , December 2023.

Updates history

December 21, 2023

Editor: Caroline Picard

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Fact-checked to ensure accuracy.

Your Next Read

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

It’s Surprisingly Easy to Make a Diaper Cake — Here’s How Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Make Sugar-Dusted Memories With a 'Sweet One' Birthday Theme Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw the Sweetest 'Berry First Birthday' Party for Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

14 Gender Reveal Cake Ideas to Share Your Sweet Baby News Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

11 Royally Excellent Princess Party Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Fresh Ideas for a Farm Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 of Your Biggest Toddler Birthday Party Questions — Answered Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Sweet Monthly Photo Shoot Ideas for Every Family By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window