Some Moms Swear by Red Raspberry Leaf Tea During Pregnancy — But Does It Work?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

red raspberry leaf tea pregnant, cup of tea

Before you make red raspberry leaf tea part of your pregnancy ritual, learn about its effectiveness and safety.

Moms-to-be have traditionally relied on raspberry leaf tea to trigger contractions and naturally induce labor . Plenty of women still try it in hopes of speeding up their babies' arrivals. But research hasn't proven that raspberry leaf tea is effective — or, more importantly, safe.

Here's why you should be cautious and talk with your health care practitioner before drinking red raspberry leaf tea during pregnancy.

Key Takeaways

Red raspberry leaf tea may not actually induce labor. While the herbal tea has long been used as a natural way to trigger contractions and speed up labor, experts say there isn't enough quality research to recommend it.

Its safety during pregnancy remains unclear. Because herbal supplements aren't tightly regulated and studies on red raspberry leaf tea are limited, practitioners can't say for sure whether it's safe. Always check with your practitioner before trying it.

The tea may have side effects and modest health benefits. Red raspberry leaf tea could act as a diuretic or laxative and may cause more frequent bathroom trips. On the plus side, it contains antioxidants and may help reduce bloating from water retention.

What is red raspberry leaf tea?

Red raspberry leaf tea is an herbal tea made from the leaves of the red raspberry plant.

Historically, it's been used in folk remedies, including as a tonic to strengthen the uterus and promote faster, healthier labor and quicker postpartum recovery . However, scientific research on red raspberry leaf tea's effects on labor has produced some inconclusive results.

Why do pregnant women drink red raspberry leaf tea?

Pregnant women looking to jumpstart their labor have long turned to raspberry leaf tea because it's thought to be a uterine tonic that boosts blood flow to the uterus and strengthens uterine muscle fibers. In turn, that's believed to get the birthing process started by triggering contractions .

Strengthening the uterus is also thought to help prevent excessive postpartum bleeding .

Pregnancy advice can feel like a game of “Who do I believe?” one minute and “Should I Google this?” the next. Get the What to Expect app to cut through the noise with trusted articles, symptom tracking, and expert-approved guidance tailored to your exact week of pregnancy.

Can you drink raspberry leaf tea to induce labor?

Countless women have tried it. The problem? Even though plenty swear by red raspberry leaf tea to induce labor, the research isn't so straightforward.

One small study found that taking red raspberry leaf pills starting at 32 weeks pregnant shortened the second stage of labor (but not the first stage) and reduced the need for forceps . Another suggested that taking red raspberry leaf tea could lower the chances of having a post-term baby — meaning a pregnancy that goes 42 weeks or beyond.

"I believe it contributed to a very short labor for my first," says What to Expect Community member lmcmama22. "I had to drink less because the Braxton Hicks were so strong."

That might sound promising. But more recent reviews have concluded that there's not enough high-quality evidence to say for sure whether red raspberry leaf tea is actually effective for inducing or shortening labor. And most experts agree that the tea shouldn't be recommended because of a lack of good safety data.

"I used it with both my babies," says mom eshcf. "Drank it consistently two or three times a day. Honestly don't think it did anything. I think I'll skip it this time."

Is it safe to drink raspberry leaf tea?

Because teas are largely unregulated and because there's not enough research to support its safety, we just don't know if it's safe to drink raspberry leaf tea during pregnancy.

You might assume that if a box of red raspberry leaf tea is sold in a drugstore or online, it can't possibly be harmful. But that's not actually the case.

Herbal supplements are only loosely regulated in the U.S., and manufacturers don't have to test them for safety or efficacy before putting them on the market. In fact, there's no guarantee that what's in the package matches what it says on the label. That alone is reason enough to proceed with caution, especially when you're pregnant.

And because quality research on red raspberry leaf tea is limited, experts don't know enough to say for sure whether drinking red raspberry leaf tea to induce labor is safe.

As for drinking it earlier in your pregnancy? Even herbalists and midwives who recommend the tea generally advise avoiding it during the first trimester . If red raspberry leaf does in fact stimulate uterine muscles, it could potentially increase the risk of miscarriage .

Ultimately, you should be careful before using red raspberry leaf tea or any other herbal supplements during your pregnancy . And if you're thinking about trying the tea, always get the green light from your practitioner first. If your practitioner approves it, it's best to drink the tea in moderation.

"It definitely increased my Braxton Hicks at 36 weeks, which kind of freaked me out haha, so now I'm waiting to drink it until I'm 38 weeks," says Community mom emgo.

What are the side effects of drinking raspberry leaf tea?

The lack of research on raspberry leaf tea means that experts don't fully understand its possible side effects. So what is known? Red raspberry leaf tea is thought to:

Have a diuretic effect. As if you aren't running to the bathroom enough already, raspberry leaf tea could make you have to pee more often .

Affect your bowels. Anecdotally, many users say that drinking raspberry leaf tea has a laxative effect. However, some research suggests it could help treat diarrhea . "Started drinking red raspberry tea yesterday and ended up feeling nauseas and having diarrhea multiple times," says Community member sydneymcintosh.

Possibly increase the chance of miscarriage in the first trimester . Since it may have the potential to trigger contractions if you drink it in large quantities (defined as more than four 8-ounce cups daily), it's best to avoid drinking red raspberry leaf tea early in your pregnancy.

"My OB doesn't want me drinking raspberry leaf tea because I have a history of premature birth ," says Community mom riverWrightMom.

Are there any red raspberry leaf tea benefits?

Though its benefits for labor are questionable, raspberry leaf tea still offers some health perks, including:

It's rich in antioxidants. Red raspberry leaf tea notably contains ellagic acid, a polyphenol with anti-inflammatory properties.

It may help reduce bloating. Thanks to its diuretic effects, red raspberry leaf tea could help ease puffiness caused by water retention .

Red raspberry leaf tea has been used for generations to kick-start contractions, speed up labor, and promote recovery postpartum. But since the research on whether it actually works is limited and experts can't say for sure that it's safe, skipping red raspberry leaf tea might be the best choice. If you still want to try it, be sure to talk it over with your practitioner first.