Best Songs to Sing to Your Baby

singing to your baby

Whether you sing off-key or in perfect pitch, your baby loves being crooned to. Here are some classic, modern and oh-so-silly tunes to try.

One of the hidden joys of parenthood is the chance to reclaim part of your own childhood. And one way to do this is to entertain your baby with goofy songs (complete with goofier lyrics!). In fact, not only does music delight your infant, but it can work to calm her down and even get her ready for reading.

Listening to songs, along with the rhythm and rhyme that accompanies them, helps babies learn to distinguish individual sounds and syllables, which eventually helps them connect letters. So, don't be afraid to belt out some tunes (hitting the right notes is totally optional).

What to sing? Anything you like! Popular music, show tunes and, of course, traditional kiddie ditties. Many old favorites offer endlessly variable lyrics. Take "Old McDonald's Farm," which is home to cows and pigs, but you could make the song about zebras and ostriches. Your baby will be so busy laughing at your mooing and oinking that she won't notice all the new words she’s learning.

Ready to hop on stage? Here’s why your baby can benefit from music, especially when it’s sung by you, plus a whole host of great tunes to add to your repertoire.

What are the benefits of singing to your baby?

The benefits of music for babies are well documented and include learning, comfort and most importantly, bonding. Your baby loves your voice — and when you use it to sing to her, she feels your deep affection. And when you sing the same tunes at the same times, as when diapering or putting her down for a nap, she learns about transitions and feels safe in her routine.

Your baby’s vocabulary will also expand with every new tune, whether you sing about animals in a zoo or her body parts as you wash them in the tub. And singing is actually a kind of playing — no toys required! Listening skills are also honed during song time and singing is the perfect family activity for older siblings to try as they get to know their baby sister or brother.

Best songs to sing to babies

Classic songs to sing to your baby

"If You're Happy and You Know It!" This joyful clapping and stamping song teaches body parts (help your baby clap her hands until she can do it on her own).

"She'll Be Coming 'Round the Mountain." Lots of action words are the point here, so make the most of them in each verse (toot, toot!).

"Head, Shoulders, Knees and Toes." Yup — more body parts are introduced in this cute tune. Make it extra fun by repeating the song a little bit faster each time.

"Miss Mary Mack." Clothing is the next topic in this classic tune, which is an excellent one to sing while getting your baby dressed in the morning.

"Itsy-Bitsy Spider." Down came the rain! The weather is dramatic here, so use your hands to mimic showers and then make a big “O” to indicate the sun.

"The Farmer in the Dell." Farmer, wife, child — family members are made real in this merry ditty about life on the farm, which you can personalize for your own family.

"Hush Little Baby." Are you circling the carpet trying to get your babe to drop off to sleep? Offer this quiet lullaby about what you’ll buy for your sweet girl if she’ll just shut her eyes.

"The Children's Marching Song (Nick Nack Paddy Whack)." Counting for your baby teaches numbers, of course, but the fun part is saying knick-knack paddy whack over and over.

"You Are My Sunshine." She’s the light in your heart — and in the room where she should be napping. This gentle lullaby should lull her right to sleep.

"Somewhere Over the Rainbow." Wishing upon a star and melting lemon drops are just two of the best lines in this beautiful song that’s ideal for a baby.

Modern songs to sing to your baby

"Baby Shark." This song may make you cringe, but it’s super fun and it hits upon every member of the family with a cute hand gesture.

"Blackbird." Who’s better than the Beatles? Croon this tune while at the park — you just might spy a bird that matches the lyrics.

"I Wanna Hold Your Hand." Yup, more John and Paul, plus the rest of the Fab Four. Show your love with this song and literally hold your baby’s hand while you do it.

"Can’t Help Falling in Love." Wise men say, as Elvis once sang. You’ve already fallen in love with your new baby, but keep telling her about your feelings anyway.

"Rainbow Connection." Babies and the Muppets go hand in hand. This sweet tune is about reaching for your dreams, no matter what.

"Ain’t No Sunshine." This slow ballad is another hit that’ll rock your baby into dreamland. You can replace your baby’s name for ‘she’ in the lyrics too.

"Dear Theodosia." A heartbreaking song from the hit musical Hamilton (you’ll be weeping before you finish it).

"Hallelujah." Leonard Cohen’s famous song has covered countless times — and now it’s waiting for its debut in your baby’s nursery.

"Upside Down." Jack Johnson’s adorable number was written for the film Curious George .

"Your Song." Your baby will love this Elton John tune and you’ll appreciate the thoughtful lyrics.

Silly songs to sing to your baby

"There Was an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Fly." This goofy number follows a pattern, adding a spider, a bird and then a cat as it builds to the finale.

"Fried Ham." You’ll go through the whole kitchen pantry and fridge with this funny tune.

"On Top of Spaghetti." This dinnertime ditty is about losing your meatball when somebody sneezes. Your baby will likely toss meatball bits from her highchair, so it’s very appropriate.

"Baby BumbleBee." Insects, animals and every other wild thing is packed into this crazy song, along with excellent vocab words like “squish.”

"This Little Piggy." Lay your baby on your lap as you gently tug on each of her teeny tiny toes. The best part: when the last piggy cries “wee-wee” all the way home and you tickle her chin.

"Elmo’s Song." It’s silly for sure, but you can swap your baby’s name for Elmo to personalize it and up the fun factor.

"The More We Get Together." Community and friendship are the lessons learned here. Add in the names of your baby’s pals from playgroup to make it familiar.

"Where Is Thumbkin?" Each finger has a star turn in this wacky tune — much to your baby’s delight. Wiggle your digits and use a different voice for each.

"Wheels On The Bus." Yup, they go ‘round and ‘round. The many verses teach about the people on the bus and the roles they play (parents, baby, driver).

"Five Little Monkeys." Those silly monkeys! Jumping on the bed never ends well, but this song is bound to get a chuckle from both of you as it teaches numbers.

The world of song offers so much to a baby’s budding mind, so now’s the time to reach back into the archives for some old favorites or cue up a playlist of new tunes for your infant. She’ll love the fact that you’re singing just for her — and forgive any wrong notes you hit.