Sperm Allergies: What They Are and How They Affect Fertility

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

sperm allergy semen allergy fertility, sperm swimming on red background

Though rare, they can make conception tricky. But with the right guidance, you can still grow your family.

Post-sex redness, itching, burning, or swelling down there can have a lot of different possible causes. One of them you might not have thought of is a sperm allergy.

Though a semen or sperm allergy is rare, experts estimate that up to 40,000 U.S. women may have one — which not only can make sex uncomfortable, it can also create a roadblock for couples trying to conceive.

Fortunately there are things you can do to feel better and up your chances of getting pregnant . Here’s a look at what sperm allergies are, how they relate to getting pregnant , and the best treatment options.

Key Takeaways

Sperm allergies are rare but real. They can cause redness, itching, burning, or swelling after sex — and may make conceiving the traditional way trickier.

Treatment options can help. From using condoms to desensitization or sperm-washing procedures, there are ways to manage symptoms and still try for a baby.

Your fertility and pregnancy aren’t at risk. A sperm allergy won’t affect your baby or cause miscarriage, and your doctor can guide you toward safe ways to conceive.

What is a sperm allergy or semen allergy?

A sperm allergy or semen allergy is an allergy to proteins found in semen. Officially called seminal plasma hypersensitivity, it can occur at any time. Some people have an allergic reaction to their partner’s semen the first time they have sex, but it can also happen suddenly with a longtime partner.

“I had this happen with my partner of 15 years after my fourth pregnancy (the first of our shared children). I got what felt like a yeast infection every time we had sex for a couple months,” recalls What to Expect Community mom somelamescreenname.

Sperm allergies can also show up after a period of not having sex , like after giving birth. And they might strike after sex with one partner but not another.

How can a semen allergy affect fertility?

Sperm allergies aren’t a direct cause of infertility , but they can make it harder to conceive the traditional way. The good news is that there are plenty of alternatives.

In some cases, it’s possible to treat a semen allergy so you and your partner can try to get pregnant by having sex.

If that’s not an option, you can also try to conceive via intrauterine insemination or in vitro fertilization using sperm washing . In this procedure, sperm is separated from the seminal fluid, so the sperm itself doesn’t contain allergy-causing proteins and therefore won’t trigger a reaction.

Semen allergy and pregnancy

A semen allergy can sometimes make conception challenging, but it won’t affect you or your baby once you’re pregnant. And despite what you might have heard, there’s no documented evidence of sperm allergies causing a miscarriage.

Semen allergy symptoms

People with a sperm allergy will typically start to show symptoms within 30 minutes of being exposed to semen. Sometimes the reaction can be immediate and happen within five minutes.

Signs of a semen allergy can include:

Redness, burning, itching, or swelling on any part of the body or skin that has come into contact with semen. What to Expect Community mom Melanatedmommy would notice that her vagina would swell and burn for an hour or two after sex when her partner ejaculated inside of her.

Hives all over the body, including parts of the skin that haven’t come into contact with semen

Trouble breathing

Anaphylaxis , a life-threatening reaction marked by swelling, nausea, vomiting, trouble breathing and, in severe cases, shock

Sperm allergy symptoms can clear up within a few hours, though they sometimes stick around for a few days.

The problem can sometimes be confused with vaginitis, a yeast infection or a sexually transmitted infection (STI). But there’s often a reliable way to tell the difference: If your symptoms flare up shortly after having sex without a condom, a sperm allergy may be to blame.

Semen allergy treatments

There are a few different ways to manage a semen allergy, including the following:

Avoid contact with your partner’s semen. Just like with any other allergy, the most straightforward method to prevent a reaction is to avoid contact with the substance that triggers your symptoms. That could mean using condoms every time you have sex.

Try desensitizing yourself to your partner’s sperm. You could also opt to undergo an intravaginal graded challenge. The procedure involves having an allergist put diluted amounts of your partner’s semen into your vagina at regular intervals, gradually increasing the proportion of semen until you can tolerate undiluted semen without having a reaction. You’ll then need to have sex regularly — at least two or three times a week — in order to keep your system from becoming more sensitive again.

Take an antihistamine before sex. Oral antihistamines might prevent your symptoms from flaring up. In rare cases, antihistamines may have a negative effect on ovulation and make it harder for an embryo to implant, though, so they’re not the first choice for couples trying to conceive.

Your doctor can help you figure out the best treatment option based on the severity of your symptoms and your pregnancy goals.

Regardless of which treatment option you chose, your doctor might recommend keeping an epinephrine auto-injector on-hand in case you have a life-threatening reaction like anaphylaxis.

Does a sperm allergy cause a skin rash?

Sperm allergies can cause rash-like symptoms, including redness, itching, burning, or swelling on your genitals or any other part of the skin that’s come into contact with semen.

It’s also possible for a sperm allergy to cause an all-over reaction on parts of the skin that didn’t come into contact with your partner’s semen.

Does a semen allergy go away?

As with other allergies, it’s unlikely that a semen allergy will clear up on its own. But undergoing a treatment like an intravaginal graded challenge could significantly reduce your sensitivity and allow you to have unprotected sex without triggering your symptoms.

You’ll need to have sex frequently and regularly for your body to maintain its ability to tolerate your partner’s sperm.

When to call the doctor about a semen allergy

Call your doctor if you notice any symptoms, even if they’re mild. She or he can determine whether the culprit is a sperm allergy or another problem, like vaginitis, a yeast infection, or an STI — and help you figure out the best treatment option.

Sperm allergies can cause uncomfortable symptoms and make it harder to conceive the traditional way. The good news is that there are ways to cope that can make sex more enjoyable — and increase your chances of getting pregnant.

Track your fertility, monitor symptoms, and get expert tips — download the What to Expect app today.