Treating Spider Bites in Kids

spider bites in kids, black plastic spiders on teal blue background

Your little one may love "The Itsy Bitsy Spider," but she's probably not the biggest fan of getting bitten. Learn more about spider bites on kids, including how to spot and treat them.

Spiders may seem scary, but spider bites on kids are pretty uncommon and rarely harmful. In fact, spiders usually like to keep to themselves and only bite if they’re threatened (arachnophobes, rejoice!).

If your child is bitten by a spider, expect a reaction similar to a bee sting — like redness and swelling — and make her feel better with these tips on spotting and treating spider bites in kids.

Symptoms of spider bites in kids

The symptoms of most bites by house spiders in the U.S. resemble those of any other bug bite. In fact, most spiders are harmless, and the symptoms of a bite either tend to be mild or go unnoticed.

The most common symptoms of a house spider bite include: Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSpider BitesSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSpider BitesSee All Sources

Redness

Itchiness

Pain

A bump on the skin

There are, however, two spiders in the U.S. that are poisonous to humans (i.e. their fangs are long enough to penetrate the skin, and their venom can be toxic): brown recluse spiders and black widow spiders.

Brown recluse spiders

brown recluse spider, spider bites in kids

Brown recluse spiders are most often found in the South and Midwest, particularly in Missouri, Kansas, Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma and eastern Texas. They're often found in dark, undisturbed areas such as under porches or woodpiles.

These spiders are dark brown and have a characteristic violin- or fiddle-shaped marking on the upper body. The symptoms of a brown recluse spider bite include: Trusted SourceNational Library of Medicine, Medline PlusBrown Recluse SpidersSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Library of Medicine, Medline PlusBrown Recluse SpidersSee All Sources

Pain (which can develop within the first few hours after being bitten)

Itching

Chills

Fever

Nausea

Sweating

Redness (or a purple color) around the bite

Soreness around the bite

Black widow spiders

black widow spider, spider bites in kids

Black widow spiders are found throughout the U.S., though they mainly reside in the South and West, where the climates range from temperate to subtropical, and sometimes in the North. They often live in quiet areas, such as sheds, barns, woodpiles and other piles of debris.

Like their name suggests, black widow spiders have a shiny black body and a red hourglass shape on the abdomen.

Some symptoms of a black widow spider bite include: Trusted SourceNational Library of Medicine, Medline PlusBlack Widow SpiderSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Library of Medicine, Medline PlusBlack Widow SpiderSee All Sources

One or two puncture marks from the bite

Pain (this can develop around the bite, then spread throughout the body after 15 minutes to an hour)

Swelling (including facial swelling, which can be mistaken for an allergy to the drug that’s used to treat the bite)

Redness

Muscle weakness

A sore that resembles a target

Severe stomach cramps

Painful muscle cramps or spasms

Nausea and vomiting

Chills, fever

Sweating

Sometimes, a child may develop an allergic reaction to a spider bite, which can cause symptoms such as:

Facial or mouth swelling

Trouble swallowing or speaking

Difficulty breathing

Wheezing or chest tightness

If your child has any of these symptoms, or if you suspect that she's been bitten by a brown recluse or black widow spider, go to the emergency room right away or call 911.

Treating spider bites in kids

If your child has been bitten by a spider, you may be able to treat the bite at home. Here are a few steps to take to speed up the healing and ward off an infection:

Keep it clean. Wash the area carefully with soap and water several times a day until the bite heals.

Head off infection. Apply an antibiotic ointment and keep your child’s hands as clean as possible.

Use an ice pack. Put an ice pack or cool, wet cloth on the skin to ease the pain and swelling.

Ease any pain. If your child complains that the bite hurts or seems fussier than usual, an age-appropriate dose of acetaminophen or ibuprofen will help.

When to worry about a spider bite

If your child develops symptoms of infection, like redness, swelling, pus or a warm feeling around the bite, call your doctor or 911 or head to the emergency room.

You can also call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222 if you have any questions, including non-urgent ones.

If you suspect that your child was bitten by a brown recluse spider or black widow spider, or is having a severe allergic reaction to the bite, you should call 911 or go to the emergency room right away.

Preventing spider bites in kids

Spider bites, just like other bug bites in children, can be avoided by taking precautions outside, including the following:

Cover up. Does your little one have a tiny green thumb? Make sure she wears long-sleeved shirts and shoes outside and gloves while she’s playing in the garden (a spider-friendly place).

Don't bring firewood inside. Keep logs and other wood outside the house, since there may be spiders or spider webs on them.

Apply insect repellent. Insect repellent prevents most bug bites in children. You can use one containing 10 to 30 percent DEET or one with picaridin (but don’t use either on infants under 2 months old). Limit where you apply it to your child’s clothing and any exposed skin except her hands and face. If you aren’t sure whether a particular insect repellent is okay for your child, ask your doctor to recommend a safe one. This should keep mosquito bites and tick bites at bay, too. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsChoosing an Insect Repellent for Your ChildSee All Sources [4]

Feeling creeped out by these creepy crawlers? Don't be. Most spiders rarely bite people — and when they do, their bites are pretty mild.

Still, if your child is showing symptoms of a more serious reaction — such as an infection or allergy — call your doctor, the Poison Control hotline, or 911, or go to the emergency room.