Stress During Pregnancy

stress during pregnancy, woman holding her hands to her head in front of a pink wall

If you’re like most people these days, your life is plenty stressful. Wondering what all that stress means for your pregnancy? Read on …

Pregnancy can be a stressful time for even the most relaxed moms-to-be. Happily, your pregnancy and baby won’t be impacted if you’re experiencing just the typical, everyday stress. Which means you don’t have to stress out about any stress you might be feeling.

But too much long-term, severe stress can take its toll on you, your pregnancy and your baby. Here’s what you need to know about stress during pregnancy.

Emotional stress during pregnancy

Many changes happen during the nine months of pregnancy. Between the pregnancy hormones that do a number on your moods , the prep work necessary for baby’s arrival, and worries about labor and delivery, it’s no wonder you’re feeling just a tad bit stressed while pregnant.

The ongoing pandemic has also added an extra layer of stress for most people, pregnant or not. (Be sure to talk to your practitioner about the risks of COVID-19 during pregnancy .)

Feeling stressed is extremely common and par for the pregnancy course. The good news: Not all stress is bad, and some stress may even be good. It can help you get through challenging times, and keep you on your toes so you’re motivated to take the best possible care of yourself and your baby-to-be.

Symptoms of stress during pregnancy

Pregnant or not, a body under stress experiences physical and chemical changes. Some of the most common symptoms of stress during pregnancy include the following:

An increase in cortisol, epinephrine and norepinephrine levels, whether you’re aware of it or not

An increase in heart rate or heart palpitations

Headaches

Back pain

Tummy upset

Teeth grinding

Difficulty concentrating

Excessive fatigue

Difficulty sleeping

Loss of appetite

Overeating

A feeling of worry, frustration, anger or sadness

Loss of interest in being around other people

Excessive need to be around other people, or feeling scared to be alone

Effects of stress during pregnancy

While some stress is normal and healthy, too much stress or unchecked stress can affect your health, your pregnancy and your baby.

For instance, if you have high levels of stress, you may turn to unhealthy coping mechanisms, like alcohol, smoking, drugs (like marijuana) or unhealthy eating.

Too much stress can also lead to anxiety and/or depression — mental health conditions that could impact your pregnancy and your general well-being.

High levels of stress can also exacerbate any chronic conditions you have as well as make you more susceptible to illnesses. And if your stress levels remain high for a long time — say throughout your pregnancy and beyond — it could possibly lead to high blood pressure and heart disease.

Can stress during pregnancy hurt my baby?

Regular, everyday stress during pregnancy, such as stressing to make a work deadline or finish the nursery, won’t hurt your baby.

But extreme (operative word here: extreme), chronic and long-term stress can, in some cases, increase the risk of:

Miscarriage

Preterm delivery

Low birthweight baby

Developmental delays

Babies born too soon or too small can face more complications than full-term, normal-weight newborns.

Tips for managing stress during pregnancy

Learning how to handle your stress during pregnancy should be a top priority for all moms-to-be. So take a deep breath and try some of these stress-busting strategies:

Talk it out. While it may seem like you’re the only pregnant person to feel freaked out about, say, facing labor, you’re far from alone. In fact, many expectant mothers are probably thinking the exact same thoughts you are. So reach out to women who are pregnant or are now new parents. Friends, relatives, chat groups and message boards are all great resources when you’re looking to vent. Sharing your feelings and finding like-minded mates can help you get a handle on stress during pregnancy.

Get Zen. All those ways you minimized stress before pregnancy can come in handy now that you’re expecting. Meditation , deep breathing, yoga or even a brisk walk are just some of the ways you can lower cortisol levels and boost endorphins — known as "feel-good" brain chemicals — to improve your mood. Find whatever relaxation technique works for you and make it part of your routine. Need help relaxing? Treat yourself to a prenatal massage and let the stress get rubbed away.

Ask for a hand. If you’re feeling overwhelmed, enlist friends or family members to help you set up the nursery, stock up on diapers or pick up that bag of hand-me-down maternity clothes your pal is giving you. In other words, if there’s a task you can farm out, don’t hesitate to ask for a helping hand. You’ll probably find that people are more than happy to help you, and that in itself should make you feel less stress during pregnancy. After all, how can you be expected to lug baby furniture when you’re already carrying a mini-me in your tummy?

Rest up. The right amount of sleep can help you not only recharge but also regenerate. Too little sleep can increase stress levels, and make coping with any stress you already have more stressful. So break the stress-sleeplessness-stress cycle by working to get your full night's sleep each night. A warm bath, a cup of chamomile tea and some soothing music can help you get into the sleepy zone.

Eat right. With so much going on in your life right now, you may not be focused on taking good care of yourself. But treating yourself well, which includes staying hydrated and eating well , will keep your energy up and your anxiety levels down — exactly what you need to fend off stress during pregnancy. What if you can’t find the time to make nutritious meals? Keep easy-to-grab snacks for yourself in your cupboard and fridge, such as string cheese and whole wheat crackers, baby carrots and hummus, or yogurt and an apple. If healthy food is readily available, you’ll be a lot more likely to chow down on the good stuff.

Work it out. With a workout, that is. Exercise is one of the best stress busters there is, since working out boosts feel-good endorphins and lowers stress levels. Just be sure to check with your doctor about what types of exercises you can safely do.

Cut back. If you’re doing too much and you’re stressed about that, cut back — or at least prioritize. Say no to new projects at work if you can, ignore the spring cleaning project you were hoping to do, and forget about the crafts you were thinking of DIYing. Postpone them for now so your schedule is less hectic and you can find time to….

Stop and smell the … babies. Every time your mind starts to race with your list of baby to-dos and you find your blood pressure rising, simply … stop. Instead, think about some of the reasons you’re happy you’re having this baby. Whether it’s because you can’t wait to dress him up, you love that sweet baby smell or you were born to be a mom, revel in those happy thoughts. You have all those things to look forward to. And you know what? Most of your to-dos will get done eventually — even if some of them get done after the baby is born. (You’d be surprised by how few essentials you truly need before your newborn arrives.) So instead of drowning in a sea of stress during pregnancy, take some much-needed time to focus on the joy your new baby will bring you.

When to call the doctor about stress during pregnancy

If you start to experience worry and anxiety that you can't shake, let your practitioner know. If you’re losing sleep every night, have lost your appetite for an extended period of time, or if your stress has lead to unhealthy behaviors, call the doctor. Pregnancy anxiety or depression should be treated, so don’t delay sharing your feelings with your OB/GYN or midwife.

The bottom line: Don’t stress out about regular, everyday stress when you’re pregnant, but do take steps to relax and take care of yourself. It'll help both you and your baby during your pregnancy.