Stuck on What to Say? 50 Pregnancy Announcement Captions for Every Kind of Reveal

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

From short and sweet to long and sentimental, there are so many ways to share the big news on social media.

Whether you're after a quick one-liner or sentimental story, pregnancy announcement captions can come in every style — funny, sweet, or deeply personal. Below are options for every situation, from first pregnancies and multiples to rainbow babies and IVF journeys, plus seasonal ideas and quotes for extra inspiration.

After weeks and weeks of waiting to publicly share your adorable not-so-little secret, announcing your pregnancy can feel exhilarating. While some parents have been leaning into the trend of not sharing the news on social media and hard launching their baby after they're born, others (myself included!) may be eager to post about their exciting news.

And if you’re still riding the emotional high (or nerves!) of seeing those two pink lines, download the What to Expect app to track early symptoms and connect with other expectant parents going through the same first-flutter feelings.

But what do you actually say when you post about your soon-to-be bundle of joy? Is your caption simple, sappy, sentimental, or sweet? "My timeline and newsfeed is FULL of pregnancy announcements," says What to Expect Community mom Milz5421. "I haven’t posted mine because I have no idea how I want to announce!"

Pregnancy announcement captions can be as simple as “We’re expecting!” or a more detailed explanation of the journey that led to those two little lines on the pregnancy test. Here's some caption inspiration to spark your creativity.

Key Takeaways

Pregnancy announcement captions may be short and punny or long and heartfelt — the tone is entirely up to you, whether you're going funny, sentimental, or detailed about your journey.

You might consider captions tailored to specific circumstances, such as rainbow babies, fertility treatment journeys, multiples, and seasonal or holiday announcements.

While some parents these days opt to skip social media announcements altogether and "hard launch" after birth, plenty of caption inspiration exists for those who do want to share the news with friends and family online.

What is a pregnancy announcement caption?

A pregnancy announcement caption is the text attached to a photo or video you share on social media. It could also be a one-liner shown on a letterboard or other sign featured in a social media post. Depending on the theme and your own personality, the caption can be short and snappy, long and detailed, or loaded up with silly pregnancy puns… you name it, the options are endless.

What are some short and sweet pregnancy announcement captions?

next great adventure annoucement

“in our mom and dad era” —@jolieeeb

“I’m in love with a human I haven’t met yet”

“And then there were three…”

“Baby loading…”

“Oh BABY”

“Oh BOY”

“Half of you and half of me”

“Our greatest adventure is about to begin”

What are some more detailed pregnancy announcement caption ideas?

mom and dad annoucement

“I'm pleased to announce that my incredible wife Helen is pregnant with our second child, a baby boy, due July 2024. This pregnancy hasn’t been an easy one. Two failed embryo transfers with this transfer being our second to last one. Even then we were told this baby was unlikely to survive. At the two week scan (viability scan) the baby was too small to measure. But here we are 20 weeks later, and it’s finally starting to feel. This year has taught us both a lot when it comes to the emotional pain that surrounds trying to conceive and our hearts go out to all those who have or are currently experiencing similar struggles.” — insideoursuitcase

“I’m pregnant! again! 2 under 2, here we go! Send prayers but really though, but we couldn’t be more excited — this is a dream come true for us. any mamas, papas or caregivers who’ve gone from 1 to 2 kids, please share your wisdom. also, so open to your your wisdom around kids that are ~22 months apart. even though I’ve never been drawn to kids, becoming a mama has felt like the most natural, fulfilling thing I’ve ever done. our 16-month-old is a firecracker and the most hilarious, magnetic, and attuned little human I’ve ever met. just witnessing her become more of herself each day is the biggest gift. we’re so excited to begin this journey again and I simply can’t wait to meet the next one. who will she be?! this second pregnancy has already been SO different than the first. I’m so much more tired, more anxious, more nauseous, and I keep forgetting I’m pregnant because I’m so consumed with my toddler. although second trimester vibes just hit and I couldn’t be happier to be here” — erinclairejones

“Every kick, every flutter, and every tiny heartbeat reminds us that our lives are about to change in the most incredible way. We’re so excited to share that we’re expecting! #Summer2024” — @sadekelly_

What are some funny pregnancy announcement captions?

here we grow again

“Not our first rodeo” — @beachfoamco

“There’s a little bun in the oven!” — @sprinkledsugarcookies

“Here we GROW again!” — @_sierraroth_

“Alexa, play ‘Baby’ by Justin Bieber”

“Oops…we did it again”

“We’ve been cooking something up”

“A little cutie is on the way”

“Here comes the son”

“Caution: Bumps Ahead”

“It’s bumpin’”

What are some rainbow baby announcement captions?

allison travis annoucement

“After every storm there is a rainbow”

“My rainbow, my everything”

“Oh hello, little rainbow”

“Although these pictures show the hands down happiest moment in my life, I know how incredibly hard announcements like these are for those struggling with loss and pregnancy troubles. After multiple back-to-back losses, lots of testing and multiple surgeries, l feel you and understand the sadness & disappointment you are feeling. Absolutely no one deserves to endure that pain. Please stay positive and know I am praying for you. I am always a shoulder you can lean on.” — @_allisontravis

What are some baby announcement ideas following fertility treatments?

worth the wait

“Worth every shot”

“Made with lots of love and a little science”

“The little embryo that could”

“You were worth the wait little one” — @lauracbeilke

“After over 3 years of trials, we are so excited to announce BABY GIRL ERHARD will be joining us January 2024" — @oakgrovefarmstn

“The most joyful personal news I’ve ever had the privilege to share. We’re finally going to be parents. The journey to get to this day has been silent yet incredibly long and arduous after first being told we would never have children. It evolved into recurrent miscarriages, multiple IVF egg retrievals, an endometriosis diagnosis and hours long surgery and finally the discovery of reproductive immunology and alloimmunity and the importance of personal advocacy. We are forever grateful to the 5 incredible doctors and multiple nurses for giving us a chance. We knew there always was one.” — melorlinstv

What are some twin or multiples pregnancy announcement captions?

two more to adore

“TWO MORE TO ADORE” — insideno.48

“The best things in life are THREE”

“Two more peas are joining our pod”

“A year ago we said I do, now we’re expecting two” - amyshomelife

“Buy one, get one free! Twins arriving”

What are some quotes to include in a pregnancy announcement caption?

“If I’m thinking correctly,” said Pooh “a new baby is probably, undoubtedly, the grandest gift that could ever be.” — A.A. Milne

“You know what the great thing about babies is? They are like little bundles of hope. Like the future in a basket.” — Lish McBride

“Words can not express the joy of new life.” — Hermann Hesse

“A new baby is like the beginning of all things wonder, hope, a dream of possibilities.” — Eda J. LeShan

“A baby fills a place in your heart that you never knew was empty.” — Unknown

What are some seasonal or holiday pregnancy announcement captions?

red white and due

For Valentine’s Day: “Roses are red, violets are blue, on [DATE], our baby is due”

For Valentine’s Day: “Our little Valentine is arriving [DATE]”

For Easter: “Some bunny special is coming soon”

For summer: “Pregnant girl summer”

For Fourth of July: “Red, white, and DUE!! Baby GIRL due on our 1 year anniversary” — @camillemclain_

For Thanksgiving: “Feeling extra thankful this year”

For Christmas: “All we wanted for Christmas was you”

What are some sibling pregnancy announcement captions?

sibling pregnancy annoucement

“Filling our family table up one seat at a time!” — @sammierreed

“Geter Party of 5” — @torilaytham_photo

Updates history

June 24, 2026

Editors: Kathleen Felton/Rebekah Walhberg

Light copy updates and fact-checked for accuracy.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Funny Pregnancy Announcements That Are Sure to Amuse Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Pregnancy Announcement Templates to Personalize Your Big News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

9 Creative DIY Pregnancy Announcements for Crafty Parents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

11 Surprise Pregnancy Announcements to Drop Your Unexpected Baby News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Thanksgiving Pregnancy Announcements That All Parents-to-Be Will Fall For Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Halloween Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your New Boo Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Twin Pregnancy Announcements for a Doubly Sweet Surprise Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Dog Pregnancy Announcements for Human Parents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

11 Fall Pregnancy Announcements That Are Pure Autumnal Bliss Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

How to Share Your Baby News With Grandparents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Picture-Perfect Maternity Photo Ideas for Every Parent-to-Be Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

30 Gender Reveal Ideas for Celebrating Your Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

What to Write in a Baby Shower Card Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window