Stuffy Nose and Nosebleeds During Pregnancy

Updated with Ask Heidi video.

nasal congestion in pregnancy

Is your sniffer all stuffed up? Here's what causes the congestion during pregnancy (and, sometimes, the nosebleeds) and what you can do about it.

You're as stuffed up as if you had a cold or allergies — and what’s with the bloody nose that appears every week? If it helps you feel any better, you’re not alone: Nasal congestion and nosebleeds during pregnancy are a common issue and can even last the whole nine months (pass the tissues!).

But while congestion and nosebleeds while you’re expecting are certainly a nuisance, they’re definitely treatable. For more about when a stuffy nose usually starts during pregnancy, what’s behind it and some quick ways to find relief, read on.

When do congestion and nosebleeds generally start during pregnancy?

Nasal congestion is a classic sign of pregnancy so don’t be surprised if you develop a case of stuffiness and even a few nosebleeds around week 16. In fact, stopped-up noses are so commonplace that congestion affected a whopping 65 percent of pregnant women enrolled in one study .

And if you think you’ll get a break from the dripping and blowing in a later trimester, that’s usually not the case. Congestion during pregnancy tends to stick with you (and sometimes it gets worse) to the very end. Remember — keep the tissues or a few hankies handy!

What causes congestion and nosebleeds during pregnancy?

Alas, it probably feels like every part of your body is swelling these days ( thanks to pregnancy edema ). If you were prone to feeling stuffy and blocked before pregnancy, you’re likely to feel it even more now. Plus your allergies may be kicking in , which only adds to your nose woes.

Congestion and nosebleeds happen during pregnancy thanks to increased vascularity (blood flow) along with the swelling of mucus membranes in the nose, which is also known as pregnancy rhinitis. And the culprit behind it all? Yep, you can point to higher-than-usual levels of the pregnancy hormones estrogen and progesterone coursing through your veins. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSymptoms of Pregnancy: What Happens FirstSee All Sources [1]

Congestion and nosebleeds happen during pregnancy thanks to increased vascularity (blood flow) along with the swelling of mucus membranes in the nose, which is also known as pregnancy rhinitis.

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSymptoms of Pregnancy: What Happens FirstSee All Sources

This extra blood flow and swelling softens nasal membranes, leading to congestion. What’s more, the constant blowing and sneezing can dry out your nose, causing it to bleed easily.

You may also develop postnasal drip, which in turn can cause coughing or gagging at night (as if you didn't have enough other things keeping you awake).

Can nosebleeds affect pregnancy?

Fortunately, your stuffy nose and occasional nosebleeds aren’t a bad sign during pregnancy. Truth is, these conditions won’t adversely affect you or your baby on board.

But if you’re experiencing a bloody nose almost daily, it may be due to a single vessel that keeps bleeding. Luckily, it can be cauterized at an ENT's office, which will put a stop to frequent nosebleeds.

What can I do to find relief?

What can I do to find relief?

While you can’t prevent congestion during pregnancy or the nosebleeds that come with it, you can ease the soreness and dryness as well as treat symptoms with some OTC and other options. Trusted SourceNationwide Children'sPregnancy Rhinitis: Relief for Ongoing Nasal Congestion Is PossibleSee All Sources [2] Just be sure to clear anything you’re planning to take with your doctor first.

Trusted SourceNationwide Children'sPregnancy Rhinitis: Relief for Ongoing Nasal Congestion Is PossibleSee All Sources

Here’s what you should know:

Blow the right way. To clear your breathing passages without doing too much damage to those delicate nasal membranes, use the right blowing technique. Use your thumb to close one nostril, and blow gently out the other side. Repeat with the other nostril until you can breathe again. Make sure you use a soft tissue to prevent chafing.

Avoid some OTCs. Medications like antihistamines and most decongestant nasal sprays may be safe for short-term use — so ask your practitioner to recommend one that's effective and okay for you to take while you're pregnant. Saline sprays, decongestant chest ointments and nasal strips are also considered safe for you and baby. However, avoid products like Sudafed and Afrin containing ingredients like phenylephrine and pseudoephedrine that can cause vasoconstriction (the narrowing of blood vessels by small muscles in their walls).

Moisten the air. Try putting a warm-mist humidifier in your room to add some nose-soothing moisture to the air. Make sure to clean it every three days or at least once a week and according to manufacturer instructions, a practice that helps safeguard the unit against bacteria.

Moisten in there. To combat the dryness in your nose, dab a little petroleum jelly in each nostril using a cotton swab.

Get more vitamin C. Eating vitamin C-rich fruits and veggies like kiwis, bell peppers and tomatoes may make your capillaries stronger, which reduces the chance of nosebleeds during pregnancy.

Lean in. If you do get a nosebleed, lean slightly forward rather than back, and pinch closed the area right above your nostrils and below the bridge of your nose for five minutes. If the bleeding continues, repeat. If nosebleeds are frequent during pregnancy, speak with the doctor.

How long does nasal congestion last during pregnancy?

As with many conditions of pregnancy, you’ll have to get mentally prepared to live with nasal congestion and nosebleeds for a while. Chances are, your case of pregnancy rhinitis will probably get progressively worse as you go through the nine months — and your nose won't know relief until after delivery. For most women, congestion usually clears up in the first week postpartum.

When should I call the doctor about my stuffy nose and congestion?

You can always bring up a stuffy nose and nosebleeds at your next prenatal appointment or make a call sooner if you’re very uncomfortable. This way, your practitioner can make sure your congestion isn’t a sign of something more serious, like sinusitis (an infection of the lining of the sinuses). Also, be sure you’ve had the flu shot to guard against the virus during pregnancy.

This way, your practitioner can make sure your congestion isn’t a sign of something more serious, like sinusitis (an infection of the lining of the sinuses). Also, be sure you’ve had the flu shot to guard against the virus during pregnancy.

And if your nose is blocked enough to cause sleeplessness, exhaustion, excessive snoring or other symptoms that can severely affect your quality of life during pregnancy, your doctorcan recommend treatment options that ease your air flow and help you get the rest you and your growing baby need.

While nasal congestion and nosebleeds aren’t much fun, keep in mind that you’ll be breathing more easily in the days right after your sweet bundle of joy arrives.

The Weirdest Pregnancy Symptoms