Stuffy Nose in Babies and Toddlers

baby blowing nose in grass, stuffy nose in babies and toddlers

Is your little one all stuffed up? When that tiny nose gets clogged or runny, it can make your baby — and everyone else in the house — pretty miserable. Here's what you need to know about how to treat your child's stuffy or runny nose and when to call the doctor.

Your baby's stuffy or runny nose is definitely not fun, but it's rarely a sign of anything serious. While it’s tricky to prevent or stop those sniffles — which can make your little one fussy and sleepless — there are things you can do to help alleviate her discomfort. And knowing what’s causing her runny or stuffy nose can make it easier to treat.

What causes a stuffy nose in babies and toddlers?

It's amazing that little noses can produce so much gunk — but it's also totally normal. Stuffed-up noses are caused by inflammation of the sensitive membranes that line the nasal cavity, and they’re usually nothing to worry about.

Congestion in newborn babies is common, even when there's nothing wrong — the mucus in her system means her immune system is developing.

Other causes of congestion in babies and toddlers include:

Upper respiratory viruses like the common cold and COVID-19

The flu (influenza virus)

Allergies

Cold weather

Exposure to environmental irritants like tobacco smoke

Your child's nasal congestion and runny nose may come with other symptoms, including sneezing , a cough and itchy skin around the nose or face.

When should you call the doctor?

By itself, a stuffy nose or congestion isn’t something to worry about, especially if it’s caused by a cold or exposure to cold weather — which makes grown-up noses run too.

If your child’s stuffiness is accompanied by a fever, ear pain, a sore throat and/or swollen glands, or you suspect there is a foreign object stuck in her nose , call your pediatrician right away. If your little one's breathing becomes labored , even through the mouth, that also warrants an immediate call to your pediatrician's emergency line or 911 (or a trip to the ER).

You’ll also want to get your child tested for COVID-19 if she’s experiencing symptoms (including a stuffy nose), and isolate her as best as possible for 10 days if she tests positive. Consult the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention COVID-19 guidelines (as well as any school or day care protocols), and check in with your family’s pediatrician if you have any questions.

You'll also want to consult your doctor if you suspect an allergic reaction to any environmental pollutants, which is rare in babies, or if the nasal discharge is green, bloody or smells bad.

Sometimes those secondary symptoms are hard to discern in a baby, so if you’re worried about your little one’s plugged-up nose and her general comfort, a call to your practitioner is a good idea anyway, if only to ease your mind.

What can you give a baby or toddler for a stuffy nose?

Since you can't give babies and toddlers any cold medicine , simple home remedies can offer lots of relief from stuffy, runny noses in little ones.

Saline drops and suction: To clear up baby's congestion, try using baby saline drops or a saline spray, which you can get at any pharmacy. Put two or three drops in each nostril, and then use a baby nasal bulb aspirator to suction the mucus plugging up her nose. Doing this before feeding can help prevent nursing interruptions due to discomfort.

Vapor rubs: Some vapor rubs — especially those formulated for babies and toddlers — may be okay to apply to either the soles of your child's feet or potentially to the chest, though always check with your pediatrician before using any of those products and get detailed instructions on how, regardless of what the label says. Keep them out of reach of children, and never put the rub under or inside your little one's nose.

Humidifier: A cold-mist humidifier — not a hot-mist one, which can pose a burn risk if a baby or toddler falls or trips on it — can help moisten the air and your child's dry, irritated sinuses.

Never give decongestants or other cold medications to babies or children under 4 years old. And beyond that, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends talking to your pediatrician before giving any cold medicine to children between the ages of 4 and 6 because it isn't proven to alleviate symptoms in young children and could be potentially dangerous.

Can you prevent stuffy, runny noses in babies and toddlers?

Unfortunately, stuffy, runny noses are common for babies and toddlers, but you can minimize the risk of colds and viruses by:

Washing your hands and your child's frequently — and making sure everyone who comes in contact with baby does the same

Avoiding infectious people as much as possible

Not sharing personal items like utensils and cups

Ensuring your family is up-to-date on vaccinations — including the flu shot and the COVID-19 vaccine, if your children are old enough

Wearing well-fitting masks in crowded spaces (toddlers over the age of 2 can safely wear them too)