Sunburn in Babies

Updated and medically reviewed to ensure accuracy.

sunburn

Not to be taken lightly, sunburn can seriously hurt your baby. Here's how to protect your little one's skin from the sun's harmful rays.

Sunburn is redness, burning and inflammation of the skin caused by exposure to sunlight. Typically, a burn on your baby begins to show up two to four hours after exposure just as it would on an adult, and the color — and pain! — peak 12 to 14 hours later. That's also when a bad burn may begin to blister. The redness will begin to fade in two or three days, and the skin usually starts to peel.

A sunburn hurts when it happens, but it can be even more painful down the line. A single bad sunburn in infancy or childhood doubles the risk of developing melanoma, the deadliest skin cancer, in adulthood. Researchers estimate that 90 percent of skin cancers are caused by overexposure to the sun and are therefore preventable.

What causes sunburn in babies?

Just as in adults, the sun's harmful rays cause sunburn in your baby. Specifically, UVB (ultraviolet B) rays are a main cause of sunburn and skin cancer, while UVA rays can lead to premature skin aging and also contribute to skin cancer. Infants are particularly susceptible to sunburn because their skin is so thin and delicate.

What can you do to prevent sunburn in your baby?

Prevention is paramount when it comes to sunburn. Here's how to keep your baby safe: Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSun Safety: Information for Parents About Sunburn & SunscreenSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSun Safety: Information for Parents About Sunburn & SunscreenSee All Sources

Limit exposure. The sun's rays are strongest between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., so try to keep baby in the shade during those peak hours. Babies shouldn't be outside for extended periods of time when the heat index is 90 degrees Fahrenheit or hotter. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSun Safety and Protection TipsSee All Sources [2] Follow these tips on protecting your baby from the heat.

Use sunscreen. There are dozens of formulas out there, so choose wisely. Look for a sunscreen made for children with an SPF of at least 30 that offers broad-spectrum protection, which means it protects from both UVB and UVA rays. It should also be water-resistant and formulated for sensitive skin. If possible, do a patch test on your baby's arm 48 hours before using a new product. Once you determine it won't cause a rash, apply the product 15 to 30 minutes before going outside. For babies under 6 months old, use sunscreen sparingly on small areas of your baby's body like the face, backs of the hands and tops of the feet. For older babies, reapply sunscreen early, often and liberally, especially after your baby gets wet.

Dress your baby appropriately. Opt for hats with brims and back-flaps to protect the eyes, face and neck — hopefully your baby will wear one without fussing. Older babies can also wear sunglasses (if they'll keep them on) that protect against all UV rays. The best clothes for babies are lightweight but tightly woven to protect their skin from the sun.

Make your own shade. A good sunshade or parasol for your stroller is key for everyday protection. At the beach or pool, put up a big umbrella or portable tent so there's always a shady refuge for your baby.

How to Dress Baby for the Sun

How can you treat sunburn in babies?

If your child does get burned, your primary task is to soothe the pain. Here's what to do:

Apply cool tap-water compresses for 10 to 15 minutes, three to four times a day.

Use aloe vera gel or a gentle hypoallergenic moisturizer to soothe the skin.

If there's a lot of pain and/or swelling, you can give acetaminophen (for babies 3 months and older) or ibuprofen (for babies 6 months and older) with your pediatrician's approval.

Keep your baby out of the sun until the sunburn is fully healed.

Make sure to keep baby hydrated to prevent dehydration , since a sunburn causes fluid to evaporate from the skin.

When to call the doctor about a sunburn in your baby

If your baby is younger than 1 year old and gets a sunburn, call your pediatrician right away. For older children, it's a good idea to keep your doctor in the loop if the burn is anything more than mild and is accompanied by blistering, fever or a lot of pain. Your practitioner can help you decide if and when your child needs pain medicine or an office visit.

An extreme reaction to the heat and sun is rare, especially if you take the proper precautions and protect your baby when you're outside. But if the burn seems extensive, very painful and/or is accompanied by vomiting , your baby could be suffering from heatstroke and needs immediate medical attention. Call your doctor and head to the nearest emergency room.