Sweet Monthly Photo Shoot Ideas for Every Family

monthly baby photo ideas

Find the best series for food connoisseurs, bookworms, and more.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

I received so many thoughtful baby gifts after my son was born, but one of my favorites was a set of three wooden blocks. Two with the numbers 0 to 9, and the other with “weeks,” “months,” and “years” etched on it. Every 19th day of the month (my son's birthday date), I’d spread out a sweet blanket I received from a mom friend, set up our little wooden blocks, and do my best to catch a smile from my tiny scene-stealer.

Those monthly photos were such a joy to take and share with family and friends — but I’ll be honest, they weren’t always picture-perfect. Some months, I’d forget and snap them a few days late, or we’d be traveling without the “official” props. And once he hit about 6 months and discovered his wiggly-worm superpowers, my cooperative little model suddenly had places to be and zero interest in sitting still.

But looking back, those few minutes I set aside to take those photos were so worth it. Simply clicking on my Instagram Highlight takes me back to my son’s first back to belly rolls, scootching that soon turned to crawling, and of course, his sweet smile.

If you're looking to take those milestone pictures so you too, can capture the joy as your baby grows, your setup can be as simple or as extra as your heart desires. You truly don’t need fancy props or a big budget to snap something special. From favorite stuffed toys to beloved books and everything in between, there are so many sweet ways to mark each monthly moment.

1. Don’t miss out on the name sweater trend

sweater trend photo shoot

“We are taking pics on this leaf play mat with this bunny and also documenting her growing into this sweater!” shared WTE mom kaylaguibs . You can find a similar hand-embroidered sweater on Etsy, and complete this parent’s setup with a Jellycat bunny , leaf play mat , and monthly milestone pennants . Easy peasy.

2. Stick with a consistent theme

you are my sunshine

For her second baby, WTE mom mgb-10 used the same, “You are my sunshine” mat and monthly cards from her first, but brought out a new clothing item: “I’m going to put him in this outfit that my sister-in-law made him to see how much bigger he gets each time!” she shared. Pro tip: Make sure the clothing item is one your baby can comfortably grow into during the first year, like this unique star-shaped onesie.

3. Get their siblings in on the tradition

sibling monthly photo shoot

It doesn’t get more adorable than a candid photo of two brothers in coordinating T-shirts. “Using the same blanket his brother used,” wrote WTE parent leelachan , who later added, “I am finding myself cherishing the newborn phase a lot more this time around.” Just know that a helpful partner, grandparent, or friend nearby to make your kids smile can make all the difference — a one-person baby-wrangling/photography team is no small feat.

4. Include those furry family members

furry friends photo shoot

Does your first baby have four paws? Make some room on the milestone blanket! “This is what I did for my sweet little Isabela Rose,” WTE mom kayray83 shared. “My mom gave her the tutu so I plan to use it each month to show how much she’s grown. Her big (dog) brother Sammy will be a part of her monthly photo as well.” If you’re not sure your pup will stay put like Sammy did, consider holding a treat near the camera to get their attention (or to make them sit).

5. Honor your pregnancy cravings

pregnancy craving photo shoot

WTE parent ftmoct08 has switched up the food theme each month, but this first one is our favorite. “I had Chick-fil-A at least once a week my entire pregnancy, so it felt fitting,” she shared. I found a similar “Lil Nugget” onesie at Target, and you can always keep the background the same (in this case, a checkered print throw blanket) for month-to-month consistency.

6. Record your love by the dozen

donut monthly photo shoot

Celebrate your baby’s 12 months with a dozen donuts. WTE mom inksme2 started with one chocolate sprinkle donut from Dunkin’. If you don’t want to spring for 12 donuts each time, kindly ask an employee for one big box with your order. And if donuts aren’t your thing, consider recreating this idea with anything else sold by the dozen (like bagels or cupcakes).

7. Snap photos of your cutie pie

pie monthly photo shoot

When you look for inspiration on Pinterest, you’ll inevitably see this compilation of photos from parents and photographers Dani and Jonathan ( @daniandjonathan ). “What is better than having pizza once a month to take these adorbs photos?” they captioned their Instagram post featuring their son Enzo.

pizza pie monthly shoot

And Alex Armato ( @alexcoloreo ) and her husband Steve chose to do a similar photoshoot with their son Miles. “My husband and I love pizza and thought it would be really cute to see how much Miles grew over the months that way,” Alex says. “We ended up doing a first birthday pizza theme to [tie it all] together.” Ordering a whole pie and removing slices will inevitably leave unwanted grease stains, but Armato has a trick: “We always got an extra clean pizza box to put the baby in,” she says. “The pizzerias were always very accommodating when we told them what it was for.”

8. Collect photos of your budding bookworm

book worm monthly photo shoot

You can never have too many books, and WTE mom glitter-m had an ingenious idea to pair each monthly photo with a book featuring a number. For example, month one was the book One Bear Lost , and month two was Two Together .

“We love reading to our little man, so I thought about incorporating books somehow,” she wrote. “We're going to have his age in months as the first word of the book we choose! So far, we've found some neat books two months in (this also gives me an excuse to get out and book shop for myself). We had some stuffed animals lying around that fit the themes so far, so I guess we'll be continuing with that too!”

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Easy-to-Take Holiday Photos You’ll Cherish for Years to Come By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

This Is Your Sign to Have a Valentine's Day Photo Shoot With Your Baby By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Picture-Perfect Maternity Photo Ideas for Every Parent-to-Be Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

12 Family Maternity Shoot Ideas to Celebrate a New Sibling Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

7 Photos Every Pregnant Mom Needs — Because You'll Regret Not Taking Them Later Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

8 Tips to Get the Sweetest Photos of Your Kids — Without Fancy Equipment or a Full Day Photoshoot Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

From 'Half-Baked' Desserts to 'Half-Bloomed' Bellies: Inside the Middle-of-Pregnancy Photo Trend Taking Off Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

13 Fabulous Fall Maternity Photos to Honor a New Season of Your Life Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

25 Gorgeous Baby Shower Cake Ideas to Sweeten Your Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Gorgeous Winter Maternity Photos Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

15 Baby Shower Cupcake Ideas That Are Just as Sweet as Your Little One Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

14 Gorgeous Plus-Size Maternity Photos That'll Inspire You to Document This Beautiful Stage Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window