Taking Clomid for Infertility

Updates throughout to copy, information, sources, and formatting, and new medical review.

clomid, white pills on blue background

If the timing of ovulation is inconsistent for you, getting pregnant can be a challenge. Clomid might be a good option, depending on your circumstances.

Some women seem to get pregnant quickly, while others may wait several months or years for an egg to connect successfully with sperm. If you fall into the second category, you’re certainly not alone: About 15% to 20% of women have trouble conceiving because of issues with ovulation. In those cases, ovulation can be difficult to predict, which can, in turn, affect conception. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsTreating InfertilitySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsTreating InfertilitySee All Sources

Fertility medications like Clomid can help regulate cycles for women with ovulation challenges. Here’s more about Clomid, including how it works, how much it costs, the benefits, and the possible side effects.

What is Clomid?

Clomid (and its generic version, clomiphene citrate) is a fertility medication that comes in tablet form and works to rebalance your hormones .

When you take Clomid, your body makes more follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). Together, these encourage follicles in your ovaries to develop, which helps you release more eggs during ovulation.

If your doctor feels that Clomid is right for you, you’ll likely start with a dose of 50 milligrams (mg) per day. This dosage can increase by increments of 50 mg if you don’t get pregnant after the first round, up to as much as 250 mg. If you still don’t conceive, up to four treatment cycles of Clomid can be repeated.

Along the way, your practitioner will see how things are progressing via blood tests and ultrasounds. The goal? Connecting your egg with that sperm, either via sex or intrauterine insemination (IUI) .

"We’ve been TTC for a year; I have irregular cycle lengths, so we did Clomid," says What to Expect Community member ctama. "I am really trying to be realistic, but I am so excited at the possibility of actually getting a positive this time."

If you’re still trying to conceive after six months on Clomid, you may need other fertility help, such as in vitro fertilization (IVF) .

"My first cycle of Clomid ended up not successful in pregnancy, but I did ovulate and have a 'normal' 28-day cycle," ctama adds. "Staying hopeful that maybe round 2 will be it."

Who is a good candidate for Clomid?

If your menstrual cycle is irregular , you’re under 37, or you’ve been trying to conceive for more than a year, you could be a good candidate for Clomid.

Before you try it, however, talk to your doctor about any allergies you have or other medications you take.

Women who have a history of frequent or severe migraines shouldn’t take Clomid, as the drug may make headaches occur more frequently.

What is the success rate of Clomid?

Clomid’s success rate is usually higher than timing when you have sex with your partner or intrauterine insemination alone (when sperm is placed directly into the uterus using a small catheter).

Women who are prescribed Clomid for an irregular menstrual cycle have an 80% chance of ovulating, usually within the first three months of taking it, according to CCRM Fertility, and abot 40% will conceive. Trusted SourceCCRM FertilityClomid/Clomiphene CitrateSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCCRM FertilityClomid/Clomiphene CitrateSee All Sources

When should you take Clomid?

Stick to your doctor’s prescription when it comes to taking Clomid. Your starter dose of 50 mg per day is given for five days, and usually begins on day three or five of your menstrual cycle (depending on your health provider’s preference). If you don’t have a regular cycle (or any cycles), you can take the medicine at any point. Always talk to your provider first to be sure.

Your practitioner will monitor if and when ovulation takes place . You can track your own menstrual cycle or pick up an ovulation predictor kit to find out your most fertile window.

What are the risks and side effects of Clomid?

Clomid’s side effects are generally mild compared to other fertility drugs , and they often subside as soon as you stop taking the medication. However, you should still check with your doctor if you experience any of the following:

Bloating

Stomach or pelvic pain

Hot flashes

Headache

Mood swings

Vaginal dryness

Less common side effects include changes in vision and a yellowing of the eyes or skin. Check with your health care provider if you notice these symptoms or if you have breast pain, nausea, vomiting, feelings of depression, heavy menstrual periods, restlessness, or trouble sleeping. Other potential effects include a thinning of the uterine lining and a drop in cervical mucus production.

Be aware that taking Clomid comes with an increased chance of a twin pregnancy because it ups your odds that more than one egg will be released per cycle. In fact, the chance of twins is 5% to 7% for those on Clomid — higher than the general twin rate of around 1%.

How much does Clomid cost and does insurance pay for it?

Clomid in pill form is among the more affordable fertility treatments , and can be picked up at your local drug store.

Check with your provider to see if Clomid will be covered under your insurance plan (many do). You can also find out how much of the total cost you can expect insurance to pay.

Without insurance, Clomid tablets typically cost about $100 apiece. You’ll also need to pay for blood tests, monitoring, and ultrasounds, which add to the price. All in all, you might pay between $500 to $2,000 a month for Clomid out of pocket, depending on your situation.

Ovulation-related infertility is not uncommon, so if you're struggling to get pregnant, know that there are many others going through the same thing. Your doctor can help you figure out whether Clomid is the right fertility treatment for you.

Key Takeaways

Clomid is a fertility medication that comes in tablet form and can help regulate ovulation for women who are struggling to get pregnant.

You might be a candidate for Clomid if your menstrual cycle is irregular , you’re under 37, or you’ve been trying to conceive for more than a year.

Women who are prescribed Clomid for an irregular cycle have about an 80% chance of ovulating, usually within the first three months of taking it. Around 40% will get pregnant.