Taking a Hospital Tour During Pregnancy

Light copy updates, updates to sources, fact-checked for accuracy.

Pregnant couple checking in at a hospital

Although many hospital tours for expecting families have gone virtual since the pandemic, there are still opportunities to do in-person visits. Here’s when and how to set up a tour and what you’ll learn while you’re there.

Whether virtual or in-person, a hospital tour is one of the simplest ways to calm any pre-birth jitters and feel prepared. Usually scheduled around the start of the third trimester, these free visits take expectant parents through the registration process and key areas of the maternity ward, while giving you a chance to ask questions.

After all, no matter how long you've got until your due date, it's normal to be excited — and a bit nervous — about what goes down once labor starts. What’s more, if you’re not used to hospitals, staying in one might feel a little intimidating.

Here’s more about what you’ll learn during a hospital tour when you're pregnant, plus some key questions you can ask.

Key Takeaways

Taking a hospital tour in the third trimester can help you familiarize yourself with logistics like parking, entrance points, and registration before you arrive to give birth.

Both in-person and virtual tours can cover essential ground — from triage and labor suites to postpartum rooms and the newborn nursery — providing a realistic preview of the delivery experience.

Hospital tours are also an opportunity to ask any questions you have about pain management options, visitor policies, birthing amenities, and support services like breastfeeding assistance.

Is a hospital tour necessary?

A hospital or birthing center tour can pay off in a number of ways. If it’s in person, it can be a great practice run for getting to the hospital when you’re actually in labor. You can figure out the best route to take — which means you can (mostly) be on auto-pilot when it’s go time (no worries about a GPS failure).

You can also iron out other details during an in-person or virtual hospital tour — like where to park and what entrance to go to, whether you get there at lunchtime, during rush hour, or in the middle of the night. During an in-person visit, you may even get to meet some of the staff who will be helping you during your hospital stay, which can be comforting. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursWhere Should I Have My Baby?See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursWhere Should I Have My Baby?See All Sources

But perhaps the biggest benefit of a pre-delivery maternity tour, either virtually or in person, is that it gives you a sneak peek of where you’ll be and what will happen on the big day.

"We did a tour a few weeks ago," says What to Expect Community mom emmlou29. "The nurse who showed us around was super nice and explained everything. Gave me a lot of peace about going to give birth."

"I did a virtual tour with my daughter, [I] mainly just wanted to see where to go so there was no confusion day of," says mom AL2019.

When should you take a hospital tour?

A good time to take a hospital tour is at the beginning of the third trimester of pregnancy, in month 7 . More specifically, you could take the tour between week 30 and week 34 of pregnancy.

Hospital tours are free, and setting one up is easy: Call the hospital or birthing center (or check the website to find dates and times of upcoming tours) and reserve your spot. Trusted SourceUCLA HealthBirthPlace Tours See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceUCLA HealthBirthPlace Tours See All Sources

Ever since the COVID-19 pandemic, virtual hospital tours have also become more common. Both in-person and virtual tours offer a lot of good information.

To take a virtual hospital tour, which is typically self-paced with 360-degree views, visit the facility’s website. A virtual tour typically includes the lobby, admissions, most of the floor plans, operating rooms and various departments.

Most virtual hospital tours also feature detailed captions with every picture, plus an FAQ section.

What can you learn during a hospital tour?

Wondering what happens during an in-person hospital tour? You’ll want to set aside about an hour for the tour, which usually involves a labor and delivery nurse or hospital educator who’s tasked with walking you through the whole delivery process, from admission to discharge. Here's what you'll likely see during this tour:

The registration desk: The first stop will probably be the registration office. If you haven’t pre-registered already, circle back and do so after the tour — getting all the paperwork out of the way will make your admission process faster.

The triage area: Though you may not get to enter, you’ll likely get a look at the triage area. That’s the pre-delivery part of the maternity ward, where a nurse will monitor your vitals and assess whether delivery is imminent.

Other essential rooms: You'll also get a sneak peek of the family waiting rooms, a labor and delivery suite, and a postpartum room. If the center has private and semi-private rooms, ask to see both. The best part is usually last when you’ll get to see the newborn nursery, so get ready to ooh and ahh over the little cuties.

Keep in mind that delivery wards can be intense places: There are tears, nervous spouses, well-meaning grandparents, and actual screams sometimes. It can be a lot to take in — but remember, it's all in the excitement of bringing a new life into the world, so don’t be scared!

What questions should you ask during a hospital or birthing center tour?

The nurse or hospital educator will provide lots of valuable information, but don’t be afraid to speak up about something that’s on your mind. Here are some questions to ask on a hospital or birth center tour:

Insurance plans vary, of course, but what are the fees for private rooms and special birthing facilities?

What should I pack in my hospital bag ?

What pain management options are available?

Are you equipped to care for preterm infants, multiples, and high-risk pregnancies?

What birthing amenities does the hospital offer (such as a birth ball, birthing tub, or squat bar )?

Who can be in the room during the delivery? Is there a limit on the number of people?

Are recording devices (like a video camera and tripod or cellphone) allowed in the delivery room?

Can I play music, light a scented candle, or have other mood-enhancing items in my room?

Do you work with a cord blood bank (if you’re considering banking your baby’s cord blood )? If not, how can I arrange to transfer my baby’s cord blood? Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsCord Blood BankingSee All Sources [3]

When are the visiting hours? Can children visit?

Is my partner allowed to stay with me overnight?

Can my baby stay in the room with me during our stay instead of in the nursery?

What other security policies are in place?

Do you offer breastfeeding support services?

What kind of information will I go home with?

If you have other questions or concerns, your doctor or the hospital staff will be more than glad to address them. And don’t worry about sounding silly — the physicians and nurses have heard them all before and are happy to help.

Enjoy your hospital tour, whether it’s virtual or in-person, and remember, everyone has the same goal: to make sure your baby has a healthy entrance into the world!