Tarun Jain

Tarun Jain, M.D.

About Tarun Jain, M.D.

Dr. Tarun Jain is a board-certified reproductive endocrinology and infertility (REI) physician and serves as the ambulatory medical director of Northwestern Fertility and Reproductive Medicine in Oak Brook, Illinois.

Dr. Jain did his fellowship at Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, in Boston, Massachusetts, and his residency at the University of Washington in Seattle, Washington.

He has Bachelor of Science degrees in biomedical and electrical engineering from the University of Southern California (USC), as well as a Master of Science in biomedical engineering from the University of Texas at Austin and an M.D. with Highest Distinction from the USC Keck School of Medicine.

Board certifications

Dr. Jain is board-certified by the American Board of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

Hospital affiliations

Dr. Jain is affiliated with Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago, Illinois, and Central DuPage Hospital in Winfield, Illinois.

Other relevant positions

Dr. Jain is a professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine.

Publications and research

Dr. Jain is the author of the book The Infertility Journey: Real voices. Real issues. Real insights, as well as authoring and contributing to numerous other academic articles and publications on infertility, fertility treatments and related subjects.

Awards

Dr. Jain has been a Castle Connolly Top Doctor from 2018 to the present.

He's a past recipient of the American Medical Association (AMA)'s National Leadership Award, has been named to the Best Doctors in America list, has received the Top Reproductive Endocrinologist in the Nation award, and was recently honored with the ASRM Service Milestone Award for 15 years of service on American Society for Reproductive Medicine boards and committees.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window