7 Pacifiers Small Enough to Soothe a Preemie Baby

Best Preemie Pacifiers

There's a reason pacifiers are a universal symbol for babies: By offering something to suck on other than the breast or bottle, pacifiers can help soothe a fussy infant who isn't hungry, tired or in need of a clean diaper. And if your baby is born premature, pacifiers may still be a helpful tool, experts say.

"Pacifiers can help premature babies in a number of ways," says Anjuli Gans , M.D., a pediatrician at CHOP Karabots Pediatric Care Center. There are calming benefits, for one. "Premature babies in the NICU are often in a loud, busy environment," she notes. "Some research has shown that pacifiers help regulate their heart rate and oxygen levels, which can help buffer the stress of that environment."

Premature babies also often have to develop their sucking and swallowing reflexes, Dr. Gans adds, noting that pacifiers can help strengthen the muscles involved in this.

What’s more, pacifiers offered during sleep have also been linked to a lower risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).

Here’s what you need to know about choosing a pacifier for your little one, along with the best pacifiers for preemies.

How We Chose the Best Pacifiers for Preemies

We spoke to Dr. Grans and Daniel Ganjian , M.D., a pediatrician at Providence Saint John’s Health Center in Santa Monica, California, to learn about pacifier safety and what features to look for when shopping. Per their recommendations, as well as guidance from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), all pacifiers on this list:

We utilized reviews from What to Expect’s community of caregivers to learn which preemie-sized pacifiers parents felt were most comforting for their babies. Per their feedback, we made sure that every pacifier on the list satisfied the following criteria:

Other Preemie Pacifier Features To Consider

When shopping for preemie pacifiers, keep these features in mind:

Nipple shape: Some pacifier brands have an orthodontic nipple, which is intended to better support baby's oral development. Other brands may have designed the nipple to look more like the “real thing” to feel natural in a breastfed baby's mouth. Many parents find that they need to experiment with a few different brands to learn which one their baby prefers.

Size : Not all pacifiers are the same, so start small. Look for pacifiers that are labeled for babies 0+ or 0 to 6 months, and keep an eye out for specific preemie sizing if the brand offers that.

Easy to clean: Look for pacifiers that can be sterilized easily. Dishwasher-friendly options, which you should be able to drop in the same cleaning rack you use to wash bottle parts, are especially convenient.

Ready to shop? Look no further than these top picks.

Best Preemie Pacifier Overall

Ryan & Rose Cutie Preemie Pacifier

Designed for preemies

notched shield to accommodate respiratory tubes

Not available at many retailers

Why We Love It

Ryan & Rose pacifiers are available in a preemie size that’s designed to meet premature babies at various stages. The Preemie Kit includes two pacifiers: Preemie Tiny, which has a smaller nipple to be used up to 35 weeks, and Preemie Stage 1, which is made for babies over 35 weeks. Both feature a notched shield that can accommodate any respiratory tubes baby may need in the hospital, along with two ventilation holes. The pacifiers are lightweight, too — weighing just .6 ounces, making them one of the lightest on this list.Parents also appreciate that the small handle on the back makes it easy for caregivers to grip the paci without touching the nipple. Worth noting, though, is thatat $7 each, Ryan & Rose pacifiers are one of the more expensive models on this list.

Ryan & Rose pacifiers are available in a preemie size that’s designed to meet premature babies at various stages. The Preemie Kit includes two pacifiers: Preemie Tiny, which has a smaller nipple to be used up to 35 weeks, and Preemie Stage 1, which is made for babies over 35 weeks. Both feature a notched shield that can accommodate any respiratory tubes baby may need in the hospital, along with two ventilation holes. The pacifiers are lightweight, too — weighing just .6 ounces, making them one of the lightest on this list.

Parents also appreciate that the small handle on the back makes it easy for caregivers to grip the paci without touching the nipple. Worth noting, though, is that

at $7 each, Ryan & Rose pacifiers are one of the more expensive models on this list.

Material : Silicone

Sizes : Preemie Tiny, Preemie Stage 1

Weight : 0.6 ounces

Community Reviews

Laurenham09 "We have two. And my son likes it!"

babyyoda2020 "Our FAVORITE pacifiers for my daughter are Ryan & Rose."

Best Affordable Preemie Pacifier

Dr. Brown's HappyPaci

Affordable

multiple pacifiers per pack

readily available

Some parents say the pacifiers feel heavy

Why We Love It

Just as Dr. Brown’s bottles are popular with parents of premature babies , so are their pacifiers . The brand's lightweight silicone pacifier closely resembles the nipple on their bottles, so it will be familiar to babies already using them. (Several What to Expect Community parents note that little ones who love Dr. Brown’s bottles also seem to do well with the brand’s pacifiers.) The design wins points for its shape, too, which slightly curves away from baby’s nose and cheeks for better air flow and reduced friction. As a bonus, the HappyPaci is the most affordable pacifier on this list, coming in at just $2 each.

. The brand's lightweight silicone pacifier closely resembles the nipple on their bottles, so it will be familiar to babies already using them. (Several What to Expect Community parents note that little ones who love Dr. Brown’s bottles also seem to do well with the brand’s pacifiers.) The design wins points for its shape, too, which slightly curves away from baby’s nose and cheeks for better air flow and reduced friction. As a bonus, the HappyPaci is the most affordable pacifier on this list, coming in at just $2 each.

Material : Silicone

Sizes : 0-6 months

Weight : 1.44 ounces

Community Reviews

Ellka "These are the only pacis my daughter will take."

Camar3 "This is my daughter’s favorite pacifier."

Best Preemie Pacifier for Breastfed Babies

Nanobebe Baby Pacifiers

Soft

affordable

open side vents for better air flow

Some parents say they are a little small

Why We Love It

Although the AAP recommends waiting until breastfeeding is established before introducing a pacifier, this Nanobebe paci is a particularly good choice once you feel ready.The nipple shape and super soft material is designed to mimic a breast as closely as possible, which makes it ideal for breastfed babies. Many parents of preemies say their baby was able to use it comfortably.

Nanobebe paci is a particularly good choice once you feel ready.

The nipple shape and super soft material is designed to mimic a breast as closely as possible, which makes it ideal for breastfed babies. Many parents of preemies say their baby was able to use it comfortably.

Material : Silicone

Sizes : 0-3 months, then 4-36 months

Weight : 1.44 ounces

Community Reviews

jjwestgate20 "I breastfed with my first. With that in mind, I wanted a pacifier that was made to avoid nipple confusion. After a lot of research, I chose Nanobebe pacifiers and we loved them."

Mariaann1229 "We’ve have the Nanobebe pacifier and when he takes it, he takes it well."

Best Lightweight Preemie Pacifier

Tommee Tippee Ultra-Light Silicone Pacifier

Affordable

lightweight

wide size range

Some parents find the clear pacifiers hard to find in the dark

Why We Love It

If you’re looking for a lightweight pacifier for your preemie, this one from Tommee Tippee is a great choice. As with Ryan & Rose pacifiers, it weighs just .6 ounces, but it’s slightly more affordable. (Several What to Expect Community members rave about the lightweight feel of these pacis.) The first stage is appropriate for premature babies, and it has an orthodontic nipple shape that helps aid a baby’s natural oral development. A nice perk: This pacifier has anti-static properties to prevent dust from settling on it. Parents also appreciate that the brand offers the same pacifier in sizes up to 36 months, so it can grow with baby if your little one really falls in love with it.

If you’re looking for a lightweight pacifier for your preemie, this one from Tommee Tippee is a great choice. As with Ryan & Rose pacifiers, it weighs just .6 ounces, but it’s slightly more affordable. (Several What to Expect Community members rave about the lightweight feel of these pacis.)

he first stage is appropriate for premature babies, and it has an orthodontic nipple shape that helps aid a baby’s natural oral development. A nice perk: This pacifier has anti-static properties to prevent dust from settling on it. Parents also appreciate that the brand offers the same pacifier in sizes up to 36 months, so it can grow with baby if your little one really falls in love with it.

Material : Silicone

Sizes : 0-6 months, 6-18 months, 18-36 months

Weight : 0.6 ounces

Community Reviews

Morg2121 "I use the Tommee Tippee ultra light ones. My babe is [exclusively breastfeeding] and hasn’t had a problem with them."

Best Nighttime Preemie Pacifier

Joovy SiliNoogie Pacifier

Comfortable

dishwasher-safe

Not widely available

Why We Love It

In the middle of the night, few things are more frustrating than a lost paci in a pitch-black nursery. That’s where the Joovy SiliNoogie comes in handy: With its groovy glow-in-the-dark hue (make sure you select "Night Glow" at checkout), it’s easier to locate should it go missing in the dark. But the SiliNoogie is a solid pick for daytime hours, too. The clear, curved shield sits comfortably under your baby’s nose, and the design is a good choice to help newborns transitioning from breast to bottle. Parents also love that the silicone is resistant to picking up tastes or odors, and is top-shelf dishwasher-safe.

Material : Silicone

Sizes : 0+

Weight : 0.64 ounces

Community Reviews

Trevor J. Pachucki "I prefer these over [some other pacifier brands] because they’ve got the one flat side for her nose. She was a preemie and [others were] giant on her face!"

Best Orthodontic Preemie Pacifier

Chicco NaturalFit Pacifier Clear Soft Silicone

Gum massage ring for added comfort

durable

widely available

Some parents say they are a little small

Why We Love It

Developed with leading European orthodontists, the Chicco NaturalFit is designed to help support the development of a baby’s teeth and palate with its inclined orthodontic nipple shape. The nipple also features a gum massage ring that makes for more comfortable sucking, while the tiny ridges and grooves fit seamlessly into the natural positioning of your baby's tongue. The result is added flexibility and optimal mouth closure, even for brand-new babies. Thanks to this thoughtful design, many parents of preemies say the Chicco NaturalFit was one of the only pacifiers to stay in their little one’s mouth during those early days. Note: Although this model is not dishwasher-safe, it includes a carrying case that doubles as a microwave sterilizer.

Material : Silicone

Sizes : 0-6 months (then upgrade to 6-12 months)

Weight : 1.76 ounces

Community Reviews

Lyss "Perfect for my preemie baby. We have tried multiple pacifiers and this is the only one he can keep in his mouth."

Johns Family "These pacifiers are seriously the best. I don't know why they aren't all made this way. Single-piece silicone construction. Open-backed nipple so it doesn't trap water inside when you wash it. Flattened nipple that mimics the shape [of] an actual nipple in the mouth."

Best Durable Preemie Pacifier

Philips Avent Soothie

Doctor-recommended

widely available

great value

Some babies may not like the thickness

Why We Love It

The Philips Avent Soothie won Best Pacifier in the 2024 What to Expect Sleep Awards , and is a great choice for all babies — preemie or otherwise. With its medical-grade silicone and seamless design, the Soothie is distributed in many hospitals across the country. There are minimal nooks and crannies, making it easy to clean (it’s dishwasher-safe, too), and parents rave about how durable it is, saying it holds up well to constant wear and tear. In fact, many parents in the What to Expect Community say they started using the Soothie after getting it from the hospital and never stopped. Another selling point for many parents is the special orthodontic design, which helps support the development of baby’s teeth and gums — just make sure to upgrade to the brand’s 3 to 18-month pacifier as soon as your child hits that milestone since the larger size is made from thicker silicone that can better withstand tiny teeth.

, and is a great choice for all babies — preemie or otherwise. With its medical-grade silicone and seamless design, the Soothie is distributed in many hospitals across the country. There are minimal nooks and crannies, making it easy to clean (it’s dishwasher-safe, too), and parents rave about how durable it is, saying it holds up well to constant wear and tear. In fact, many parents in the What to Expect Community say they started using the Soothie after getting it from the hospital and never stopped. Another selling point for many parents is the special orthodontic design, which helps support the development of baby’s teeth and gums — just make sure to upgrade to the brand’s 3 to 18-month pacifier as soon as your child hits that milestone since the larger size is made from thicker silicone that can better withstand tiny teeth.

Material : Silicone

Sizes : 0-3 months and 3-18 months

Weight : 1.05 ounces

Community Reviews

"I found the Avent soothie ones to be best because you can help support it with your finger while they get the hang of it."

"Avent is what all four of my babies preferred. Also what the hospital used."

"My son loves the Avent Soothie he received after a weekend in the NICU for jaundice. We have four or five other brands/types of pacifiers, but he hasn't liked any of them."

Preemie Pacis FAQs

Do preemies need special pacifiers?

In short, it will depend on your baby. "Some may and some may not," Dr. Gans says. "Depending on a baby's size, oral anatomy — do they have a high arched palate or a tongue-tie ? — or other medical conditions, they may do better with different shapes or sizes of pacifiers." If you’re unsure, ask your pediatrician what features your child might need.

Ultimately, though, you’re looking for a pacifier small enough for your preemie’s mouth, says Dr. Ganjian. When shopping, that means looking for a pacifier labeled 0+ or 0 to 6 months.

"As long as the pacifier is small enough and baby is comfortable, then go for it," Dr. Ganjian says. "Try a few different ones. They may hate one pacifier, but love another."

Can preemies sleep with a pacifier?

Yes, preemies can sleep with a pacifier (and in fact, offering one at nap- or bedtime may help lower SIDS risk) — but it’s critical to always follow safe sleep guidelines.

Regardless of whether you’re offering a pacifier to a preemie or older baby, keep these safety tips from the AAP in mind:

Keep pacifiers loose in the crib. Never attach a pacifier to your child’s hand or neck, to their crib or car seat, or to a lovey or stuffed animal. Pacifier clips and other such accessories that might attach to a pacifier (including ribbon, string, cord, chain, twine, leather or yarn) are incredibly dangerous.

Look for one-piece pacifiers. Pacifiers molded from one piece of firm, solid plastic (as opposed to multiple small parts) are safest, according to the AAP. Pacifiers should also have ventilation holes.

Check the measurements. According to the AAP, pacifiers should be at least 3.8 centimeters across to ensure they can’t fully fit into your child’s mouth.

Never use the top and bottle nipple as a pacifier. They could come apart and pose a choking risk to your baby.

Inspect your child’s pacifiers regularly. Make sure that the material isn’t deteriorating or torn, and if it is, replace ASAP.

Keep size in mind. If your child continues to use a pacifier past the preemie stage (or even into the toddler stage), regularly replace them to ensure your little one is using an age-appropriate product.

When can I introduce a pacifier to a preemie?

If you’re nursing, you might choose to wait until breastfeeding has been established (usually around three or four weeks) before offering a pacifier, according to the AAP. If you’re bottle-feeding, you can introduce a pacifier any time you’d like.

Your Next Read

Best Bottles for Preemie Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Care for Your Premature Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do and How to Cope When Your Preemie's in the NICU Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Gavage Feeding, Preemie Formula and Other Ways of Feeding Your Preemie Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Should You Take Away Your Toddler's Pacifier? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Sweet Stories to Help Your Little One Say Goodbye to the Pacifier (Including the Book That Finally Worked for My Toddler) Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How Kangaroo Care Can Help Your Premature Baby Medically Reviewed by Marty Ellington, M.D., M.P.H

How to Do Paced Bottle-Feeding With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Understanding Your Baby’s Preemie Category — and How It Shapes His NICU Journey Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Can White Noise Help Your Baby Sleep Better? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Having a Premature Baby Medically Reviewed by Marty Ellington, M.D., M.P.H

How to Swaddle Your Baby Safely — A Step-by-Step Guide Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Your Premature Baby's Development and Doctor's Appointments Medically Reviewed by Marty Ellington, M.D., M.P.H

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window