The Best Quotes About Twins and Multiples — From Laugh-Out-Loud Funny to Super Sweet

Updates to copy and formatting.

Mom and dad hold smiling young twin daughters.

It's twice (or three or four times) the work, but it's worth it. Here's some inspiration to motivate you when the going gets tough.

Anyone managing more than one baby per birth date — be it twins, triplets, or even quads — knows life can be chaos times two (or three or four). A good laugh or a few words of wisdom or inspiration can go a long way towards making the disorder more bearable.

A guilty pleasure can also help, reports What to Expect Community member ejg361. "When we had to wake the babies every 3 hours to feed them, we'd both wake up, get out an iPad, turn on Real Housewives , and feed the babies together," she shares. "There were some long nights, but looking back, it was so special to have that time in the middle of the night with my whole little family in my bed."

Here are some of our favorite quotes and sayings about twins and multiples.

Key Takeaways

Raising twins is naturally chaotic — no matter how organized you are. Don’t worry, it’s not just you!

A shared laugh makes a difference. Having a “yes, that’s how it feels” moment can help you get through the topsy-turvy days.

The “twin parent club” includes many famous people. You can browse their quotes and compare notes.

"It's double the giggles, and double the grins, and double the trouble if you're blessed with twins." — Anonymous

"The special relationship with twins is that, if there's anyone else in the world that's going to get or be the confidant that you need, it's an identical twin." — Sam Underwood, actor

"Are they twins?" "No, I found the extra kid in the parking lot and thought, 'Why not?'" — Some Ecards

"With twins, reading aloud to them was the only chance I could get to sit down. I read them picture books until they were reading on their own." — Beverly Cleary, author

"We made a wish and two came true." — Anonymous

"I make humans three at a time. What's your superpower?" — Anonymous

"Identical twins. I'm glad they're identical 'cause you save money on photographs." — Ray Romano, actor

"You know you're a mom of multiples when you see people with one baby having a hard time and think, 'One baby? I laugh at your one baby!'" — Some Ecards

"After raising twins, you get organized." — Scott Ellis, film director

"You don't scare me. I have triplets." — Anonymous

"True twins share womb chemistry and endure many fateful slings and arrows together." — Gregory Benford, physicist

Whether you are expecting twins or are already chasing two (or more!) around, find real-world tips in the What to Expect app — and connect with other parents of multiples

"I'm 35 minutes older than my twin brother, so I always say, 'When I was your age ...' And then proceed to tell him what I did 35 minutes ago." — Anonymous

"'You're right! Having two kids a year apart is just like having twins.' Said no twin mom ever." — Some Ecards

"There are two things in life for which we are never prepared: twins." — Josh Billings (Henry Wheeler Shaw), humorist

"You're a parent of multiples when ... it takes longer to get everyone in the car than to run the actual errand." — Anonymous

"The only things [my twins] have shared so far are my uterus and their birthday." — Some Ecards

"A twin sister is like a good bra: supportive, comfortable, there to lift you up, and always close to your heart." — Anonymous

"Twice the love, half the sleep." — Anonymous

"I may be a twin, but I am one of a kind." — Jerry Smith, former NFL player

"I figure if the twins are alive at the end of the day, I’ve done my job." — Anonymous

"If you think my hands are full, you should see my heart." -— Anonymous

"Who needs dumbbells? I've got twins!" — Anonymous

"A good neighbor will babysit. A great neighbor will babysit twins." — Anonymous

"Twins are more than just friends. They are more like a very small gang." — Anonymous

"Twins have so much energy because they siphon it out of their parents." — Anonymous

"Twins by chance, friends by choice." — Anonymous

"Just because two people look the same doesn't mean they have the same dreams." — Anonymous

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

The Quote Garden, I Dig Old Books , February 2018. Someecards, Baby Memes Someecards, Baby Memes BrainyQuote, Josh Billings Quotes CafePress, Maternity T-shirts Someecards, Baby Memes BrainyQuote, Beverly Cleary Quotes BrainyQuote, Sam Underwood Quotes Double Time: How I Survived---and Mostly Thrived---Through the First Three Years of Mothering Twins , Jane Roper, 2012. AZquotes, Ray Romano Quotes BrainyQuote, Scott Ellis Quotes BrainyQuote, Gregory Benford Quotes

Updates history

December 23, 2025

Editor: Lisa Lombardi/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

10 Twin Pregnancy Announcements for a Doubly Sweet Surprise Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Expecting Two? Here Are 10 Surprising Facts About Twins Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

11 Surprise Pregnancy Announcements to Drop Your Unexpected Baby News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Twin Pregnancy Myths, Busted: What’s Really True When You’re Expecting Two Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

From One Child to Two: 23 Secrets of Second-Time Parents Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Stuck on What to Say? 50 Pregnancy Announcement Captions for Every Kind of Reveal Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Want a Good Laugh? Moms Share 17 Hilarious (and Slightly Cringey) Pregnancy Moments Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

10 Funny Pregnancy Announcements That Are Sure to Amuse Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

What Are Your Chances of Having Twins? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

What to Know About Twin Pregnancy Risks — and How to Stay Ahead of Them Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

6 Signs You May Be Pregnant With Twins Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

What to Do When Your Twin Babies Cry at the Same Time Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

5 Easy Ways to Tell Your Newborn Twin Babies Apart Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What Are the Different Types of Twins? Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

13 Tips to Make Flying and Traveling With Twins Less Stressful Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window