The 15 Best Musical Toys for Toddlers to Foster a Life-Long Love of Music

best musical toys for toddlers: baby einstein guitar, melissa & doug piano, uncommon goods turntable, and toddler playing with lovevery accordian from play kit

Quick Summary

Having watched my sons grow from music-making toddlers to budding stage performers, I believe the best musical toys for toddlers are designed for open-ended play, prioritize safety, are made from durable materials and encourage a life-long love of music.

When my kids were toddlers, their favorite toys were the musical ones: mini drum sets, ukuleles, and light-up xylophones dominated the playroom. The best musical toys for toddlers keep them entertained and help them expend energy, but in my experience, they also help build a foundational love of music. Now in their tween years, my children sing in a local choir and perform in musicals.

According to child development experts, playing with musical toys can encourage early cognitive development, helping toddlers develop coordination and laying the groundwork for future STEM skills. From simple shakers to toddler-friendly guitars and keyboards, there’s a wide variety of musical toys that can make your home come alive with sound (and sometimes sweet chaos!).

How I Chose the Best Musical Toys For Toddlers

Drawing from personal experience, I know anything that lets the kids shake, drum or dance is an instant hit. When choosing the best musical toys for toddlers, I kept safety top of mind, prioritizing options that are age-appropriate and designed to stand up to lots of play. To refine the list, I researched over 40 products and leaned on recommendations from the What to Expect community. I also sought insight from Claire Goss , Senior Manager of Family and Client Support at Bright Horizons , and Dr. Dana Suskind , a pediatrician and co-director of the TMW Center for Early Learning + Public Health.

Based on Dr. Suskind’s advice and American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommendations, I sought toys with volume control or child-appropriate decibel levels. I also I looked for open-ended musical toys that let children experiment with different sounds and rhythms while ensuring they were made from safe materials. Finally, I chose toys that are easy for little hands to operate, so toddlers can enjoy them independently.

Colleen de Bellefonds originally contributed to this article.

Lovevery Music Set

Includes a variety of instruments for open-ended play

Made with sustainable and non-toxic materials

Pricier than some musical toy sets

Weight: 1 pound

Dimensions: 10 x 10 x 5 inches (package)

Age/weight limit: 18 months to 4 years

Batteries: Included with metronome

Why We Love It

This thoughtfully designed collection from parent-favorite brand Lovevery introduces toddlers to music in a hands-on, sensory-rich way. Each of the six included instruments is crafted from sustainable wood and non-toxic materials, ensuring safe, durable play, along with an instructive toddler-friendly songbook. The set encourages rhythm, coordination and creativity, with notes in the book matched by color or letter across the pentatonic scale (five simple notes) for each instrument. While it’s pricier than other instrument sets for toddlers, the quality is unmatched and the price tag is well worth it for all that you get. Plus, the minimalist, Montessori-inspired design blends beautifully with any playroom, which parents love.

Community Reviews

PtitPois “We also just got the lovevery music set for bday present and it's a nice addition!”

gcy22 “The new lovevery music set looks like a great gift!”

KiwiCo Piano Xylophone and Shaker Set

Dual-function xylophone and piano create variety

Compact and portable

Xylophone may be a bit small for older toddlers

Dimensions: 11 x 7.3 x 2.5 inches

Age/weight limit: 6 months and up

Batteries: None

Why We Love It

The KiwiCo Piano Xylophone and Shaker Set is a fun way to introduce your toddler to the idea of notes while honing in on their rhythm and fine motor skills. The xylophone doubles as a piano, offering two ways to play, with each note a different color. My toddlers loved using shakers like the egg-shaped ones in this set to keep a beat, but they also had a blast shaking their shakers as hard as possible. This set’s shakers are perfectly sized for toddler hands and the piano is compact and durable.

Community Reviews

hllf2224 “Love them!! We were gifted a subscription when my first was born two years ago. Many of the toys still get played with regularly at our house and have held up really well and some of them are now being used by our April baby.”

faviola.a “We love Kiwico.com!”

Munchkin Mozart Magic Music Cube

Engaging

Lightweight

Portable

Only two volume levels

Weight: 16 ounces

Dimensions: 5.25 x 5.25 x 5.25 inches

Age/weight limit: Safe for all ages

Batteries: Three AA required

Why We Love It

If you want an engaging introduction to classical music for your little one, The Mozart Magic Music Cube is a fantastic pick. With easy-to-press sides, toddlers can layer different instrument sounds — think piano, violin and drums — to compose their own melodies. It’s a simple but captivating toy that lets tots explore new combinations of sounds in a screen-free way. The cube’s lightweight design makes it easy to carry around, but it’s durable enough to last through multiple kids.

Melissa & Doug Learn-To-Play Piano

Durable wooden design

Songbook included

Looks cute

Limited to two octaves

Weight: 11.5 pounds

Dimensions: 11.5 x 15.75 x 9.5 inches

Age/weight limit: 3-5 years (though younger toddlers also enjoy it)

Batteries: None

Why We Love It

Until they’re big enough to sit at a real piano, the Melissa & Doug Learn-To-Play Piano is a great option for budding pianists. With 25 keys and a color-coded songbook, it helps little ones explore pitch, rhythm and basic melodies. My younger cousins had a piano just like this one, and they absolutely loved putting on “recitals” for me when I would babysit. The sturdy wooden construction held up well, so they passed this piano toy down to my boys, who also adored banging away on the keys. If your toddler is truly into learning the piano, they’ll outgrow this two-octave set of keys into their preschool years, but until then, it’s a fun and pretty addition to the playroom.

Community Reviews

Dvody “She likes the Melissa and Doug piano. It has an open place underneath which a lot don’t have, but it lets her sit at it way more easily than anything with a solid box bottom.”

RenFox Kids Musical Mat

Lots of modes for play

Works well for multiple ages

Volume control panel

Takes up a decent amount of floor space

Weight: 9.6 ounces

Dimensions:43.3 x 14.2 x 0.39 inches

Age/weight limit: 12 months to 3 years

Batteries: ThreeAA batteries required

Why We Love It

Active toddlers will twist and leap their energy out across this musical mat , wiggling or dancing along to tons of instrument sounds and melodies. Four play modes mean there's plenty of fun to be had with this mat, from hearing different instruments to touching and kicking the keys to recording your tot's own special tune. You’ll appreciate having one more way to keep your little busy body moving and exploring.

Pinkfong Baby Shark Sing-Alongs

Each button plays a full song keeping tots entertained for half an hour in total

Some users complain that the book suddenly stops working

Weight: 11.7 ounces

Dimensions:8.78 x 7.87 x 0.67 inches

Age/weight limit: 12 months and up

Batteries: None

Why We Love It

According to Dr. Suskind, choosing a musical toy that’s connected with your toddler’s interests can be beneficial. “For a child who likes books and/or likes the satisfaction of cause-and-effect toys, you might consider a musical book that plays certain sounds or songs when a button is pushed,” she explains. Since “Baby Shark” is this generation’s toddler hit, this musical sing-along book is a fantastic pick.

According to Dr. Suskind, choosing a musical toy that’s connected with your toddler’s interests can be beneficial. “

For a child who likes books and/or likes the satisfaction of cause-and-effect toys, you might consider a musical book that plays certain sounds or songs when a button is pushed,” she explains. Since

” is this generation’s toddler hit, this musical sing-along book is a fantastic pick.

Parents love that this version of the tune doesn’t involve screen time. The book’s form and buttons are designed for little hands, and built-in speakers provide a surprisingly rich sound. Each page features a playful image and lyrics that pair with the song button.

VTech KidiBeats Kids Drum Set

Teaches kids the alphabet and numbers

Some parents find the sounds annoying

Weight: 1.51 pounds

Dimensions: 3.9 x 12.09 x 11.46 inches

Age/weight limit: 2 to 5 years old

Why We Love It

Hit it! Work your child’s memory and musical creativity while releasing pent-up energy. The drum pads and cymbal light up and make a unique sound when tapped with a stick. Toddlers can either free-play or jam along to nine rock, dance and pop melodies. Four play modes also teach kids letters and numbers.

Hape First Musical Guitar

Toddler-sized

Durable

Lightweight

No volume control

Weight: 1.14 grams

Dimensions: 25.7 x 8.4 x 2.4 inches

Age/weight limit: Ages 3 and up

Batteries: None

Why We Love It

The small, sturdy design of this toddler-sized acoustic guitar fits little hands comfortably so they can easily mimic their favorite musicians. Unlike more advanced instruments, this guitar focuses on fun instead of precision, so toddlers can strum away without the potential frustration of learning specific notes. My kids loved pretending to perform with a wooden guitar like this one as toddlers, and theirs was used well into elementary school. Overall, it’s a great toy for encouraging imaginative play and an early love of music.

VTech Zoo Jamz Piano

Lots of buttons to explore

Volume control

Sounds may annoy adults

Weight: 2.38 pounds

Dimensions: 2.95 x 17.32 x 11.14 inches

Age/weight limit: 18 months and up

Batteries: Two AA required

Why We Love It

Toddlers are curious, and this toy is packed with buttons to inspire exploration and play. Four settings play more than 20 songs on the piano, violin, xylophone or saxophone. Light-up piano keys help your child to follow along with the melody or learn to play a song. The whammy bar and scratch disc encourages fine motor skills with fun sounds. Kids will love hearing themselves on the working microphone as they sing along to more than 100 songs, sounds, and phrases.

Ipidi Toys Echo Mic

Open-ended

No batteries required

Lightweight

Portable

No volume control

Weight: 0.33 pounds

Dimensions: 9.7 x 3.7 x 3.5 inches

Age/weight limit: Ages 3 and up (though many parents use with younger children)

Batteries: None

Why We Love It

An echo mic is a simple but endlessly entertaining toy that amplifies toddlers’ voices without any batteries or buttons. My kids loved belting out songs and hearing their voices echo back in an echo microphone just like this one. It was pure, giggle-filled fun and I truly think it was this exact toy that paved the way for their future singing performances. Lightweight and easy to carry, it’s perfect for impromptu performances or car ride karaoke. It’s a fantastic, low-tech way to encourage confidence and creativity.

Hape Pound & Tap Bench with Slide Out Xylophone

Durable

Aesthetically pleasing

Clear sounds

Hammer is not attached

Weight: 3 pounds

Dimensions: 9.4 x 5.9 x 5.3 inches

Age/weight limit: 1 to 3 years

Batteries: None

Why We Love It

Watching your toddler create their own melodies on this xylophone is pure joy. It’s the kind of toy that entertains but also builds important skills like fine motor development and hand-eye coordination as tots tap the keys or hammer the balls through the top shelf. Parents appreciate its versatility and the fact that the xylophone and balls are removable, so little ones can play with each piece separately if they want. However, the hammer isn’t attached by a string, which some parents prefer to avoid tangles or accidental throws. Made with sustainable wood, water-based paint, and non-toxic finishes, it’s a safe and durable option for young musicians.

is pure joy. It’s the kind of toy that entertains but also builds important skills like fine motor development and hand-eye coordination as tots tap the keys or hammer the balls through the top shelf. Parents appreciate its versatility and the fact that the xylophone and balls are removable, so little ones can play with each piece separately if they want. However, the hammer isn’t attached by a string, which some parents prefer to avoid tangles or accidental throws. Made with sustainable wood, water-based paint, and non-toxic finishes, it’s a safe and durable option for young musicians.

Baby Einstein Together In Tune Guitar

Easy to clean

Can connect with other instruments

Touch-sensitive “buttons”

Some wish it had a shoulder strap

Weight: 2.2 pounds

Dimensions:22 x 2.5 x 8 inches

Age/weight limit: 12 months and up

Batteries: Three AA required

Why We Love It

Rock out and play a variety of kid-friendly tunes with the Baby Einstein Together in Tune Guitar . Toddlers can jam to four different play modes and 10 different melodies. Your toddler can hear real guitar sounds when they touch the colorful frets (which are super-receptive to touch, so your toddler won't have to slam down on the frets to hear noise). The frets are also buttonless, which makes this wooden toy particularly easy to wipe clean. Your little one can even play with other friends or family members who are using Together in Tune instruments nearby by connecting wirelessly via radio signals. Parents will also appreciate the off, low and high-volume control panel.

Community Reviews

babymd23 “Baby Einstein Guitar, a bongo drum, and the ball pit are all hits right now”

Melissa & Doug Band-In-A-Box

Wide variety of instruments

Storage box included

Great for group play

Numerous pieces mean some may get lost easily

Weight: 3.3 pounds (total)

Dimensions: 14.9 x 11.3 x 3 (package)

Age/weight limit: 3-6 years (though many parents use with younger children)

Batteries: None

Why We Love It

This Melissa & Doug wooden instrument set gets the whole family involved in your toddler’s jam sessions. It has everything they need in one convenient box, with 10 total pieces including maracas, a tambourine, cymbals, and more, so there’s a variety of instruments to explore and learn to play. My kids had a similar set and absolutely loved trying each instrument and playing as a “band” performing together. (Bonus: it encouraged teamwork and creativity!) This is a fantastic starter set for introducing more music into your toddler’s play.

Community Reviews

DedicatedtoCoffee “Melissa & Doug have a lot of good quality learning toys! …We also have the learn-to-play piano and the band-in-a-box (it’s for ages 3+ so I don’t let her play with the triangle or the tone block but she loves the tambourine and the maracas).”

Learn to Mix Spin DJ Pad

Portable

Features 18 sounds and four instruments

Spin and scratch feature

Some note this stopped playing sound after a few years

Dimensions: 13 x 7 x 2 inches

Age: 1 to 5 years

Batteries: 3 AA batteries

Why We Love It

This toddler-size turntable will allow your little one to whip up their own mixtapes with song overlay controls according to pitch, tempo and volume. The 18-key synythezier allowchoose between four different musical instruments and 18 different sound effects, Pressing different buttons and keys also emits flashing lights for extra fun. including playful choices like meows and bubbles. Parents were impressed with the quality and catchiness of then tunes, noting it’s captured the attention of young and older toddlers alike. However, do note that this is currently on backorder.

Hape Tap-Along Tambourine

Durable

Aesthetically pleasing

Clear sounds

Hammer is not attached

Weight: 3 pounds

Dimensions:9.4 x 5.9 x 5.3 inches

Age/weight limit: 1 to 3 years

Batteries: None

Why We Love It

Community Reviews

Suebs “I got my son this for his first birthday. He loves it still!”

starry1007 “Someone got him the hape xylophone ball toy and he's loved that since 12 months and plays with it differently each month.”

What to Consider When Buying a Musical Toy

Age-appropriateness: In addition to looking at the recommended age range, evaluate the toy as a whole. Look for easy-to-use features like large buttons or knobs that your child can use independently. For younger toddlers, consider more simple toys like shakers, tambourines or play mats that encourage movement and sensory exploration, while older toddlers may want something more advanced like a keyboard, microphone, or drum set to hone in on fine motor skills and creativity.

In addition to looking at the recommended age range, evaluate the toy as a whole. Look for easy-to-use features like large buttons or knobs that your child can use independently. For younger toddlers, consider more simple toys like shakers, tambourines or play mats that encourage movement and sensory exploration, while older toddlers may want something more advanced like a keyboard, microphone, or drum set to hone in on fine motor skills and creativity.

Open-ended play : Dr. Suskind suggests that the best musical toys allow toddlers to experiment. Instruments like xylophones, drums or toy pianos let them create rhythms and melodies of their own while building coordination and spatial awareness.

: Dr. Suskind suggests that the best musical toys allow toddlers to experiment. Instruments like xylophones, drums or toy pianos let them create rhythms and melodies of their own while building coordination and spatial awareness.

Safety and durability : Toddlers tend to play enthusiastically, so Goss stresses the importance of durable, non-toxic materials. Additionally, toys should have appropriate sound levels. Check that noise levels stay under 85 decibels to protect your child’s hearing . Musical toys with volume control are a great option.

: Toddlers tend to play enthusiastically, so Goss stresses the importance of durable, non-toxic materials. Additionally, toys should have appropriate sound levels. Check that noise levels stay under 85 decibels to

. Musical toys with volume control are a great option.

Musical toy type: Whether your toddler loves to dance, sing, or explore different sounds, there’s a musical toy to match their personality. Consider toy microphones for aspiring vocalists (aka your little chatterbox), drums for kids who love to hit and bang on things, or play mats with built-in tunes for energetic toddlers who never slow down.

Whether your toddler loves to dance, sing, or explore different sounds, there’s a musical toy to match their personality. Consider toy microphones for aspiring vocalists (aka your little chatterbox), drums for kids who love to hit and bang on things, or play mats with built-in tunes for energetic toddlers who never slow down.

Your Next Read

26 Toys for 18-Month-Olds, According to Child Play Experts and Parents Alike Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Musical Play for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Top Toddler Learning Activities for Brain-Based Fun Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Toddler Songs to Sing Together Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

6 Best Standing Toys to Help Your Baby Meet a Milestone Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

The Best Crafts for Toddlers Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Best Activities for 15-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

20 Advent Calendars for Preschoolers That Are Bound to Sell Out Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Best Activities for a 10-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for 18-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for 3-Year-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 9-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Sensory Play Activities for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window