The Best Energy-Boosting Pregnancy Foods to Sustain Your Strength

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

best energy-boosting foods for pregnancy

Boost your energy levels the old-fashioned way with these pregnancy-friendly superfoods.

Feeling too pooped these days to do much of anything? Of course you are — you're pregnant!

Even if you're still in the first trimester and may not yet be showing any evidence on the outside that you're busily building a baby, there's plenty going on inside — and it's all hard work, the hardest work your body has ever done.

To fuel the baby-making factory that's in operation 24/7, you're producing more blood, your heart rate is up, your metabolism is burning energy overtime (even when you're lying down), and you're using up more nutrients and water. All of this contributes to the pregnancy fatigue you're likely experiencing. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHaving A BabySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsHaving A BabySee All Sources

What's more, during the first trimester, your body's still in the process of manufacturing your baby's placenta (which won't be complete until the fourth month). It's not surprising that you're always fighting fatigue — and feeling like you're fighting a losing battle. Second-trimester fatigue is possible too, as well as in the third trimester as you grapple with pregnancy insomnia and your growing baby bump.

"I’m pregnant with my first, and I was not prepared for the exhaustion," says What to Expect Community user ivfwarriormom88.

So what's an exhausted mom-to-be to do (other than crawl into bed at the first opportunity)?

While you can drink coffee during pregnancy (it's safe for pregnant women to consume up to 200 milligrams of caffeine a day), it's smart to avoid sugary energy drinks or heavily caffeinated snacks. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsModerate Caffeine Consumption During PregnancySee All Sources [2] The sugar and caffeine combo can cause a sharp rise in blood sugar — followed by a quick, deep plummet, leaving you even more tired than when you first took a sip.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsModerate Caffeine Consumption During PregnancySee All Sources

For an energy lift that lasts, turn to high-quality, energy-boosting foods like the ones below. Bonus: Not only will these superfoods help deliver an energy boost, but they'll add nutritional value to your day.

Key Takeaways

Pregnancy fatigue is totally normal. Your body is working overtime to grow your baby, increase blood volume, and build the placenta — all of which drain your energy, especially in the first and third trimesters.

To keep energy up, skip the sugar rush. While a little caffeine is fine (up to 200 milligrams a day), avoid sugary energy drinks that cause energy crashes and fatigue.

Fuel up smartly. Eat protein-rich foods, complex carbs, and iron-packed options — like lean meats, beans, eggs, and whole grains — to sustain your energy and support your baby’s development.

Best energy-boosting foods during pregnancy

Here's the lowdown on foods that will give you a lift that lasts: Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsNutrition During PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsNutrition During PregnancySee All Sources

1. Protein-rich foods

Protein is essential during pregnancy , and it's also nature's ultimate pick-me-up. It provides you with the kind of energy that keeps you going — instead of leaving you flat in the middle of the day.

Better still, the amino acids in protein-rich foods will also aid in the development of your baby's rapidly reproducing cells. You need approximately 71 grams of it per day when you're expecting.

You can find healthy sources of protein in:

Milk

Cheese

Eggs

Lean meat

Poultry

Fish and seafood

Tofu and soy products (soy pasta, edamame)

Beans, lentils, split peas

Quinoa

Nuts and seeds

Peanut butter

2. Complex carbohydrates

Has the word carb become a four letter one in your diet plan? Redefine it by choosing healthy complex carbohydrates that nourish your baby and fuel your energy needs.

Check out this list of healthy carb options that reads like the roster of a nutritional all-star team:

Fresh fruits

Dried and freeze-dried fruits

Fresh vegetables

Whole grain breads, crackers, and cereals

Baked potatoes (with skins on)

Dried beans and peas

For more tips and advice on the nutrients you need to fuel you and your growing baby, the What to Expect app has you covered.

3. Iron-rich foods

Fatigue, especially if it's really keeping you down, could be related to iron-deficiency anemia , especially as pregnancy progresses and the demands of blood making start to take their toll.

Making sure you get some iron-rich foods daily (as well as taking your prenatal vitamin ) will keep your irons stores elevated and help pump up your energy level. You can find iron from these healthy sources:

Iron-fortified cereals

Dried fruit

Spinach

Canned sardines

Eggs

Lentils

Soy products

Lean red meat

Cooked shellfish

Cooked dried beans

Finally, make sure you're getting enough calories . When you're making a baby, you need an extra 300 to 500 calories a day (depending on the trimester you're in) to fuel his growth. Get less than that amount, and you'll undercut the energy needed to grow a baby — as well as the energy you need to get through your day.

Sources

Having A Baby

Show in the article

Moderate Caffeine Consumption During Pregnancy

Show in the article

Nutrition During Pregnancy

Show in the article

Your Baby’s Placenta

Iron During Pregnancy

Caffeine During Pregnancy

How Many Calories Do You Need During Pregnancy?

Anemia During Pregnancy

Pregnancy Fatigue

Pregnancy Diet: Focus on These Essential Nutrients