The 10 Best Baby Formulas, Vetted by Pediatricians and 300+ Moms

Best Baby Formulas

QUICK SUMMARY

According to pediatricians and parents in the What to Expect community, Enfamil is considered the best baby formula due to its affordable price point, availability, and ingredients. Other beloved brands include Kirkland, Aussie Bubs, and Bobbie, the latter of which I personally used for my son during my 13-month-long breastfeeding journey.

Editor’s note (Nov 11, 2025): We updated this guide following an announcement related to ByHeart Whole Nutrition Infant Formula , which has voluntarily recalled all of its products, including cans and single-serve stick packs. In light of this, we’ve removed the brand from our list of recommendations. For the latest guidance, please refer to the FDA and CDC notices .

For the latest guidance, please refer to the FDA and CDC notices .

I loved nursing my son for 13 months, but was never able to produce enough breast milk to build a backup stash for date nights, kid-free travel, or return to work. I knew I’d have to supplement with formula — and I didn’t hesitate.

“Baby formula is the only appropriate alternative [to breast milk] that offers complete nutrition during a baby’s first year of life,” says Whitney Casares, M.D., M.P.H., F.A.A.P. , a Portland, Oregon-based pediatrician.

Still, standing in the formula aisle (or scrolling endless options online) was enough to make my sleep-deprived brain short-circuit. So I turned to the What to Expect community — and a few trusted mom friends — to figure out the best formula to give my baby boy.

What I quickly learned: The “best” baby formula is one that’s readily available, within your price range, and easily tolerated by your little one. And since the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires every formula to have 30 essential nutrients that growing babies need, you can feel confident that any brand you choose will nourish your baby’s growing body and brain.

Still feeling a little (or a lot) overwhelmed by the options? Below, you’ll find a guide to the best baby formulas, including the one I ultimately chose: Bobbie.

How I Chose the Best Infant Formulas

To create a list of the best baby formulas, I drew on my own feeding journey — plus deep research and expert guidance — to spotlight formulas that are widely available, well-tolerated by babies, and trusted by both doctors and parents. Here's how I narrowed it down:

I started with the research I did when choosing a formula for my son. I compared ingredient lists, availability, price points, and reviews across leading brands.

I consulted four pediatricians to understand what truly matters when picking a baby formula and how to assess whether it's working for your little one. In addition to Dr. Casares, I spoke to:

I spoke to five parents on the What to Expect staff, who together have seven kids, to learn what formulas worked for their families — including those who needed specialty options for sensitivities or allergies.

I scoured What to Expect’s community forums and message boards, where parents share honest, unfiltered experiences with formula feeding.

I analyzed results of the 2026 What to Expect Feeding Awards , in which over 350 parents voted on their favorite formula brand.

Based on parent input, expert guidance, and research, I made sure the following 11 baby formulas are:

Easy to find in stores or available through reliable online subscriptions

Clinically sound, meeting or exceeding FDA requirements

Backed by pediatricians, with a strong safety and efficacy profile

Doctor's Note: "I tend to give formulas a couple of weeks of use to see how the baby is doing on it, unless [there’s] any allergic reaction. I have parents always start with the basic one and then change if there are problems," says Dr. Gina Posner, M.D. , pediatrician.

Best Baby Formula Overall

Enfamil

Available as powder or ready-to-feed

Reusable tub

Container and scoop design could be better

Sizes available: 20.7 and 36.4 ounces

Why We Love It

Backed by pediatricians and parents alike, it’s hard to find fault with Enfamil’s extensive family of baby formulas. Not to mention it's won Best Baby Formula in back-to-back What to Expect Feeding Awards , so it’s clearly a favorite among What to Expect parents as well.

Backed by pediatricians and parents alike, it’s hard to find fault with Enfamil’s extensive family of baby formulas. Not to mention it's won Best Baby Formula in back-to-back

, so it’s clearly a favorite among What to Expect parents as well.

Enfamil’s Enspire and Nutramigen varieties also earned spots on this list, but their NeuroPro line is a go-to for many families. This formula also provides brain-building nutrients like DHA, as well as immune system-boosting prebiotics.

The structure makes this milk-based formula generally easy for babies to digest (although the brand also has specific lines to address common feeding issues — more on that later). “My daughter was born as the formula shortage began, so we were forced to try a few different brands,” says Leah Rocketto , What to Expect’s Associate Commerce Editor. Ultimately, her daughter took best to Enfamil, experiencing fewer spitups and blowouts than with other brands. And it didn't hurt that it was the most cost effective, at $1.70 an ounce. "Since the container is dishwasher safe, I ordered refill packs, which were cheaper than individual tubs, and stored them in the washed container.”

The structure makes this milk-based formula generally easy for babies to digest (although the brand also has specific lines to address common feeding issues — more on that later).

“My daughter was born as the formula shortage began, so we were forced to try a few different brands,” says Leah Rocketto , What to Expect’s Associate Commerce Editor. Ultimately, her daughter took best to Enfamil, experiencing fewer spitups and blowouts than with other brands. And it didn't hurt that it was the most cost effective, at $1.70 an ounce.

This formula is also available as a powder or ready-to-feed formula, as well as in a gentle variety that may be beneficial for little ones prone to spit-up and gas.

that may be beneficial for little ones prone to spit-up and gas.

To top it off, some What to Expect community moms were seriously impressed by Enfamil’s customer service, from general assistance to even receiving formula coupons.

Tested by Leah Rocketto , soon-to-be mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Shopping Director:

"Not only did she spit up less when drinking Enfamil, but her poop wasn’t as foul-smelling."

Community Reviews

"We’ve used this since birth and it’s been problem free!"

"We used Enfamil NeuroPro for both babies and we all love it."

"We’ve used this since birth and it’s been problem free!! We tried the gentle ease neuro pro and it actually did the opposite so we went back to this!!"

"I've been using neuropro with my daughter since she was 4 months old and if you actually go onto the enfamil website they have an option where you can compare the two formulas. Neuropro has prebiotics which help promote the growth of healthy bacteria in the stomach and helps to break down foods easier, it also has MFGM which is found in breastmilk and it helps with brain development. I personally feel like it's the closest formula to breastmilk and its easier on LO tummies."

Best Hypoallergenic Baby Formula

Enfamil Nutramigen

Hypoallergenic for babies with milk protein allergies

Some say it smells better than Alimentum

Expensive

Can be hard to find in stock

Sizes available: 12.6, 19.8, and 27.8 ounces

Why We Love It

“If [babies] have a milk protein allergy, then they would need to go on a hydrolyzed formula, which is still actually based from cow’s milk, but they break down the protein so they're not allergic to it,” explains Dr. Feeley. Her recommendation: Enfamil Nutramigen .

Designed for babies with food allergies, and including bonus nutrients like DHA, many What to Expect moms saw a huge difference when they switched from traditional formula to this hypoallergenic option.

Many note that their baby didn’t spit up or get constipated as often as they did before, and one parent in particular found that their baby stopped fighting bottles when they switched to Nutramigen. What’s more is that although this product is very similar to Similac’s Alimentum, which is also a hydrolyzed formula, many parents say they preferred the smell of Nutramigen, which ultimately made them choose this one instead.

Tested by Sarah Darby , mom of two and What to Expect's Senior SEO Strategist:

"Nutramigen was honestly a lifesaver; my son was miserable with his allergy symptoms before we tried it. I really liked that Nutramigen wasn’t clumpy when mixed. My son thrived on it!"

Community Reviews

"I used Nutramigen with my oldest, she is now 15 months old. But it took a week for her to get used to switching from breast milk to formula, but it helped her a lot, she definitely didn’t throw up or get constipated like she used to."

"Love Nutramigen! It really does make a difference. Start with the ready to feed bottles, as the powder can create those bubbles and add to air intake. We’ve been on it for a month and haven’t looked back!"

"I live in the UK so am lucky enough to get Nutramigen for free but I definitely would have paid for it if it wasn't on prescription! My baby lost 11 oz., wasn't waking for feeds, was throwing up constantly and fighting every bottle — she's like a completely different baby since changing to Nutramigen!"

Best Subscription Baby Formula

Bobbie

Female-founded and mom-led

Easy-to-use website

Subscriptions available

Excellent customer service

More expensive than other formulas

Sizes available: 14 ounces

Why We Love It

Bobbie has long reigned supreme among formula subscription services. Even during the height of the formula shortage in 2022, Bobbie made sure to keep up with subscribers. "I often received texts from the company asking if I was keeping pace with her supply and whether I needed more cans early — which I often did," says Kathleen Felton , mom of two and WTE contributor who began subscribing to Bobbie right before the shortage.

This is just one of the ways Bobbie has impressed moms over the years, including me. Additionally, Bobbie’s website is incredibly user-friendly. For starters, there’s a whole page dedicated to its ingredients and what each one does. There’s also helpful guidance on how many cans to buy based on your baby’s age and whether or not you’re also breastfeeding — or you can opt for a “starter bundle,” which includes one can at half price.

Of course, quality service means little without a quality recipe — and Bobbie delivers there, too. Its European-style formula is both FDA-approved and meets the latest European Union (EU) standards for key ingredients like DHA and iron. The formula is also USDA-certified organic, meaning the ingredients were produced without GMOs, synthetic pesticides or fertilizers. In fact, Bobbie sources its key ingredients — such as pasture-raised dairy, whey and casein — from small family farms in the U.S. Bonus: It’s also the only female-founded and mom-led infant formula company in the country.

Since its inception, Bobbie’s list of formulas has grown, including a new Whole Milk-based creation that the brand states is the first and only American-manufactured USDA Organic whole milk infant formula. If you’re not sure what would be best for you and baby, you can opt to take Bobbie’s formula quiz to help narrow down your choice.

One considerable downside, as with many subscription services, is that Bobbie can be hard to find. Although it’s available at Target, stock is often low. This may present a challenge if you're in a bind and need formula faster than it can be delivered.

Tested by Blake Bakkila , mom of one and What to Expect contributing writer:

"So many mom friends recommended it to me, mainly due to its breast milk-like formula, and my son took to it right away — no easy feat for a baby who didn’t always love bottles."

Community Reviews

"Been using it since our baby turned 3 months old and he loves it! It’s easy on his stomach) uses the bathroom frequently and isn’t fussy at all! We love Bobbie!"

"I’ve used Bobbie exclusively since the day we got home from the hospital. My son is doing great on it! He had donor milk in the hospital and we had zero issues switching to this formula."

"We absolutely love Bobbie — we combo-fed her until 5 months when I stopped pumping and now she’s fully on it. It's worth the money to us since the ingredients are on par with what we prefer to feed our daughter. She’s also never had any issues with taste or poop on it."

Best Organic Baby Formula

Earth’s Best Organic Infant Formula

More affordable than lots of organic formulas

Easy to open

No smell

Only available as a powder

Sizes available: 21 and 32 ounces

Why We Love It

Not only does Earth’s Best Organic Formula have all the essential nutrients your baby needs to develop and grow, but it’s also one of the most affordable organic formulas on the market.

This milk-based powder formula is produced from cows fed with certified organic grain and hay, which are grown without any synthetic pesticides or fertilizers. It includes all the key ingredients your baby needs, plus DHA and ARA for brain and eye development and lutein for eyes. To top it off, it’s the brand’s closest formula to breast milk.

Reviewers also appreciate the packaging, which includes an easy-pull seal under its lid. Also nice: While some powdered formulas have a (totally harmless and subtle) smell, a number of parents mention that they like that Earth’s Best formula doesn’t have such a scent.

Psst : The brand also offers a sensitive variety if your pediatrician recommends it.

Tested by Kathleen Felton , mom of two and What to Expect contributing writer:

"I used this formula for about four months with my first son. It’s organic but at an accessible price point, which I really appreciated. I also found it a lot easier to mix compared to others I tried, which helped with his ability to tolerate it."

Community Reviews

"We use Earth’s Best Organic with LO and also used it with my first. They both have done great with it, no issues, and a huge plus for me is that it has no bad smell."

"I used Earth's Best with my Singleton and loved it."

"My first was EFF with Earth’s Best and I really liked it."

Best Baby Formula for Constipation

Dr. Brown’s x Gerber Good Start Soothe Pro

Gentle on sensitive tummies

Contains probiotics

Only available as a powder

Sizes available: 12, 19.4, and 30.6 ounces

Why We Love It

Finding a baby formula that agrees with a sensitive stomach can involve some trial and error. Many parents in the What to Expect community swear by Dr. Brown’s Gerber’s Good Start line, particularly for constipation, and for good reason. The brand has developed a variety of blends to suit various conditions that can affect newborns, and Good Start earned a reputation for adding probiotics to calm the digestive system. (Note, though, that the jury is still out on whether probiotics are beneficial long-term for your baby, so double-check with your pediatrician before trying them, according to the AAP .)

Finding a baby formula that agrees with a sensitive stomach can involve some trial and error. Many parents in the What to Expect community swear by Dr. Brown’s Gerber’s Good Start line, particularly for constipation, and for good reason. The brand has developed a variety of blends to suit various conditions that can affect newborns, and Good Start earned a reputation for adding probiotics to calm the digestive system. (Note, though, that the jury is still out on whether probiotics are beneficial long-term for your baby, so double-check with your pediatrician before trying them, according to

Despite new packaging and branding, the non-GMO milk-based formula has remained the same. It also includes DHA for brain and eye development and has no artificial growth hormones.

That said, you should check with your pediatrician to make sure your baby is truly constipated before switching to this type of formula. "Babies that are formula-fed are going to have less frequent bowel movements and often firmer bowel structure, or stool structure, as opposed to breastfeeding babies,” Dr. Abelowitz , pediatrician, explains.

Doctor's Note: Make sure you're mixing the formula correctly. “A lot of times they're not, and then that can be why the babies are getting constipated from it," says Dr. Feeley , board-certified pediatrician.

Community Reviews

"I just started this because my baby girl was dealing with [colic]. I switched to the SoothePro and it’s been so much better!"

"We use the Gerber Good Start and it has honestly been a life saver, LO was so fussy and spitting it up we switched to this and all is right in the world again."

"My LO has been on Gerber Good Start SoothePro since Nov 23rd! This is the 4th formula he’s been on and he’s doing GREAT!!! He’s eating more, happy, smiling, giggling, totally different baby!"

Best Formula for Gassy Babies

Similac Alimentum

Formulated to be gentle on tummies for little ones with gas and colic

One of the priciest formula varieties on the market

Some parents dislike the smell

Sizes available: 12.1 ounces

Why We Love It

If your little one is suffering from symptoms of gas and colic, Similac’s Alimentum may be worth a try. It’s a particular favorite among What to Expect community parents whose babies are gassy and colic-prone. This formula includes the necessary ingredients to boost brain and eye development and provide your baby the nutrition she needs, but it also has a hypoallergenic milk protein that helps eliminate allergic reactions and colic symptoms due to protein sensitivities.Alimentum is also available in a ready-to-feed format for families who prefer to take that route.

If your little one is suffering from symptoms of gas and colic, Similac’s Alimentum may be worth a try. It’s a particular favorite among What to Expect community parents whose babies are gassy and colic-prone. This formula includes the necessary ingredients to boost brain and eye development and provide your baby the nutrition she needs, but it also has a hypoallergenic milk protein that helps eliminate allergic reactions and colic symptoms due to protein sensitivities.

Alimentum is also available in a ready-to-feed format for families who prefer to take that route.

Alimentum is expensive, however — at $3.47 an ounce, it’s not exactly a budget-friendly pick. If your baby doesn’t have symptoms of gas or colic, you likely don’t need to spend more on a special formula like this. When in doubt, ask your pediatrician what they recommend for your baby’s symptoms.

Community Reviews

“Alimentum. It's expensive but does help! My oldest used it for a milk allergy but my youngest is currently using it for colic."

"My baby has allergies which caused her reflux and a really bad skin rash. A week on Alimentum and it cleared right up."

"My daughter was put on Alimentum and was a whole new baby after. She slept better and was all around happier."

Best Formula for Newborns

Aussie Bubs Organic Grass Fed Infant Formula

Affordable organic option

Widely available

Only available as a powder

Sizes available: 20 and 28.2 ounces

Why We Love It

Aussie Bubs Organic Grass Fed Infant Formula is not only another excellent option for parents who would prefer an organic formula, but also for newborns specifically. As you might guess, Aussie Bubs is manufactured in Australia, but this company is FDA-compliant and was given the green light by the agency to import to the U.S. during the formula shortage. This Stage 1 formula is made to be extra sensitive on newborns' stomachs, who are fed more times a day than when they get older.

Aussie Bubs’ milk-based powder is made with grass-fed organic cow’s milk that contains milk fat globule membrane (MFGM), as well as probiotics. The brand’s formulas are Clean Label Project certified, which means they have been extensively tested for chemicals that could be concerning. Many parents in the What to Expect community report that they switched to this formula during the shortage when their go-to brand was unavailable and were pleasantly surprised by how well their babies did on it.

Worth noting: While most U.S. formulas are designed broadly for infants, Aussie Bubs’ milk-based powder formulas are stage-based. Stage 1 is for 0-6 month olds and Stage 2 is formulated for 6-12 month olds — so make sure to purchase the right type for your little one’s age.

Community Reviews

"I just gave him [Aussie Bubs] last night and he’s honestly done amazing. Actually sounds like a little less reflux than even when he’s on my breast milk."

"I breastfeed and formula feed my newborn. We use Aussie bubs! Great brand."

"I'm very happy with the brand, and if I have a second kiddo requiring formula, will go the Aussie Bubs route."

Best Goat Milk-Based Formula

Kendamil Goat Infant Powder Formula

Recommended for babies sensitive to lactose

Goat’s milk comes from European goat farms

Creamy consistency

Frequent shortages

Sizes available: 28.2 ounces

Why We Love It

Goat’s milk has quickly proven to be a popular alternative for parents whose babies are intolerant to cow’s milk. Sourced from goat farms in Europe, Kendamil’s formula is a vegetarian-friendly option the What to Expect community is loving for their babies. Many share that problems such as gas pains and reflux have been remedied with this product, which features A2 proteins that can help with digestion. However, it should be noted that it has experienced recurrent shortages. The formula is sold at Target and Walmart, but at the time of publishing, they were either sold out or low in stock.

Community Reviews

TarraE01 we use Kendamil goat! We started it when he was like 2 weeks old due to horrible gas pains and pain/straining with bowel movements. He’s done great on it. No more straining and passing gas just fine!

christine444 I love kendamil goat. Negatives: Expensive, doesn't mix with water as easily as the cow milk kendamil. Positives: My baby was having issues with reflux, spitting up, and gas but he's doing great now. He poops pretty regularly too, not that it was an issue beforehand. That said, it didn't make him less regular.

Best Gentle Formula for Sensitive Stomachs

Similac 360 Total Care Sensitive

Widely available

Designed for babies with lactose sensitivity

Didn’t work for some babies

Sizes available: 20.1 and 30.2 ounces

Why We Love It

Many parents whose babies experienced colic and digestive issues swear by Similac’s 360 Total Care Sensitive formula , as it’s made to address fussiness and gas caused by lactose sensitivity. The key is five different prebiotics that have nearly an identical structure to those found in breast milk. But perhaps the best part? It’s usually easy to find online and in stores.

However, this won’t always provide you with an overnight fix. Dr. Posner stresses you may need to give it a couple of weeks to see if it works for you and your baby.

Still, parents rave that this is easy to mix and doesn’t have an off-putting smell. It’s also sold in a large container with more servings compared to most other options on this list, meaning you won’t have to worry about replacing it or having an extra on standby as frequently.

Community Reviews

one thing I wish someone had told me was how switching formulas also upset babies stomach. it takes weeks for them to adjust. that could be the issue too. but its definitely frustrating because you don't know if it's the formula switching or formula itself. couple weeks in my baby finally adjusted going from similac 360 to sensitive to total comfort.

We went from 360 to gentlease and back to 360. On the gentlease she was pooping nonstop, to the point that she got bad diaper rash and she broke out in a rash on her face. And she cried nonstop. Within 24 hours back on 360 all the issues were resolved.

"I actually made this switch. Baby had a lot of gas and belly pain with the slightest bit of gentlease. I switched to 360 Total Care Sensitive and we’ve been great ever since. I use this to supplement while breast feeding."

Most Affordable Baby Formula

Kirkland Signature ProCare

Much more affordable option

Only available at Costco

Texture can be a little foamy

Sizes available: 42 ounces

Why We Love It

Because all baby formulas in the U.S. must adhere to the same FDA rules and regulations, there’s no reason to buy an expensive formula if you don’t want or have to. Kirkland’s Signature ProCare formula from Costco is a widely loved generic option that parents in the What to Expect community consistently praise for its more affordable price tag.

It includes all the nutrients and extra ingredients that name-brand formulas do (as well as DHA for brain growth and lutein for baby’s eyes), but comes at a fraction of the price. It also contains no artificial growth hormones, and is certified kosher and certified halal. And although this formula is currently only available at Costco and non-members have to pay a small surcharge, the price per ounce is still significantly lower than other options.

The only (very minor) complaint some parents have about Kirkland formula is that it can sometimes be a little more frothy than other brands after it’s just been mixed. Swirling the bottle gently to incorporate the formula rather than shaking it too hard can help to ease bubbles, parents say.

Also good to know: More great options that come at a lower price point include Up&Up from Target and Member’s Mark from Sam’s Club , both of which several What to Expect community parents love.

, both of which several What to Expect community parents love.

Tested by Leah Rocketto , soon-to-be mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Commerce Editor:

“My daughter had the same response to Costco’s formula as she did to Enfamil — little spit-up and less stinky poops, so we used the two interchangeably, depending on availability."

Freelance writer Kathleen Felton originally contributed to this article.

Community Reviews

"I switched my LO to the Kirkland brand a few months ago without any issues. It's essentially the same as Enfamil and Similac and half the price. I say give it a try!"

"I've only used Costco Kirkland formula and I have had no issues. Can't beat the price!"

"We've been using the Costco brand formula and it's been working out great for us! The price is amazing!"

What to Look for in Baby Formula

Although baby formula is patterned after breast milk to provide baby with the same essential vitamins and nutrients, not all formulas are alike. Ahead, we explain some of the most important features to consider when deciding on a baby formula:

Type: The foundations of baby formula are usually roughly the same, but there are a handful of different types of baby formula to choose from. Milk-based formulas are the most common type , according to the AAP , but there are a number of other options, such as partially-hydrolyzed baby formula (which may benefit little ones with gas or colic) and extensively hydrolyzed formula (which might be better for little ones with a milk protein allergy), as well as a few organic options. The FDA also now permits goat’s milk-based formulas, which some parents feel is better tolerated by their babies than cow’s milk or soy protein (also this isn’t yet certain, says the AAP).

Ingredients: Although most infant formulas are basically the same, experts say, some varieties contain additional ingredients that may be beneficial for baby or target different concerns, such as prebiotics or probiotics to support immune health. Most infant formulas are made from non-genetically modified ingredients, and the AAP recommends that any babies who are not breastfed be given a formula that is iron-fortified. You’ll also find docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and arachidonic acid (ARA) in many formulas, which are both fatty acids that may help the development of baby’s brain and eyes.

Availability: Many parents who experienced the formula shortage know how important it is to choose a formula that is readily available. If this is a priority for you, you may want to opt for a formula that is sold at multiple major retailers. There are some formulas that are only available online, which is more convenient for some who prefer to have formula delivered on a subscription basis. Before choosing a formula, you should decide on what method of purchase works best for you.

FAQs

What formula do pediatricians recommend?

In general, the pediatricians we spoke to do not recommend a specific formula brand. Instead, they recommend formulas that are easy for parents to get and in their price range, as well as well-tolerated by their baby.

“Full-term healthy children can be started on any formula that parents prefer,” says Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P., a board-certified pediatrician in Cincinnati, Ohio, with TriHealth and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. “Often the best formula is really whatever is available.”

What is the most recommended infant formula?

Within the What to Expect community, the two formula brands that are most often recommended are Enfamil and Similac. Both offer numerous different types of formulas and are typically readily available in a majority of major retailers, both in person and online. However, just because these are the two most popular formula brands, it doesn’t mean that they’re what’s best for your baby. You may need a special type of formula for your child or prefer an organic brand, for instance.

How do I choose the best formula for my baby?

First, you’ll want to consider the type of formula that your baby needs. Most infants drink a cow’s milk-based baby formulas that have been modified to be more digestible and safe for little ones. This is the most common type of baby formula, according to the AAP.

However, there are other types too: Partially hydrolyzed baby formulas have been partially digested, which can help babies who deal with colic or gas. Extensively hydrolyzed baby formula, also called predigested formula, contains broken-down milk proteins, making them easier for babies to digest; these are well-tolerated by most babies who are allergic to cow’s milk. Soy-based formula may be an option for your baby if she is intolerant to galactose, but this condition is very rare, so only make this switch under your pediatrician’s guidance. And some babies may require special formulas, such as preemies or babies with specific diseases.

In addition to type, you can also review a formula’s ingredients. However, all infant formulas marketed in the U.S. must meet strict nutrition guidelines from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), so while every formula is unique, you can rest easy knowing all the choices on the shelf are regulated.

“I always describe the different formulas kind of like Coke and Pepsi: They're pretty much the same, but a little different,” says Dr. Feeley.

Dr. Abelowitz agrees. “We always tell parents that, same as different Tylenols and Motrins and brands, when you have dozens, or these days, maybe even hundreds of different types of options, there almost isn't one that's superior to the other,” he says.

In addition to all the ingredients the FDA requires in a baby formula, several formulas on the market also contain a few extra ingredients that may help your infant grow and develop, like DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) and ARA (arachidonic acid).

You may also find that some formulas include prebiotics or probiotics, which are designed to support immune health. (A common example you’ll probably see on formula labels is 2'-FL HMO, aka 2′-fucosyllactose human milk oligosaccharides, which are found in breast milk.) While these generally don’t have much evidence to support their use, they’re also not thought to hurt, Dr. Feeley says. “This is part of formulas trying to mimic human milk as much as possible,” she explains.

Is organic formula better than conventional?

Organic baby formulas are similar to standard milk-based formulas, but are generally produced with organic ingredients. “It's really the same as the families that choose to have organic foods and fruits and vegetables. It's really a personal choice,” says Dr. Feeley.

Organic formulas are often higher in cost than non-organic formulas though, notes Dr. Abelowitz, so if the bigger price tag sounds inhibiting, don’t stress. “When you really study the outcomes of those children that were [organic versus non-organic], both short and long term, the benefits are quite slim,” he says. “They're still there; they're quite slim — slim enough for us to say if economy or finances is a factor, then it doesn't justify doing it.”

What to do if my go-to formula is sold out?

As supply chain issues continue to reverberate across the country, it can understandably feel worrisome to find your go-to formula missing from the shelves. If you find yourself in this situation, Dr. Abelowitz says parents should reach out to their pediatricians to see what the best, most compatible formula is to buy instead.

Generally speaking, one good rule of thumb is to stick to the same type of formula. “If they were on a cow's milk-based regular formula, nothing special about it, then try another brand's cow's milk-based, nothing-special-about-it formula,” explains Dr. Feeley. “If they were on a partially broken down formula (what we call partially hydrolyzed) like an Enfamil Gentlease and they're out of it, but they have the Similac Pro Total Comfort, which is also partially hydrolyzed, then go with that. If they're out of Nutramigen (which is the fully hydrolyzed Enfamil one) but they have Alimentum, which is Similac’s version of the fully hydrolyzed one, then switch to that.”

Can I use European baby formula?

You may have heard rumors that European baby formulas are made with higher-quality ingredients that make them better for infants. However, experts stress that imported formulas ordered online from other countries are not always reviewed by the FDA. Imported formulas purchased online may not meet U.S. standards for quality, nutrition, and packaging, and they may have been stored improperly during shipping, which could up the risk of contamination.

While “the basic structure and breakdowns [of U.S. and European formulas] are very, very similar,” says Dr. Abelowitz, formulas in Europe are regulated differently than they are in the U.S. Because the European equivalent of the FDA has different requirements for formula than the U.S does, European formulas are often marketed as having ‘higher standards’ than U.S. formulas, even though that’s not true, explains Dr. Feeley. While the regulations are different, one isn’t better than the other.

There are also serious drawbacks to consider when buying imported baby formula, points out Dr. Abelowitz. “The biggest thing we're seeing at times [is] the confusion in dosages and how to prepare,” thanks to language translation issues or uncertainties with the way instructions are laid out. “There can be some dangerous situations of kids getting the wrong concentration,” he says.

However, during the height of the formula shortage, the FDA announced regulatory changes allowing for certain European formulas to be imported and made available for purchase in the U.S. As a result, you can now find certain European brands available for purchase from U.S. retailers, and these have been produced and stored safely and confirmed to provide adequate nutrition.

Still, many experts agree that there’s no evidence that European baby formulas are any better for babies than the options manufactured here in the U.S., so you shouldn’t feel that you have to seek out European brands for your child’s health.

WhatToExpect.com, Formula-Feeding Your Baby? Here’s What You Need to Know , May 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Here’s How Much Formula You Should Feed Your Baby , January 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Should You Buy European Baby Formula During the Formula Shortage? , August 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Formula Feeding , Last Accessed May 2024. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Choosing a Baby Formula , October 2023. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Formula Buying Tips , August 2018. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Forms of Baby Formula: Powder, Concentrate & Ready-to-Feed , May 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Is Homemade Baby Formula Safe? , May 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Probiotics in Infant Formula , July 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Infant Formula Feeding , June 2023. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Choosing an Infant Formula , June 2023. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Infant Formula Preparation and Storage , May 2023.

Your Next Read

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

5 Best Formula Dispensers That You Can Safely Stash in Your Diaper Bag Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

The Best Nipple Creams to Help You Find Relief While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Free Baby Samples? Yes, Please! How to Score Diapers, Formula and More By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Why Homemade Baby Formula Isn't Safe Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Bottles for Preemie Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Should You Buy European Baby Formula During the Formula Shortage? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Formula-Feeding Your Baby? Here’s What You Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Supplementing With Formula (Combo Feeding) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 9 Best Prenatal Vitamins That OB/GYNs Recommend — and Moms Actually Take Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Nutritional Needs of Babies: the First 12 Months Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

The 10 Best Baby Lotions, Creams, and Ointments for Sensitive Skin Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window