What Is the 3-Year-Old Sleep Regression?

3-year-old sleep regression, little toddler girl awake and playing on the bed

Bigger kids mean bigger problems, alas, including a few at bedtime. If your toddler gets out of bed repeatedly and resists his nap, you could have a 3-year sleep regression on your hands.

Putting a toddler to bed can feel like herding cats — one minute he’s over here, and the next he’s down the hall. The truth: 3-year-olds are in perpetual motion, racing around, climbing over the couch and talking up a blue streak. It’s no wonder that sleep is the last thing on their minds!

And it’s these physical and developmental milestones that can result in the 3-year-old sleep regression, leaving you with an overtired, cranky toddler who fights his beloved nap and nighttime routine.

For help with this bedtime situation, here’s what’s behind the 3-year-old sleep regression and some quick ways to handle it with your child.

What is the 3-year-old sleep regression?

The 3-year-old sleep regression is a common, though temporary, interruption in your toddler’s regular bedtime and napping schedule. While not every child this age experiences it, this kind of phase could sound familiar if you’ve been through similar recent disturbances, like the 12-month sleep regression , the 15-month sleep regression , the 18-month sleep regression and the 2-year-old sleep regression .

How long will the 3-year-old sleep regression last?

Just as every child develops at his own pace, walking and talking at a range of ages, the same is true for sleep issues . The 3-year-old sleep regression should be short-lived, lasting for a couple of weeks or even up to six weeks, depending on your child and what’s behind the setback.

If the 3-year-old sleep regression is related to a story he’s scared of, it might be quick and easy to allay his fears over that Big Bad Wolf. But a sleep regression due to sleepwalking, nightmares or a health issue such as noisy breathing will likely take longer to resolve.

Signs of the 3-year-old sleep regression

Wondering what to look for to determine whether your toddler could be going through a 3-year-old sleep regression? Here are some common signs:

Waking up overnight

Waking up much earlier than usual

Resisting bedtime or naptime

Getting out of bed repeatedly

Taking a long time to settle down for bed and fall asleep

More irritability or fussiness than usual during the daytime

Causes of the 3-year-old sleep regression

Your toddler’s skill set is exploding right now as he masters new milestones seemingly every month. These, in turn, can become sleep regression causes in 3-year-olds, including:

Potty training . Ditching diapers and using the potty is a major developmental achievement, but it doesn’t come without a few accidents, sometimes at night. And getting up to go can make it difficult for a toddler to fall back to sleep afterwards.

Improved speech . By age 3, your toddler will know 200 words and he can hold a conversation rather well, which means he’ll no doubt say “Don’t want nap!” often.

Delay tactics. Toddlers are smart! Better language skills might be put to use at night as your kid requests a cup of water, another trip to the potty plus more stories and songs.

Nightmares . Bad dreams and a fear of the dark can both conspire to interrupt your child’s sleep. He might also experience night terrors at this age as well.

TV time . Exposure to TV and other screens like smartphones, tablets and computers can interrupt a child’s sleep, and the content may be scary.

The end of naps . This big change is one that parents are sad to see, but it’s normal for kids to gradually nap less and then stop altogether between the ages of 3 and 5.

Overtired. Energetic toddlers can have a hard time slowing down at the end of a busy day filled with playtime and preschool, resulting in an amped-up, overtired tot.

Changing beds . Between the ages of 18 months and 3 1/2 years, most kids move from a crib to a toddler bed or twin bed (though it's good to make the switch as close to age 3 as possible) — and it’s this easy-to-exit bedtime setup that can contribute to a 3-year-old sleep regression.

Sleepwalking . This issue isn’t uncommon and might be prompted by excess fatigue or irregular sleep, plus it can be accompanied by sleep apnea or night terrors.

Life events. Sleep setbacks might also be connected to anxiety or worry over the arrival of a sibling, a new babysitter, a different home or the start of preschool.

Tips for handling the 3-year-old sleep regression

The best way to handle this bump in the sleep road is with as much patience as you can muster. Next, work to ease your tot back on track with these tips for sleep regression:

Practice good sleep habits. Don’t give up on your toddler’s usual bedtime routine. Make time every night for a bath, some quiet reading, a quick snack and cuddling. Good sleep habits also mean nixing or greatly reducing TV, especially close to bedtime. Shut off screens at least two hours before tuck-in time.

Remain calm. Getting into an argument with your 3-year-old or bribing him can backfire. Instead, keep your cool and walk him back to bed each time he gets up.

Introduce quiet time. Has your tot’s nap gone out the window? This is perfectly fine if his nighttime sleep isn’t impacted. One strategy to try: Instead of official sleeping in the afternoon, arrange for your tot to have quiet time in his room alone. Tell him he can play quietly or lie down if wants to, but this time is for rest and relaxation only.

Nix drinks at night . Help keep your little potty trainer dry at night with limited water and milk close to bedtime. And make a trip to the bathroom part of the tuck-in routine.

Add a port-a-potty. Encourage your child to get up if he has to pee — and make it easy by setting up a small toilet training chair with an attached potty right in his room.

Offer a light snack. Growing toddlers may need a small bite before bed to keep them satisfied. Serve up some cereal, crackers and cheese, or yogurt and fruit if he’s hungry.

When to call the doctor

Your child’s pediatrician is your partner when it comes to sleep strategies, so check in to see what you can learn. You should also call the doctor if your toddler’s nightmares, fears or worries are frequent or intense, or his lack of sleep is affecting his behavior during the day.

And schedule a checkup after a few days or a week if you hear your child snoring or making other breathing noises at night. A call or appointment is also important for your own peace of mind, as many of these issues can be distressing (like sleepwalking and night terrors), but hearing that they’re also normal is a big help to parents and caregivers.