The 9 Best Cradle Cap Shampoos and Treatments to Keep Baby’s Scalp Soft and Healthy

best cradle cap shampoos in 2025, featuring Karla Martin's child with cradle cap that extend to their eyebrows. Featured products include Weleda, Tubby Todd, Frida Baby and Dermazen

Quick Summary

According to parent testers, Mustela’s foaming shampoo is the easiest to use and clears cases of cradle cap fast.

The first time I noticed crusty yellow scales covering my newborn daughter’s otherwise perfectly adorable scalp, my heart did a flip. I immediately dialed my pediatrician’s office to figure out what was wrong. Thankfully, the diagnosis was pretty straightforward: it was a case of cradle cap. Totally harmless, totally painless, and totally treatable with one of the best cradle cap shampoos.

Also known as seborrheic dermatitis , cradle cap is basically baby dandruff. It usually appears in the first few weeks of their life as red, flaky patches on the scalp. (It can also be found in baby skin folds and in the diaper area, although that’s less common.) While it looks uncomfortably dry and itchy, it isn’t. In fact, the worst part might be how much it bothers you.

Luckily, localized cases of cradle cap are simple to treat. New parents may be afraid of washing their baby’s scalp if cradle cap presents, but don’t be frightened: The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) advises washing your baby’s hair every other day to gently remove and loosen up new flakes. That means you’ll need to have a great cradle cap shampoo on hand. Below, you can check out a few parent and pediatrician favorites.

How We Tested and Selected the Best Shampoos for Cradle Cap

As a mom of two young daughters who both dealt with cradle cap for months, I took my personal experience into account. I tried several different cradle cap shampoos and treatments to get rid of the flakes with my daughters and kept those in mind when compiling this list.

I also combed through dozens of conversations in the What to Expect Community, looking for insights into which cradle cap shampoos worked best for them. I also swapped stories with my mom friends who’ve survived stubborn flakes, asking them what they used and loved (or would skip altogether).

Most importantly, I spoke with three experts in the medical field who have experience dealing with cradle cap both professionally and personally with their own kids. This includes Gabriella Dauer , M.D., FAAP, pediatrician at Dauer Pediatrics in South Florida; Dina Elbeltagy , M.D., dermatologist and medical writer; and Sanober Pezad Doctor, M.D ., an integrative and holistic dermatologist whose specialities include pediatric dermatology. They weighed in on what’s normal, as well as what ingredients are safe and which to avoid. For example, Dr. Pezad recommends mild formulas made with organic ingredients.

I conducted my own research to learn more about cradle cap and the best ingredients for treatment using resources such as the AAP and the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD).

From there, I finalized my list of the best shampoos for cradle cap by keeping the following criteria in mind:

Overall Best Shampoo for Cradle Cap

Mustela Foam Shampoo for Newborns

Gentle yet effective formula that parents love

Made with 99% plant-based ingredients

Easy-to-use foaming pump

Doesn't come with a lot of product

Size : 5.07 fl oz

Active Ingredient : Avocado polyphenols

Fragrance-Free : Yes

Tear-Free : No

Why We Love It

The reviews don’t lie – and Mustela’s foaming shampoo earned a lot of love from our community. This tried-and-true formula is extra gentle on sensitive newborn skin and made of 99 percent plant-based ingredients, and sans parabens and phthalates. But that doesn’t mean it isn’t strong enough to be effective.

of love from our community. This tried-and-true formula is extra gentle on sensitive newborn skin and made of 99 percent plant-based ingredients, and sans parabens and phthalates. But that doesn’t mean it isn’t strong enough to be effective.

I tapped Mustela for my first daughter after our pediatrician recommended it, and found that after just a few washes, her cradle cap noticeably improved. Every time I went a few weeks without it, the patches returned, but as soon as I started using it again, the flakes would fade away.

I never had any issues with the pump dispenser; it provided the perfect amount of foamy shampoo that made it easy for me to lather into my baby’s hair without having to worry about the product dripping into her eyes. The only drawback? You only get about five ounces to work with, so if you’re looking for better value, this may not be the best pick.

Community Reviews

“I love that stuff!!! Can't emphasize it enough!! My lil man had cradle cap and it cleared in 2-3 days. It came back once or twice after but only last a day with the Mustela. I use the lotion and the body wash as well. And they have waterless mustela body wash if u don't have time to do a full bath”

“Mustela... it's a bit more pricy but totally worth it!!!”

The cradle cap shampoo and lotion by mustela were very helpful for my LO! Cleared up in a couple of days.

Best Hypoallergenic Shampoo for Cradle Cap

Cetaphil Baby Wash and Shampoo

Dermatologist-approved mild formula

great for sensitive skin

Sold as a combo pack with lotion

Contains fragrance

Size : 7.8 or 13.5 fl oz

Active Ingredient : Calendula extract

Fragrance-Free : No

Tear-Free : Yes

Why We Love It

This dermatologist-tested shampoo is formulated to be tear-free, hypoallergenic, and safe for reactive, sensitive skin. It’s also free of parabens and mineral oils, making it a solid choice for babies prone to irritation. “My children have very sensitive skin, so I use Cetaphil [and] it works wonders,” writes one WTE mom . Bonus: The addition of organic calendula extract in the formula leaves skin smooth and moisturized.

I also love the fact that this is another 2-for-1 formula, providing a bigger bang for your buck — use this to wash your baby's hair and skin. The brand also sells it paired with its parent-loved lotion , too, for $14.

Community Reviews

“My baby has eczema & we use this one”

“This is what I use on my twins! And it happens to smell really good. Then after their shower I put aveeno eczema relief lotion.”

“Someone on here told me to use the cetaphil wash for baby acne. Well I've also been using it as a shampoo and my daughter's cradle cap is gone too.”

Best Versatile Shampoo for Cradle Cap

Aquaphor Baby Wash & Shampoo

Simple

soothing formula that experts recommend

Larger size lasts longer

Some parents found the chamomile extract irritating to sensitive skin

Size : 16.9 or 25.4 fl oz

Active Ingredient : Natural chamomile essence

Fragrance-Free : Yes

Tear-Free : Yes

Why We Love It

Aquaphor has long been trusted by both pediatricians and parents for its healing skin products — it’s also the brand behind one of our favorite diaper rash creams . “I prefer Aquaphor for everything,” writes one What to Expect community member .

While not made specifically to treat cradle cap, it's a great everyday shampoo and wash if you're looking to enrich baby's skin without drying it out. It's also a great value, sold at just $10 for a large amount.

enrich baby's skin without drying it out. It's also a great value, sold at just $10 for a large amount.

Parents love the mild, tear-free formula that's also free of artificial fragrances. However, it is naturally enriched with chamomile essence. I found this to be a soothing addition (it’s a known ingredient for reducing inflammation and redness), but some parents found it was a bit irritating for their little ones with eczema, so keep an eye out for any developing rashes.

Best Medicated Shampoo for Cradle Cap

Dr. Eddie’s Happy Cappy Medicated Shampoo and Body Wash

Effective on stubborn cases of cradle cap

works quickly

May irritate baby skin

Size : 8 fl oz

Active Ingredient : Pyrithione zinc

Fragrance-Free : Yes

Tear-Free : Yes

Why We Love It

Dr. Eddie's shampoo is medicated to help fight flaking, itching, scaling… you name it. It’s the first over-the-counter cradle cap shampoo with pyrithione zinc — the same ingredient found in adult dandruff shampoos — and it also doubles as a body wash. The formula is fragrance-free, dye-free, alcohol-free, paraben-free, sulfate-free, cruelty-free, vegan, and BPA-free (did you get all that?).

is medicated to help fight flaking, itching, scaling… you name it. It’s the first over-the-counter cradle cap shampoo with pyrithione zinc — the same ingredient found in adult dandruff shampoos — and it also doubles as a body wash. The formula is fragrance-free, dye-free, alcohol-free, paraben-free, sulfate-free, cruelty-free, vegan,

And it works , happy parents say. In fact, one WTE community member notes they used this just two times, and the cradle cap was completely gone. Other parents say it was the only thing that helped after trying everything else.

, happy parents say. In fact, one WTE community member notes they used this just two times, and the cradle cap was completely gone. Other parents say it was the only thing that helped after trying everything else.

One thing to note: Because this is medicated, you should chat with your pediatrician before using it on your child.

Doctor’s Note :

“We used Happy Cappy shampoo for my daughter. It’s gentle and made for kids with pyrithione zinc, which has antifungal properties, but is not as strong as a medicated shampoo like ketoconazole.” — Dr. Dauer

Community Reviews

“It’s really dry (co springs is something like 7000 feet in elevation) in winter, so I got this for my little man at the suggestion of another forum post! This combined with some coconut oil every morning before daycare has taken care of my little guys extremely dry scalp!”

“Dr Eddie’s Happy Cappy. It worked wonders. And still does for eczema.”

“Happy Cappy shampoo and then brushing it out worked great for both my kids! Saw it nearly clear up after just one bath with my son!”

Best Unscented Shampoo for Cradle Cap

Cerave Baby Wash and Shampoo

Gentle enough for babies with eczema (National Eczema Association Seal of Acceptance)

Some parents say it takes a while to see results

Size : 8 or 16 fl oz

Active Ingredient : Vitamin E

Fragrance-Free: Yes

Tear-Free : Yes

Why We Love It

This soap-free wash and shampoo was developed with pediatric dermatologists and formulated specifically to gently cleanse infant skin. It has a National Eczema Association Seal of Acceptance, meaning that it’s safe to use on (and treat) eczema — ideal if your baby is battling that on top of the cradle cap. “I love it! My son has eczema and this is all we will use on him,” says one WTE mom .

This product contains hyaluronic acid (hydration), ceramides (restores the natural skin barrier), niacinamid (calms irritated skin), and vitamin E (soothes and moisturizes). Parents love how gentle (yet effective) this wash is… and many swear it outperforms pricier, fancier baby products.

Community Reviews

sj2022hi We put coconut oil on the scales and use a silicone brush to gently scrub out the flakes. then we use cerave body wash/shampoo to rinse and get the coconut oil out of her hair. which works pretty well but will need to do it a few more times.”

abbykristine We’ve always used Cerave. No scent, not drying… no complaints!

Best Cradle Cap Shampoo for Sensitive Skin

Weleda 2-in-1 Gentle Shampoo + Body Wash

Gentle and hydrating

Tear-free

Doctor-recommended

Has a mild fragrance some babies may not like

Size : 6.8 fl oz

Active Ingredient : Sweet almond oil and calendula extract

Fragrance-Free : No

Tear-Free : Yes

Why We Love It

Made with moisturizing ingredients like sweet almond oil and calendula extract, Weleda's 2-in-1 shampoo and body wash is gentle enough for sensitive skin. The calendula extract helps cleanse the skin and lift away dirt, which can help clean the scalp and the flakes. Meanwhile, the sweet almond oil is very hydrating, which is key with cradle cap, since it can be drying. It also promises to be tear-free for a non-irritating wash overall, and when used as a body wash, leaves skin super smooth. The one downside is the fragrance that, while nice to smell, can be irritating for some babies.

Doctor’s Note :

“I recommend Weleda Calendula Shampoo and Body Wash. It contains soothing and softening ingredients that help loosen the flakes without irritating the baby’s sensitive skin.” – Dr. Elbeltagy

Community Reviews

amwil13 “Mustela and Weleda Calendula are my two favs, worth it for either one.”

Best Moisturizing Shampoo for Cradle Cap

Dermazen Cradle Calm Treatment

Formulated to target the root causes of cradle cap

moisturizes with ingreidents like aloe and niacinamides

Can be used on babies and adults

Some ingredients might be too harsh for sensitive skin

Pricey

Size : 3 fl oz

Active Ingredient : Willow bark, niacinamide

Fragrance-Free : No

Tear-Free : No

Why We Love It

Created by parents who deal with seborrheic dermatitis themselves and who have children who grew up with cradle cap, this Dermazen shampoo is formulated with ingredients that are meant to target the root cause of the crusty flakes. Willow bark helps to balance out oil production and reduce the effects of the fungus that can cause cradle cap, while xylitol helps reduce the signs of fungus. Ingredients like squalane, niacinamide, and aloe leaf juice all help to reduce dryness, soothe, and moisturize the skin so it’s less red and inflamed.

is formulated with ingredients that are meant to target the root cause of the crusty flakes. Willow bark helps to balance out oil production and reduce the effects of the fungus that can cause cradle cap, while xylitol helps reduce the signs of fungus. Ingredients like squalane, niacinamide, and aloe leaf juice all help to reduce dryness, soothe, and moisturize the skin so it’s less red and inflamed.

Because it’s potent, you may want to check with your pediatrician before using it on very young or sensitive babies. But for many parents, it’s been a game-changer.

Pro tip: This is more like a cleansing serum rather than a shampoo, so don't expect this to lather up. Because this features all-natural ingredients, also be sure to give it a good shake before use (the oils tend to separate).

Community Reviews

“This stuff works wonders!”

“We are also using Cradle Calm oil from Dermazen. It's done wonders for her scalp and neck!”

“My baby’s hair also comes out with the flakes. I don’t know how to prevent that other than preventing the flakes. I use dermazen cradle cap serum and so far it has helped the best.”

Best Pre-Shampoo Treatment for Cradle Cap

Tubby Todd Hair + Body Wash

Works alongside shampoo to get rid of cradle cap

Formulated for sensitive skin

Works on more intense cases

More expensive than other products on this list

Size : 1.8 fl oz

Active Ingredient : Pyrithione zinc

Fragrance-Free : Yes

Tear-Free : No

Why We Love It

Sure, the Tubby Todd Bye-Bye Cradle Cap isn't technically a shampoo, but it's great at treating cradle cap. This gel is made with pyrithione zinc, an antifungal that Dr. Dauer recommends because it can help treat the root cause of cradle cap. Hydrating ingredients like aloe vera leaf juice and olive fruit oil help with loosening scaling and soothing dryness, and make this one more gentle for sensitive scalps.

isn't technically a shampoo, but it's great at treating cradle cap. This gel is

Though sold in a small bottle, a little goes a long way, making this a worthwhile addition to your bath-time routine.

Tested by Karla Martin , mom of one and What to Expect’s Senior Photo Manager:

“We used tubby todd for cradle cap and it cleared within about 3 washes. our baby had it on her scalp (although not too obvious because she had a lot of hair) but it spread towards her eyebrows.”

Community Reviews

“yes! Tubby Todd products are totally worth it. I’ve used the cradle cap gel with the brush and also the all over ointment for baby acne. My daughter’s skin and scalp are perfect now.”

“yes bye bye cradle cap cleared my sons up very well”

“We also have the all over ointment and the bye bye cradle cap which are both great as well.”

Best Post-Shampoo Treatment

Frida Baby FlakeFixer Cradle Cap Spray + Scalp Mask Duo

Mask and leave-in conditioner

Also treats dry scalp

Brush is sold separately

Size : 5 fl oz

Active Ingredient : Aloe vera and calendula

Fragrance-Free : Yes

Tear-Free : No

Why We Love It

While this Frida Baby set isn’t a shampoo – it’s a mask and a spray – it can be used alongside one to tackle the crusty flakes that come with cradle cap. You can use the mask all over the scalp to soften the flakes so they fall off more easily, then use the spray on the scalp after getting them out of the bath to moisturize and re-hydrate. The ingredients are fragrance-free and hypoallergenic, and include soothing aloe and calendula to really leave skin less dry. My second daughter had very stubborn cradle cap, and so we tried this system out – I found that it worked great when used regularly, especially when used with gentle brushing.

On that note, yoou can also use these two products with Frida Baby’s cradle cap brush , but that is sold separately.

Community Reviews

“Haven't got my baby yet so haven't actually tried but I saw a video using the fridababy cradle cap remover and it worked wonders”

“I used the Frida mask and spray and my baby’s cradle cap went away in a few days. I used it every night during bath then really combed his hair to get the flakes out right after. Then I waited for it to dry then used the spray. I would use the spray throughout the day when I saw his scalp started getting dry.”

“Look up the Frida mom cradle cap scalp mask & leave in conditioner and the three step flake fixer system. It got rid of my baby’s cradle cap pretty fast.”

A Doctor's Note on Cradle Cap

“Cradle cap is a typical newborn scalp condition that is very common and involves a mix of oil production, dead skin cells, and yeast building up on the newborn scalp,” explains Gabriella Dauer , M.D., FAAP, pediatrician at Dauer Pediatrics in South Florida.

Most babies will experience mild or moderate cases of cradle cap; it’s rarely serious. “In more severe cases, a crusty mass may cover most of the scalp and even extend onto the face, neck, and behind the ears,” adds Dina Elbeltagy , M.D., dermatologist and medical writer. If that’s what you’re seeing, you’ll definitely want to check in with your pediatrician.

Most babies will experience mild or moderate cases of cradle cap; it’s rarely serious. “In more severe cases, a crusty mass may cover most of the scalp and even extend onto the face, neck, and behind the ears,” adds

, M.D., dermatologist and medical writer. If that’s what you’re seeing, you’ll definitely want to check in with your pediatrician.

In some instances, your pediatrician may recommend a low-dose hydrocortisone cream or medicated shampoo that contains an antifungal ingredient like zinc to get rid of the patches faster, but just note that these products can sometimes be irritating to delicate newborn skin. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends starting off with a mild shampoo — like those mentioned in this roundup — to treat cradle cap at home first.

It's also important to note that cradle cap doesn’t indicate an allergy, poor hygiene, or an infection. Rather, experts believe it’s likely triggered by maternal hormones that cross the placenta before birth, increasing inflammation and oil production.

Freelance writer Zara Hanawalt originally contributed to this article.

Shampoos FAQs

How often should I wash my baby’s scalp and hair with shampoo, especially if they have cradle cap?

You don’t need to wash your baby’s hair every day, even if they have cradle cap. Dr. Dauer recommends washing their hair twice weekly at a very young age. “They’re not really getting dirty or out playing to accumulate dirt and sweat at that very young age,” she says. “Your doctor can help determine the frequency with which to use a medicated shampoo with ketoconazole, but shampoos with pyrithione are safe to use daily.”

“While there isn’t a higher limit, I often recommend parents to freely wash their child’s scalp as often as required, especially with a mild baby shampoo. Every second or third day is ideal and plain water works just as fine if washing the scalp daily,” echoes Dr. Pezad.

What triggers cradle cap?

“No one knows for sure the exact cause of cradle cap,” says Dr. Pezad. “There are several theories that suggest possible etiologies such as mother's hormonal changes during pregnancy which stimulate the infant's oil glands.” Experts believe that sebum (the body’s natural oils) and yeast (which lives on your skin) play a role as well, but it’s unclear exactly how they interact to cause seborrheic dermatitis aka cradle cap.

How likely is cradle cap to come back after treatment?

Even if you’ve managed to get rid of cradle cap completely with shampoo, it can still come back. “Since cradle cap is a form of dandruff, it can come and go for a while, even after treatment,” Dr. Elbeltagy says. She recommends regular gentle shampooing and brushing to prevent it from recurring. If it’s very persistent, you should speak with your pediatrician.

What’s the best remedy for cradle cap?

Contrary to many parents’ first instincts, washing a cradle cap-afflicted scalp is one of the most effective ways to address the issue. “Wash the scalp every second or third day with a mild baby shampoo ,” advises Dr. Pezad. “Thereafter use a soft toothed comb to brush off the accumulated scales in severe cases.” Massage baby’s scalp gently with your fingers, a brush or comb while shampooing to help loosen the scales. Put baby or mineral oil on the scalp before bathing to help with super stubborn scales. In more severe cases, your doctor might prescribe a cortisone lotion to use after bathing to help reduce inflammation.

American Academy of Dermatology, How to Treat Cradle Cap , August 2022. American Academy of Dermatology, Seborrheic Dermatitis , December 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics, Cradle Cap , November 2009. Mayo Clinic, Cradle Cap , November 2022. Sanober Pezad Doctor, M.D ., Integrative Dermatologist.

Your Next Read

Cradle Cap (Seborrheic Dermatitis) in Babies Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

How to Care for Newborn Skin Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

The 10 Best Baby Lotions, Creams, and Ointments for Sensitive Skin Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

When Do Babies Grow and Lose Their Hair? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Clean Baby Clothes By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Brushing Your Toddler's Hair Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Diaper Rash in Babies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Winter Skin Care for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Head Lice in Children Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Give Your Baby an Oatmeal Bath Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Bathe Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Dry Skin in Babies Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Dry Skin in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window