The Best Potty Training Underwear, According to a Mom Who’s Been Through It 3 Times

Best Potty Training Underwear featuring Hanna Andersson, Gerber, MooMoo Baby, Pampers, and Amazon

Quick Summary

Gerber training underwear comes highly recommended by What to Expect community members, who praise them for being soft, absorbent and easy to clean. Bonus: they’re also incredibly affordable (a must since these are destined to get ditched once your little one is able to use the toilet on their own!).

Typically introduced in the throes of toddlerhood, potty training pants help bridge the gap between diapers and regular “big kid” underwear. Designed to promote independence, they feature multiple layers of absorbent fabrics in case of accidents (which inevitably happen). As a mom who’s guided three toddlers through this stage so far, I can tell you that the extra protection was key to riding out the adventure with minimal puddles.

Although they aren’t perfect — I’ve found they don’t hold in wetness and messes as well as a true diaper — they have saved me from constantly cleaning their clothes or sheets. So, if your kiddo has started to make strides in the bathroom department, you might want to consider purchasing a few pairs of my tried-and-tested favorites to help make the going easier (literally!).

How I Chose the Best Potty Training Underwear

Having potty trained three of my four kids (the youngest isn’t quite there yet!), I relied heavily on my personal experience with potty training underwear to find the best options for your child’s needs, your daily routine, and your budget. I spoke with Daniel Ganjian , MD, a pediatrician at Providence Saint John’s Health Center in Santa Monica, CA, about the different options, as every child’s needs and preferences can vary. I also reviewed potty training guidelines set by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), which note the importance of switching to underwear, as “diapers and disposable training pants send a message to children that they are not taking over and do not need to learn to use the toilet.”

Expert insights, in addition to my personal experience and professional expertise as a parenting and health writer, allowed me to set the following criteria, on which all potty training underwear was judged:

Absorbency: Potty training underwear isn’t as absorbent as diapers, but the ability to contain messes and wetness is still important. All of the potty training pants I chose contain a moderate amount of pee or poop, though not blowouts.

Materials: A cotton blend is usually most comfortable to wear in reusable potty training pants, while overall softness and stretchiness matter with disposable options. I also considered the underwear’s breathability and ensured they were free from allergens to minimize the risk of rash.

Maintenance: Potty training pants will inevitably get wet or messy. Reusable underwear needs to be easy to clean, while disposable potty training underpants should be simple to remove and toss in the trash.

Cost: You’re going to need to stock up on several pairs of potty training underwear so you have backups ready to go after an accident. All of the disposable options on this list cost less than $0.45 per pull-up, while the reusable options are a bit pricier, though never more than $6 per pair.

By doing so, I narrowed down my list of 20 recommendations to just the eight best pairs of potty training underwear.

A Doctor’s Note on Signs It’s Time To Start Potty Training

Wondering when to introduce your tot to the toilet ? Dr. Ganjian says major indicators of readiness include a little one holding in their urine for longer periods, communicating their need to go (or having gone), showing noticeable discomfort in a dirty diaper, or seeking privacy to go, such as hiding behind furniture.

But potty training pants aren’t necessary. Ultimately, Ganjian says you just have to go with what feels right. “Each family’s situation is unique, so it’s important to consider your child’s readiness, your own schedule, and your family’s needs when choosing a potty training method,” he says. In my experience, potty training underwear can give your tot the comfort and support they need to adjust to life without a diaper. They can also give you, the parent, a little peace of mind.

After all, potty training is taxing on both the child and their parent; potty training pants can help prevent accidents, meaning less clothes for you to wash at the end of the day.

Psst : Check out our potty training essentials and favorite potty training books to guide you through it.

Best Overall Training Underwear

Gerber Baby Unisex Training Underwear

Made of soft cotton

Looks like real underwear

Three pairs in a pack

Limited patterns to excite toddlers

Type: Reusable

Material: 50% ‎cotton, 50% polyester

Size range: 18M to 3T

Why We Love It

Sometimes, it’s best to stick with the classics, as so many parents say is the case with Gerber training underwear . My sons wore these training pants during the daytime, and the multiple layers were great for minimizing leaks (which helped them avoid soaking their pants).

They fit similarly to regular underwear, to the point where many parents, including myself, say it’s hard for little ones to tell the difference. Plus, they’re made with soft cotton that’s gentle on sensitive skin. I also appreciate the super stretchy waistbands that made it easy for my little ones to pull their pants up and down independently. Not to mention, these are machine-washable, so if an accident does happen (they will, and that's alright!), they can be added to your laundry pile without worry.

Community Reviews

“We like the gerber training underwear, bought on Amazon because my daughter is super petite and needed the 18m size for a long time.”

“I bought the Gerber training pants and thought they worked fine. I really liked the extra absorbency and the training pants didn't feel like a diaper to them.”

“I got 8 pairs initially (2x 4 packs of Gerber training pants). The first week I prob did a small load every other day just to be sure I had enough for the next day. I don't think we went through more than 3 pair a day that first week (I prompted at increasing intervals each day). After that he might have wet 1 pair a day for the next week. He figured it out pretty quick, so from there it was the occasional accident and back to usual laundry.”

Most Absorbent Training Underwear

MooMoo Baby Potty Training Pants

Multiple layers prevent leaks

Snug fit

Eight patterns in each pack

May shrink when washed

Type: Reusable

Material: ‎100% cotton

Size range: 2T to 10 years

Why We Love It

What sets MooMoo Baby Potty Training Pants apart from other options on this list is the six-layer structure, which gives both parents and toddlers much-needed confidence during the potty training process by absorbing leaks with ease. The outer layer is 100% cotton, while the inner layers contain a blend of cotton and muslin, ideal for kids with sensitive skin. Plus, there’s a TPU coating on the inner layer, which gives these a nearly waterproof quality, maximizing softness and absorbency. MooMoo’s designs were particularly useful for my family in the early stages of potty training before shifting to something less absorbent once my kids got the hang of things.

apart from other options on this list is the six-layer structure, which gives both parents and toddlers much-needed confidence during the potty training process by absorbing leaks with ease. The outer layer is 100% cotton, while the inner layers contain a blend of cotton and muslin, ideal for kids with sensitive skin. Plus, there’s a TPU coating on the inner layer, which gives these a nearly waterproof quality, maximizing softness and absorbency. MooMoo’s designs were particularly useful for my family in the early stages of potty training before shifting to something less absorbent once my kids got the hang of things.

Beyond the impressive absorbency, these training pants are comfortable and easy for your tot to put on and take off, thanks to a stretchy waistband and leg openings. My kids were most excited about the fun patterns (everything from unicorns and spaceships to dinosaurs), whereas I was most impressed by how well they held up in the wash. (Despite this, some parents in the community did notice shrinkage after the first wash due to the 100% cotton material, so you may want to size up).

Community Reviews

cconno89 “We use these MooMoo baby ones from Amazon and love them! They are very comfy, easy for her to pull up and down, and padded enough that we don’t have big puddles every time she pees her pants, but still gets her pants wet. They’ve been great!”

Best Training Underwear with Side Snaps

Kanga Care Lil Learnerz Reusable Training Pants

Wide range of sizes and patterns available

Soft and cushiony feel

Sizes for younger babies have side snaps for easy changes

Some say the sizes aren’t accurate

Type: Reusable

Material: ‎Waterproof TPU outer layer with a microchamois interior

Size range: XS to XL

Why We Love It

Featuring a waterproof outer layer and a soft, absorbent microfiber inner lining, Kanga Care Lil Learnerz are great for little ones just starting their potty training journey. Multi-layered absorbency aside, what makes these so ideal for first-timers are the side-snapping release panels for easy removal when accidents occur (and at a higher likelihood with younger learners). However, the side snaps are only available on the extra-small and small sizes; the larger option (up to extra-large, accommodating wearers up to 70 pounds) are designed in a pull-up style. While convenient, keep in mind that the snaps may dig into your child’s skin if the fit is off, making proper sizing crucial.

Community Reviews

Tammybeans “I have a two year old we have been using lil learnerz for daytime and the motherease overnight pull-up for bed time. It's hard to find a pull up that will absorb a full bladder and isn't bulky.”

Best Disposable Training Underwear

Pampers Easy-Ups

Comfortable and absorbent

Wide size range

Cute character print

Some children may confuse them with diapers if used during the day

Type: Disposable

Material: ‎Polypropylene, spandex

Size range: 2T to 6T

Why We Love It

Pampers Easy Ups have been my go-to for several kids due to their soft feel and cost-effective (just $0.33 per pair!), underwear-like look. The stretchy sides allowed my little ones to pull these up and down on their own from the get-go. And while they don’t technically have tear strips, I can confirm that the sides can easily be torn in case of an emergency. I don’t consider this a con, as tear strips and fastened sides would rub and irritate my daughter's skin.

have been my go-to for several kids due to their soft feel and cost-effective (just $0.33 per pair!), underwear-like look. The stretchy sides allowed my little ones to pull these up and down on their own from the get-go. And while they don’t technically have tear strips, I can confirm that the sides can easily be torn in case of an emergency. I don’t consider this a con, as tear strips and fastened sides would rub and irritate my daughter's skin.

But here’s the kicker: you can choose your child’s favorite character, whether that’s Bluey or My Little Pony, both of which have been a huge hit in my household. And although not the most sustainable option, the convenience of being able to toss these disposables in the trash after a particularly messy accident can’t be beat.

Community Reviews

“We prefer pampers easy ups. They have a 360° stretchy waistband. Huggies pull ups have velcro sides, and the velcro at the bottom pokes into her legs. Pampers just seem more comfortable. We've had no leaks.”

“They have a stretchy waistband which makes them much easier to pull up and down. We also have not experienced any leaks with these even though they don’t seem as secure.”

“Pampers seem more comfortable and they are cheaper. Haven’t had issues with leaks from either.”

Best Underwear Covers

Gerber Waterproof Training Pant

Waterproof to prevent external leaks

Can be worn with regular underwear

Can be pulled on and off easily

Crinkly noise and feel may bother some toddlers

Type: Reusable

Material: ‎100% peva material

Size range: Newborn to 2T

Why We Love It

I used these waterproof Gerber underwear covers on a long road trip shortly after one son was fully potty trained, and it helped prevent a mid-trip mess. They have an elastic waistband, so kids can pull them up or down, along with their training pants or underwear.

Keep in mind that these probably shouldn’t be your go-to everyday training pants, however. They tend to make a crinkly noise when kids move, and they’re not as comfortable as training underwear with padding. Still, they’re an excellent option when you want extra protection in a pinch.

Best Overnight Training Underwear

Goodnites Nighttime Bedwetting Underwear

Variety of sizes

Different designs to choose from

Specific boy and girl sizes

Expensive over time

Type: Disposable

Material: ‎Polypropylene, Polyethylene

Size range: XS to XL

Why We Love It

Goodnites were one of the few overnight diapers that kept my stomach-sleeping sons’ sheets dry. Yes, my boys would feel their pee and wake up — which is exactly what you want to happen! — but the wetness never leaked onto the bed. I attribute that to the five-layered “zone protection” design and reinforced leg barriers, which is included in both the boy and girl styles.

were one of the few overnight diapers that kept my stomach-sleeping sons’ sheets dry. Yes, my boys would feel their pee and wake up — which is exactly what you want to happen! — but the wetness never leaked onto the bed. I attribute that to the five-layered “zone protection” design and reinforced leg barriers, which is included in both the boy and girl styles.

They’re also sold pretty much everywhere, which is really helpful if you’re traveling out of town and need to quickly grab a pack. The only downside of these training pants, in my opinion, is the price. While they’re an excellent choice for backup protection through the night, they’re more expensive per pair than Pampers Easy-Ups, which boast an equally excellent absorbency. But, if you want something to help save your sheets while you’re almost there with potty training, I wholeheartedly recommend these.

Community Reviews

“We use Goodnites and absolutely love them for my son! He has a massive amount of urine at night and these don’t leak! He sleeps on his stomach in a butt in the air position so all the urine goes to the front!”

“We like the Goodnites because they’re unscented and work well. My son only pees during the night about once every 2 weeks, but I’m not ready to give them up.”

“My little girl uses the Goodnights but the boys print Spiderman. The absorbent in the front actually work better for my lo as she sleeps on her tummy.”

“We use good nights and don’t have issues.”

Best Big-Kid Feel Training Underwear

Fruit of the Loom Potty Trainers

Looks like “regular” kid underwear

Fun prints

Not bulky

Not the most absorbent

Type: Reusable

Material: ‎100% cotton

Size range: 2T to 5T

Why We Love It

If your child has aced potty training quickly, the Fruit of the Loom Potty Trainers are a great way to provide extra support for those just-in-case scenarios. These underpants look and feel like “big kid” underwear, but have a soft, multi-layer liner to help catch small accidents. They’re not the most absorbent out there, but that’s kind of the point. I like that you can snap these up in a six-pack; I kept a few in the car for easy changes. The fun prints — stars, dinosaurs, robots — are an added bonus, too.

Community Reviews

LittleLMNO “I got Fruit of the Loom potty training underwear that has an absorbent pad but it definitely doesn't hold much. I actually prefer that though because then I can see when he's wet and he feels it. The mess isn't fun, but it trains him to listen to his body.”

Best Training Underwear Designs

Hanna Andersson Training Packs

Huge variety of prints and patterns

Good absorbency

Soft polyester cloth liner

Pricey

Limited sizing

Type: Reusable

Material: ‎100% cotton

Size range: XS and S

Why We Love It

If cuteness is your biggest concern, you can’t go wrong with Hanna Andersson’s playful prints . Kids naturally gravitate toward bright colors, making this five-pack of training pants a hit from the start. Each set comes with different patterns; combos range from fruits and florals to spaceships and sharks, even Disney princesses , allowing little ones to choose whatever matches their mood that day — further encouraging independence (a win-win!).

If cuteness is your biggest concern, you can’t go wrong with Hanna Andersson’s playful prints . Kids naturally gravitate toward bright colors, making this five-pack of training pants a hit from the start. Each set comes with different patterns; combos range from fruits and florals to spaceships and sharks, even

, allowing little ones to choose whatever matches their mood that day — further encouraging independence (a win-win!).

But these underpants deliver more than eye-catching designs. They nail that sweet spot of absorbency without being diaper-like (parents note these are thick but not bulky), thanks to an absorbent, 4-ply polyester interlining layer that never touches the skin. In other words, kids will notice as soon as they’ve had an accident.

These training pants also feature extra stretchiness around the waist and legs, creating a snug fit to keep in leaks without feeling too tight. These also feature a 100% organic cotton rib knit outer that’s soft to the touch.

Community Reviews

uacrner “These are what I used while training her and continue to use now. They are like regular underwear, but a bit more absorbent and are very soft.”

What To Look for in Potty Training Underwear

Based on my experience, advice from parents in the What to Expect Community and recommendations from the AAP, you should look for training underwear with the following features:

Absorbent: There are many different options for training underwear, but generally, you'll choose between cloth or fabric underwear that’s washable (similar to cloth diapers ) or disposable training underwear that you can toss after use. The best training underwear is made from natural materials like cotton or bamboo, which is comfortable and soft on the skin but not super absorbent; you want your little one to feel it if they soil a pair. Disposable training pants shouldn’t be so absorbent that they mimic a diaper but should provide adequate protection from major leaks.

Comfortable: Training underwear should fit just like regular underwear without any gaping around the leg holes or near the abdomen that could allow for leaks. Check the manufacturer guidelines to ensure that you’re choosing the right size for your toddler’s height and weight.

Training underwear should fit just like regular underwear without any gaping around the leg holes or near the abdomen that could allow for leaks. Check the manufacturer guidelines to ensure that you’re choosing the right size for your toddler’s height and weight.

Easy to pull up and down: Independence is key with a pair of training underwear, so your child should be able to maneuver the pair you choose without assistance. Every child is different, but generally, training underwear should be stretchy enough that a toddler can easily pull the sides out and down and then up again after using the potty.

Independence is key with a pair of training underwear, so your child should be able to maneuver the pair you choose without assistance. Every child is different, but generally, training underwear should be stretchy enough that a toddler can easily pull the sides out and down and then up again after using the potty.

FAQs

How many pairs of potty training underwear should I buy?

A common recommendation is to have at least six to 10 pairs of potty training underwear on hand to start with. This number allows for daily changes and extras in case of accidents, but the amount can vary depending on your laundry routine, your child’s accident frequency and your budget. It's also a good idea to have a mix of disposable and reusable training pants, especially for when you're on the go or during the early stages of potty training when accidents are more frequent.

Does potty training underwear hold pee?

Training underwear is designed to hold small amounts of pee, though not as much as a diaper. Because their primary purpose is to assist in the transition from diapers to regular underwear, they provide some absorbency but also allow your child to feel wet so they can better recognize when it’s time to use the potty.

When should I start using potty training underwear?

Start using potty training underwear once your child starts showing signs they’re ready to potty train. According to the AAP, most children are developmentally ready to begin this process between 18 and 24 months of age and show signs such as staying dry for two hours at a time or they start asking to use the potty and wear big kid underwear. Keep in mind, the average age toilet training is between 2 and 3 years of age: There’s no need to rush the process.

WhatToExpect.com, Tips on Starting Potty Training , September 2022. American Academy of Pediatrics, The Right Age to Potty Train , May 2022.

Your Next Read

9 Best Swim Diapers to Keep Your Baby’s Poop Out of the Pool Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

When It Comes to Diapers, What's on The Inside Matters By Elizabeth Buxton, Director of Commerce Content Strategy

The Best Potty Training Methods to Finally Get Your Toddler Out of Diapers Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Eager to Ditch the Diapers? 9 Signs Your Toddler Is Ready to Be Potty Trained Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Bye-Bye, Diapers — How and When to Potty Train Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

What Moms Wish They’d Known Before Potty Training Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Potty Train Your Little Girl: Helpful Tips and More Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

Cloth Diapers vs. Disposable Diapers: Which Should I Use? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Diaper Size Chart: Your Weight-Based Diapering Guide Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

This Printable Potty Training Chart Can Help Your Toddler Lose the Diapers for Good Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Potty Train Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

20 Rewards That Will Help Your Child Master Potty Training, According to Doctors Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Potty Training Twins? Strategies to Help Both Kids Succeed Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window