The 2-Month Well-Baby Visit

dad with baby on bed, two month well baby visit

Here's what will happen at your child's 2-month well-baby visit, including the physical checkup, developmental milestones and shots.

Let’s face it: Caring for a newborn is exhausting (sleep — what’s that?) and sometimes challenging (um, was that a projectile poop?). But that makes the rewards — the first gummy smile, the first sweet sounds — even more worth it.

Wondering what you can expect at the 2-month well-baby visit? Here’s a quick look.

The physical checkup

Does your baby suddenly seem longer when she’s on the changing table? As your constantly squirming, ever-growing little one exercises her arms and legs, her limbs loosen up and her muscles stretch out, making her appear to have added inches almost overnight.

Of course, the doctor or nurse will measure her during her regular physical exam, so you’ll know for sure — approximately that is, since measuring a wriggly newborn is an imprecise science.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that moms be screened for postpartum depression at this checkup, so ask if you have any questions about your moods or your partner’s.

Developmental milestones

Your baby’s body and brain are busy these days. Thanks to big strides in how well your little one’s using her senses, she's much more aware of the huge world around her. Here are some of baby's developmental milestones the pediatrician may check for or ask about:

Smiling in response to a smile, aka baby's "social smile"

Vocalizing in ways besides crying (yay!), like sweet little coos

Reacting to loud sounds — maybe by turning her head, crying or quieting

Opening her hands briefly

Watching you move

Looking at a toy for several seconds

Lifting her head during tummy time

Kicking energetically when lying on her back

Do milestones vary with premature babies?

If your baby arrived early enough to require NICU care , she’s already had many more than her share of checkups (and tests and procedures) during her hospital stay. Still, her first in-office pediatrician visit, whenever it comes, will be momentous — and an opportunity to ask all the questions you’ve collected since leaving the round-the-clock care of the NICU.

One of the first questions you may have: How will my baby’s development match up to that of her full-term peers?

Generally, development will track according to a preemie’s "adjusted" age — based on the date she was due, not the date she actually arrived (so if she arrived two months early, she will likely reach 2-month milestones closer to 4 months).

This developmental gap typically narrows over time and disappears by the second birthday, at which point she’ll be assessed by her birth age.

What about baby’s immunization schedule ? This is usually set to her birth age, which means she will probably get her immunizations right on time, no adjustments needed! Check with your baby's doctor if you have concerns or are unclear about your preemie’s immunization schedule.

2-month shots

Needle pricks can look a lot worse than they actually feel. But remember, vaccines will almost always be harder on you than they are for your baby — and a few tears (on baby’s side or yours) are a small price to pay to protect your baby from vaccine-preventable illnesses.

Here are the immunizations recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) that your baby will receive at 2 months:

DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis)

Hib (haemophilus influenzae type b)

IPV (inactivated poliovirus)

PCV13 (pneumococcal)

RV (rotavirus) , which is an oral vaccine, and not a needle prick

HepB (hepatitis B) , the second of three doses

Ask the doctor or nurse to show you how to hold your baby for comfort during vaccinations. Also, feel free to ask questions about the vaccines, the diseases they help prevent and how to care for your baby after vaccinations.

Questions to ask your doctor

You’ve been writing down all your non-urgent questions for the doctor, right? They really do stack up between visits. At 2 months, you may be wondering about the following:

How do I choose good child care , especially if I’m going back to work?

What should I know about pumping, storing and bottle-feeding breast milk ?

When can I expect my baby to give up nighttime feeds ?

How can I prevent SIDS (sudden infant death syndrome) ?

How do I know if I’m giving my baby enough stimulation?

What are good toys to buy for my baby that encourage her development?

Don’t forget to make an appointment for the 4-month visit before you leave!