The 6 Best Diaper Pails That Trap Odors, Hold a Ton and Won’t Wreck Your Nursery's Vibe

Best Diaper Pails

Quick Summary

The best diaper pail, according to What to Expect staff and community members, is the Ubbi Diaper Pail. Parents loved that it's easy to operate hands-free, has a large capacity, and doesn't require special bags.

It should come as no surprise that babies produce loads of dirty diapers — upwards of seven a day. That’s not only a lot of trash, but a lot of funky odors. But the best diaper pail can prevent the dirty diaper smell from infiltrating your little one’s sweet nursery. Diaper pails are essentially trash cans for a baby’s room, and some come with special features like odor-blocking liners or filters designed to mask the overwhelming stench. Plus, most are capable of holding many diapers at once, meaning you won’t need to run out to the trash can several times a day.

Not sure where to start? Read on for our guide to the best diaper pails on the market for every budget and need.

How I Chose the Best Diaper Pails

Ultimately, the best diaper pail is the one that blocks odors, has a large capacity and fits in your nursery, both in terms of size and style. And although diaper pails aren’t as ubiquitous as other baby gear, there are enough out there to force you to do a little research. To reduce your research time, I did some of the heavy lifting. I leaned on my own experience as a mom of two, and spoke to six What to Expect staff members who have 10 children between them – so clearly they’ve changed and disposed of a lot of diapers. I also combed through feedback from parents in the What To Expect community to see what diaper pails were most — and least — popular.

Through interviewing and reading, I learned what parents prioritize when it comes to buying a diaper pail, which helped me narrow down my list of diaper pails from a few dozen to six. Every diaper pail on this list is:

Easy to use : All recommendations have a hands-free design and wide opening for easy disposable

Great at blocking odors : These diaper pails utilize fresheners or liners that keep the stench away.

Able to hold a large amount of diapers : A large capacity diaper pail saves you time and money, as you won’t have to change and purchase liners as often. All the diaper pails on this list can hold at least 30 newborn diapers.

Best Overall Diaper Pail

Ubbi Diaper Pail

Works with any type of garbage bag

has a large capacity

easy slide opening

many color options

Expensive

Weight : 5.15 pounds

Dimension: 12.5 x 8.75 x 21.6 inches

Capacity : 55 newborn diapers

Hands-free? No

Material : Steel

Why We Love It

When we looked through the What to Expect community forums, we found that the Ubbi diaper pail was easily mentioned most often. Many parents raved about how easy it is to use and how well it masks diaper smells: A lot noted that they used the Ubbi for several years (and through multiple babies) without any issues related to smell.

It has a sleek design and comes in a lot of different color choices to match your nursery, unlike most other diaper pails that are only offered in white. But one of the best things about the Ubbi is that you don’t need special bags for it, which is a convenient money saver (and means it can be used as a regular garbage pail down the line).

“We use the Ubbi and love it, particularly that it takes normal trash bags so you don’t have to spend a fortune on special bags,” says Robin Hilmantel , What to Expect’s Senior Director of Editorial Strategy and Growth, . “It really does a good job of keeping the odor contained.” She notes that she tries to take poop diapers to the outdoor garbage can right away and occasionally uses a Munchkin Arm and Hammer Nursery Freshener in the Ubbi to keep it fresh.

“We use the Ubbi and love it, particularly that it takes normal trash bags so you don’t have to spend a fortune on special bags,” says Robin Hilmantel , What to Expect’s Senior Director of Editorial Strategy and Growth, . “It really does a good job of keeping the odor contained.” She notes that she tries to take poop diapers to the outdoor garbage can right away and occasionally uses a

in the Ubbi to keep it fresh.

Sarah Darby, What to Expect’s Senior SEO Content Strategist, also used the Ubbi with her son and really appreciated that she could use any garbage bag with it. “It also holds more diapers at a time, so I only have to take the bag out one to two times per week and it never smells when closed,” she says, noting that like Robin, she puts a Mrs. Meyer’s Essentials Oils packet in the bottom of the Ubbi to keep it fresh. She also adds that although it lacks a foot pedal, it’s still easy to use one-handed — just slide the top open and toss the diaper in.

Sarah Darby, What to Expect’s Senior SEO Content Strategist, also used the Ubbi with her son and really appreciated that she could use any garbage bag with it. “It also holds more diapers at a time, so I only have to take the bag out one to two times per week and it never smells when closed,” she says, noting that like Robin, she puts a

in the bottom of the Ubbi to keep it fresh. She also adds that although it lacks a foot pedal, it’s still easy to use one-handed — just slide the top open and toss the diaper in.

Parents also attested to the fact that bags were easy to change, but some noted that a very full bag creates some suction to the pail that can make it hard to remove. One other downside is that it’s still a pricey diaper pail, despite the lack of the foot pedal. However, many reviewers felt that the impressive odor-masking and ability to use any garbage bags available are what set this pail apart from the rest.

Community Reviews

"We’ve used the Ubbi pail & liners for almost 3 years and haven’t had any issues with smell."

"I have an Ubbi pail and it is great! It uses regular garbage bags and they sell the pails at places like TJ MAXX and Marshall's."

"We have had the Ubbi for two years and will be using it again for this baby. We have never had an issue with it smelling. We clean it regularly and take the trash out often."

"We have the Ubbi and love it. We had to use formula from the beginning so we never got the smell-free diapers. Now that my LO is ten months old, it’s really needed as her diapers reek up a room quickly! Being able to use regular trash bags is great and we can use it as a trash can down the road. We tend to empty ours once a week."

Best Odor-Blocking Diaper Pail

Munchkin Step Diaper Pail

Foot pad for easy use

Multiple odor-blocking features in place

Compact but has large capacity

No built-in cutter

Weight : 11 pounds

Dimension: 12.44 x 11.5 x 27.5 inches

Capacity : 270 newborn diapers

Hands free? Yes

Material: Plastic

Why We Love It

The Munchkin Step diaper pail is another popular option among the What to Expect community. With a self-sealing system and space for a baking soda puck, this pail was designed with odor-blocking as a top priority; something that was very important to Liz Buxton , What to Expect's Director of Commerce Content Strategy.

"As a first-time mom who’s very smell-sensitive, locking in odors was my top priority when picking a diaper pail to add to my registry. After a ton of research, I chose the Munchkin Step," she says. "The real standout is its patented self-sealing system: a twisty mechanism at the top of the bag that locks in odors whether the lid is open or closed. I also love the refillable baking soda puck, which safely neutralizes odors and only needs to be replaced every six months."

I also used the Munchkin diaper pail with both of my kids, and was as in love as Liz. Although it’s small, I found that it still holds an impressive amount of diapers (more than 270 newborn diapers!!). And, I like that it’s very easy to use, even when holding a newborn, although the opening to put the diaper in is a little tight.

Another clever feature: the lid won’t fully shut if the bin is too full, which forces you to take it out before things start to marinate.

One thing Liz and I disagree about: the ease of changing the bag. I was frustrated by the fact that there's no built-in cutter, but Liz was unbothered and, "found the process as simple as pull, snip and tie."

Community Reviews

"With our second we changed to the Munchkin STEP and have had zero issue with odor after 16+ months. I like how the Munchkin diaper pail uses a continuous bag insert that can be cut or tied off at any length so if it does get smelly, you can throw it out without wasting a whole bag."

"We have a munchkin diaper pail and love it. I NEVER have to smell diapers after throwing them away and emptying it is a breeze."

"I have a munchkin and if I keep the lid closed, it works well. definitely a must for me. We keep it in our bathroom and all diapers end up there, being the living rooms ones up. Would be way too much work to have to go all the way down to the first floor to garage for garbage several times a day, so I fill up the munchkin bag and go through about 1.5 a week."

Best Diaper Pail for Small Nurseries

Dekor EKO Classic Diaper Pail

Affordable

compact

has a foot pedal

Requires use of special bags

Weight : 6.24 pounds

Dimension: 11.7 x 8.2 x 20.7 inches

Capacity : 45 newborn diapers

Hands-free? Yes

Material: Plastic

Why We Love It

The Dekor Classic a relatively slim design that allows it to easily stand against a wall or dresser without taking up too much room. Put it still has an impressive capacity (it holds up to 495 newborn diapers!) so you're not changing bags every day for the sake of saving space.

Beyond being a dream for smaller nurseries, the Dekor pail has several important features, such as dual rubber seals to lock in odors and an easy-access door for changing the bag without fuss.

The foot pedal makes it easy to toss diapers one handed, and the built-in cutter makes cleaning out a dirty bag so simple. The way the Dekor bag is designed is that it supplies one continuous liner without a specific length. You use the built-in cutter to cut the bag where you need it, which means you won’t waste any bags by throwing them out before they’re full. Parents who use cloth diapers can also instead opt for the reusable cloth diaper liner .

The foot pedal makes it easy to toss diapers one handed, and the built-in cutter makes cleaning out a dirty bag so simple. The way the Dekor bag is designed is that it supplies one continuous liner without a specific length. You use the built-in cutter to cut the bag where you need it, which means you won’t waste any bags by throwing them out before they’re full. Parents who use cloth diapers can also instead opt for the reusable

“I’ve used other diaper pails when visiting friends, but I always find my Dekor to be the one I like the most,” says Leah Rocketto , Associate Commerce Editor at What to Expect. “I like to throw out the dirty diaper as soon as it’s off, and the foot pedal makes it easy to do that without having to take a hand off my baby.” Leah adds that the Dekor holds more diapers than people would expect; she changed it two to three times a week when her daughter was at peak dirty diaper production. She hasn’t had any issues with odors, but does have to push the lid down herself. (This, however, could be because her Dekor was a hand-me-down.)

For those who do have to change the bag more frequently, the Dekor makes it easy to do so. And, more frequent bag changes are more likely to cut down on odors. Parents found that the built-in bag cutter made changes quickly and appreciated the small, compact size that allowed them to put the pail just about anywhere.

Community Reviews

"Our Diaper Dekor was great...hands-free and never stunk!!!"

"I used a Dekor plus diaper pail for my first two kids before they both got potty trained. It worked great and I was able to cut the bag at any size of my choice to reduce bad smells from poopy diapers (the Dekor plus pail has a safe razor area for you to cut the bag)."

"Love the dekor plus - has a large opening to put a dirty diaper in one handed."

Best Large Capacity Diaper Pail

Diaper Genie Complete

Has a foot pedal

Uses carbon filter for odors

Holds hundreds of diapers

Requires use of special bags

Weight : 8.36 pounds

Dimension: ‎‎12.06 x 9.38 x 27 inches

Capacity : 36 newborn diapers

Hands-free? Yes

Material: Plastic

Why We Love It

The Diaper Genie is the OG diaper pail, with thousands of great reviews and plenty of feedback from the What to Expect community. The Diaper Genie Complete is packed with features and holds a lot of dirty diapers — up to 36 newborn sized ones. This is a great option if your baby needs to be changed a lot or if you have multiples. Although it may get smelly if you don’t change it often, it has several odor-blocking designs in place including an air-tight clamp and a carbon filter at the top.

“The Diaper Genie does a really great job of containing the diaper stench,” says Christine Mattheis, Group VP of Content & Brand Solutions at What to Expect. “I liked that it was tall enough to contain many diapers before needing to take the bag out to the trash.” She also adds that she found it very easy to use and was notably highly kid-proof — even up against her toddler who managed to get into everything but the Diaper Genie.

“I love the Complete because it’s tall, so adults don’t have to bend over to throw a diaper away,” Grace Pan, Product Designer at What to Expect, says. “It also has a large capacity to contain diapers.” She adds that the hole on the Complete is large enough to toss diapers away with no mess.

One major downside of the Diaper Genie is that it requires special bags. However, they have a multi-layer film that keeps odor in and inhibits bacterial growth, so you might find that they’re quite handy.

Although there are thousands of positive reviews on the Diaper Genie, it’s worth noting that some parents in the What to Expect community found that it didn’t hold in odors as much as they wished it would. And Christine ended up having to throw her Diaper Genie out once her child was potty trained because the pail smelled so bad inside. So, it might not be a good option if you want to use it for more than one child over time.

Community Reviews

"We have a diaper genie and we do love it as it does keep the scent out! You just have to remember to change the filter, not only the bags. That’s important! However yes, the refill bags can get expensive."

"I love my diaper genie. keeps the smell inside. except for the rare occasions I forget to close it. we live in a 3 story townhouse and her room is on the 3rd floor. no way I going outside with every poop."

"I have had the diaper genie since my first was born. I have never had issues. I wipe the whole thing down with sani wipes once a week and bought the carbon inserts that help trap the smell when you open it. I also spray febreeze or similar if for whatever reason it does stink. But that only started happening when my son started eating solids and having more solid poops."

Best Portable Diaper Pail

Pure Pail Go

Folds flat for easy packing

Contains odor-blocking features

Not a large capacity

Specific bags needed

Weight : 1.8 pounds

Dimension: ‎9.75 x 3.5 x 9.75 inches folded; ‎9.75 x 8 x 9.75 inches unfolded

Capacity : 12 newborn diapers

Hands-free? No

Material: BPA-free plastic

Why We Love It

Sure, you can toss diapers in the hotel’s garbage pail or Grandma’s trash can, but there’s a strong chance the smell will linger. Instead, consider adding the Pure Pail Go to your packing list.

Measuring 9.75 x 3.5 x 9.75 inches, this portable diaper pail fits seamlessly into your suitcase, carry-on, or the trunk of your car. Once you reach your destination, it expands to 8 inches tall and can hold up to 12 newborn diapers.

Even though it’s a travel-sized pail, it still offers the same odor-blocking technology as its non-portable counterparts. It features a charcoal filter that absorbs unpleasant smells. And if you're sensitive to scents, don’t worry — it’s fragrance-free! Plus, the bags stay sealed even when the lid is open, so odors can’t escape.

Community Reviews

BabyMcDCominInHot "Pure Pail!! never ever had any issues with smell (obvi it would smell a bit if you recently put a gross diaper in when it's close to full and youve opened it)."

Best Multi-Purpose Diaper Pail

simplehuman Diaper Can

Sleek design

Can be used after diapers

Multiple sizes available

Smaller capacity

Expensive when you add in the odorsorb pods

Weight : 8.16 pounds

Dimension : 15.6 x 7.7 x 21.8 inches

Capacity : 47 newborn diapers

Hands-free? Yes

Material : Stainless steel

Why We Love It

Once your child is finally done with diapers, you’re probably eager to ditch the obvious-looking diaper pail. And considering how much some of them cost, that can sting a bit. If you’re hoping to stretch your dollar, simplehuman's diaper can is a smart choice that can be repurposed well into the college years.

The sleek, relatively compact pail looks like a standard trash can, but it comes with an all-natural 45-day odorsorb pod and odorsorb liners to block the stench of dirty diapers. Not a bad feature to have on any garbage receptacle, to be honest. That, paired with the foot pedal and silent-close lid, makes this a true winner for diaper disposal.

Another thing to love about the simplehuman diaper can: it's almost too easy to find the right bag . simplehuman uses a special coding system to help ensure you’re buying the perfect fit. And when you're running low, the bags include a tag with a QR code so you can easily reorder from your phone.

Obviously, a diaper pail of this size has a smaller capacity — especially as your child moves up in diaper sizes (though you can buy a larger size if you wish). And yes, it’s a bit more expensive than some other diaper pails on this list, particularly when you add the cost of the odor-sorb pod. But when you factor in the longevity, it’s actually a steal.

What to Consider When Buying a Diaper Pail

When shopping for a diaper pail, there are some features you’ll want to think about.

Odor-blocking capabilities : This is obviously one of the most important aspects to consider before purchasing a diaper pail. Obviously all diaper pails are odor-blocking, but some are better than others. Look for diaper pails with odor-control systems or bags that help block the smell. And, keep in mind that smells might escape more easily from plastic pails than a stainless steel pail — although steel pails might cost more money.

Type of bag : Some diaper pails require specific bags that you have to purchase on a fairly regular basis. Although these bags might perform better at masking odors, the cost can add up quickly and make your diaper pail a bit of an investment. Some diaper pails use regular garbage bags, which is a little more convenient and can save money. Consider how much you’re able to spend on bags — and remember that you’ll be changing them out quite frequently.

Ease of use : There are a few features that can make a diaper pail much easier to use. Some have foot steps so that you can easily open them up and throw away the diaper while holding baby in the other arm. But even if a pail isn’t hands-free, it should still be easy to use, whether with an extra-large opening that you don’t have to squeeze a diaper through or a simple slide top that you can still open and toss with one hand. Essentially, it should be designed for a quick, easy way to toss a dirty diaper.

Size : Diaper pails can be on the larger side because they’re meant to contain odor and hold a decent amount of diapers. Some, however, can be more compact and a better fit for a smaller nursery, while others have space-saving features, like storage for diaper essentials.

Price: Diaper pails can range from $30 to over $70, so figuring out your budget and deciding what you’re comfortable with spending is key. If the diaper pail needs special bags, you should take that price into consideration as well as it can add up over time.

Style : Because a diaper pail will always be on display in the nursery, you may prefer for it to look nice and unobtrusive. Some diaper pails can be bulky, while others may be more streamlined and sleek.

Your Next Read

5 Best Formula Dispensers That You Can Safely Stash in Your Diaper Bag Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

9 Best Swim Diapers to Keep Your Baby’s Poop Out of the Pool Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

How to Wash Cloth Diapers Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

When It Comes to Diapers, What's on The Inside Matters By Elizabeth Buxton, Director of Commerce Content Strategy

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

Our 10 Favorite Doctor-Approved Humidifiers to Help Your Baby During Sick Season Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

15 Products That Leave Moms Saying 'TikTok Made Me Buy It' Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Best Potty Training Methods to Finally Get Your Toddler Out of Diapers Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Cloth Diapers vs. Disposable Diapers: Which Should I Use? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Diaper Size Chart: Your Weight-Based Diapering Guide Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

14 Ways to Save Money on Diapers Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window