The One Disney World Splurge That Was Worth Every Penny

The Zoe V2 Double Stroller

Navigating crowds, protecting kids from the sun, and finding space for a mountain of snacks — here’s why this stroller is essential for your Disney itinerary.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

While planning our family’s first trip to Disney World, I was very optimistic, packing our days with Lightening Lanes and character dining reservations. My daughters, who were 3- and 5-years-old at the time, seemed to be the perfect age to soak in all of the magic the parks had to offer, and I figured their high-energy, incredibly active personalities would be able to handle the long days with little issue.

As you can probably imagine, the trip didn’t go quite as smoothly as I’d imagined. Between the early mornings, extreme humidity, and overall excitement, my 3-year-old crashed early most days — and 5-year-old was hanging by a thread. The thing that kept us from falling apart: Zoe Twin V2 stroller . Throughout the four days, the Zoe stroller became our fifth family member, serving as our home base, carry-all, and ideal nap spot.

Zoe Twin V2 Double Stroller photographed outside of Cinderella's castle in Disney World

The Disney-approved dream ride

In my pre-trip research, every mom deemed the Zoe Twin V2 a Disney World-friendly stroller. First, it meets the park’s stroller requirements (no larger than 31 inches wide and 52 inches long, in case you’re curious.)

Toddler sitting in the Zoe Twin V2 Double Stroller while holding a Mickey-shaped pretzel in Disney World.

Aside from that important detail, the Zoe Twin V2 is just a great travel stroller; easy to tote around even when you have other luggage. Folding it is an absolute breeze and opening it is just as easy, which makes airplane gate check less stressful. The handlebar makes it easy to carry with one hand, and at 19 pounds, it doesn’t feel too heavy or bulky.

Naptime hero

Even though my kids seem to run on never-ending batteries, I knew we wouldn’t be able to get through the day if they didn’t have a comfy place to relax. The Zoe’s seats are roomy, with an adjustable recline that can go back far enough for them to lay nearly flat, even while wearing giant fluffy Mickey Mouse ears. The extra large canopies also provided plenty of protection, which was key when temps were pushing 90 degrees and clouds were MIA.

We added a stroller fan, and my daughters were able to comfortably snooze while my husband and I enjoyed an iced Joffrey’s coffee (Pro tip: sit by the Liberty Square Riverboat if you need a cool-down break in Magic Kingdom.) And since you can adjust the canopies and seats individually, my 5-year-old was able to comfortably sit up and look around even when my 3-year-old was the only one sleeping.

Smooth ride

Another priority for me in a Disney-friendly stroller was finding one that was easy to navigate, and the Zoe Twin V2 nailed it. Even when it’s laden with two older toddlers and one too many souvenirs, we had no issue navigating through the crowds or going up and down curbs. Padded shoulder straps kept my kids from complaining and the adjustable footrests kept their legs sturdy too.

Souvenir central

Zoe V2 Double Stroller being pushed through Disney World

The Zoe Twin’s storage basket offers a surprising amount of room, and I was able to stuff it full with an admittedly excessive amount of souvenirs, snacks, and extra clothes. Combine that with the parent organizer we used and we didn’t have to carry one thing as we walked around – a game changer when it’s so hot you feel like you’re walking on the surface of the sun.

Is the Zoe Twin V2 worth the splurge?

The Zoe Twin V2 was an upgrade from a double stroller we already had, and I can confidently say it was 100% worth it. It kept my kids comfortable, allowed for multiple naps so we could avoid overtired meltdowns, and was easy for us to push through the crowds. In short, it made our trip feel just as magical as we wanted it to be. We loved it so much, it’s been with us on every trip since, because we literally couldn’t imagine being without it.

Zoe Twin V2

Disney-Friendly, Mom-Approved

Your Next Read

The Best Stroller Travel Systems That Parents Say Make Life Easier Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Find the Best Stroller for Your Family: A Comprehensive Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Buy a Baby Stroller By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Is the Doona Car Seat & Stroller Worth the $550 Price Tag? Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

I Chose the Nuna Travel System Over the Doona — Here’s Why I’d Do It Again By Elizabeth Buxton, Director of Commerce Content Strategy

I’d Pay Double for This $24 Travel Toy By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Is the Stokke Tripp Trapp Worth It? One Mom's Honest Review Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

7 Best Convertible and All-in-One Car Seats, Tested and Reviewed by Real Parents Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Moms Love These Wearable Breast Pumps — And They're Less Than $200 By Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

The 10 Best Stroller Footmuffs To Keep Your Baby Warm on the Coldest Winter Walks Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

13 Tips to Make Flying and Traveling With Twins Less Stressful Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

I Was Worried About Having Another Kid — But I Didn't Need to Be By Nicole Fabian-Weber, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window