Your 1-Year-Old's Developmental Milestones

1-year-old developmental milestones

There's a first time for everything, and your child's first year is bound to be full of them. Here are several of the exciting accomplishments your 1-year-old will master by 12 months.

Every child is one of a kind. And just as his eyes are brown or his laugh is peppered with cute little hiccups , his physical and cognitive development is also all his own.

That's why comparing your newly minted toddler with another his age just isn't helpful. One may be zooming around the playground while the other is honing his verbal skills. Or one may reach every milestone consistently while the other develops in fits and starts.

Still, there are certain developmental milestones you can expect to likely occur by month 12. Just remember that unless your child seems to be really lagging in a particular area and your doctor is concerned, your little one will hit these 1-year milestones in his own time.

Developmental milestones for 1-year-olds

Age 1 movement milestones

Whether he’s pulling up to stand or taking his first steps, your toddler is actively honing his gross and fine motor skills around his first birthday.

Sits without help. Your little one likely started sitting up with support around 4 or 5 months. By the time he's officially a toddler, he'll be sitting unsupported and getting into the position without your help.

Crawls and cruises. Not every tot will crawl , but some kind of creeping or belly slithering is a gross motor skill at this age — and this trick leads to pulling up and cruising.

Stands up alone. Whether at the coffee table or in his crib, the ability to bear weight and balance on two feet is a precursor to those tentative first steps , followed by walking.

Takes steps. Many 1-year-olds are ready to take a few steps with your help, but the official walking milestone is 18 months of age .

Age 1 cognitive milestones

You can expect your child to meet plenty of cognitive milestones around this age — learning, exploring, problem solving, thinking — all of which show just how much his brain is developing.

Explores objects. Your budding scientist is on a mission to find out how things work — you'll notice shaking, banging objects together and rolling along the way.

Finds hidden objects. Where’s baby’s teddy? When you hide his stuffed animal under the blanket, your 1-year-old will now try to find it.

Puts things in a container. Your tot’s manual dexterity is improving, which makes filling up a sand bucket (and dumping it back out again) great fun.

Starts to use objects correctly. Around his first birthday, your toddler will be more comfortable using different objects correctly, such as drinking from an open cup .

Follows simple directions. Pet the dog gently. Put the toy down. Your smart toddler can now understand and follow simple commands .

Age 1 language and communication milestones

Get ready for an explosion of language during the first year as your little babbler starts to form words and imitates speech.

Uses simple gestures. Waving "bye-bye," shaking his head "no," clapping his hands together — by the 1-year mark, your tot is able to use gestures like these to communicate.

Makes sounds with tone changes. From cooing to babbling , your little one's vocalizations have become more complex during his first year. As he approaches his first birthday, you'll notice that the sounds he makes more closely resemble speech, and have noticeable changes in tone.

Says a few words. Your child can now likely say at least a few first words , such as "mama," or "uh-oh." At this age, he'll also try to repeat words that he hears you say.

Your child is already a very social being — you know this because he makes eye contact and smiles at you. But the next level of awareness involves deeper emotions and unexpected tears.

Appears anxious with strangers. Does your tot become shy around strangers or cry when you leave? Although stranger anxiety often starts sometime around the 9-month mark, it can continue into your little one's second year.

Plays patty-cake and peekaboo . Your tot's clapping skills are put to excellent use with these classic rhyming and cause-and-effect games.

Has favorite objects and people. Your 1-year-old may have recently adopted a security or transitional object such as a lovey or stuffed animal, and he'll also start showing preference to the people he's most comfortable with (that means you!).

Hands you a book to hear a story. Around this age, reading becomes a more engaging activity. You'll notice your toddler looking at the correct picture when something is named and selecting books he'd like to read.

When to talk to your doctor about your 1-year-old’s development

While every child progresses at his own pace, talk to your pediatrician if you notice any of the following.

Talk to your doctor if by month 12, your child:

Doesn’t crawl or drags one side of the body while crawling

Can’t stand with help

Doesn’t search for objects when you hide them

Doesn’t use a few simple words

Doesn’t use gestures, such as waving hands or shaking head

Doesn’t point to things or pictures

Loses any skills he had previously mastered

Talk to your doctor if by month 18, your child:

Hasn't started walking

Can't point

Can't copy others

Doesn't know what familiar objects are used for

Doesn't have at least six words

Loses any skills he had previously mastered

As for what's next? Between ages 1 and 2, your toddler is developing new skills at a rapid pace — from taking his first steps to exploring new environments to starting to have a real conversation with you.

If it seems like he’s learning something new every day, that’s because he is! Good thing for you, you’ve got a front row seat to all the action.

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. What to Expect the Second Year , Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Fine Motor Skills , October 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Gross Motor Skills , November 2021. WhatToExpect.com, When Do Babies Start Walking? , August 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Is Your Baby Grasping the Pincer Grasp? , August 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Dancing , February 2019. American Academy of Pediatrics, Discontinuing the Bottle , December 2011. American Academy of Pediatrics, Emotional and Social Development: 8 to 12 Months , August 2009. American Academy of Pediatrics, Developmental Milestones: 12 Months , June 2009. Children’s Hospital of Richmond at VCU, Fine Motor Skills: Birth to 2 Years , 2021. Children’s Hospital of Orange County, Development Milestones: Fine Motor Skills and Visual Motor Skills , 2021. Child Mind Institute, Complete Guide to Developmental Milestones , 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Milestone Moments , 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Important Milestones: Your Child by Eighteen Months , August 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Toddlers (1-2 Years of Age) Developmental Milestones , February 2021. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Important Milestones: Your Child by One Year , August 2021. Cleveland Clinic, When Do Babies Start Walking? , July 2021. KidsHealth From Nemours, Movement, Coordination, and Your 1- to 2-Year-Old , June 2019. Mayo Clinic, Language Development: Speech Milestones for Babies , March 2021. Mayo Clinic, Infant Development: Milestones from 10 to12 Months , June 2020. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Infant—Newborn Development , February 2021. Stanford Children’s Health, Age-Appropriate Speech and Language Milestones , 2021. Zero to Three, Stages of Play From 12-24 Months: Young Toddlers Are Problem Solvers , 2021.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Your 2-Year-Old's Developmental Milestones Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Do Babies Start Playing With Toys? Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Toddler Speech Milestones Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Lano, M.S., CCC-SLP

Best Activities for a 9-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 10-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for 18-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for an 11-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for a 6-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Activities for 15-Month-Olds Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 9-Month Well-Baby Visit Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 2-Year-Old Checkup Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Do Babies Start Walking? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When Do Babies Stand Up? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Developmental Differences Between Boys and Girls Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 15-Month Well-Baby Visit Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window