My Babies Were Pacifier-Obsessed — These 9 Are the Best on the Market

best pacifiers

QUICK SUMMARY

The best pacifier is Philips Avent Soothie, according to testers from the What to Expect staff and user community, because of their safe, durable construction, soft material and affordability.

As a first-time new mom, countless experienced parents told me a pacifier could have magical powers for an overly fussy or seemingly inconsolable baby. So, naturally, I was quick to offer one to my newborn son.

But there are plenty of other reasons to find the best pacifier for your little one. Not only does the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) suggest using a pacifier to help lower the risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), but Tina Nguyen , D.D.S., an American Board of Pediatric Dentistry-certified pediatric and special needs dentist based in Basking Ridge, New Jersey, says they also provide a sense of pleasure, comfort and security.

Just know that finding the best pacifier might take some trial and error. Babies are picky, after all. You may even find your child is uninterested in pacifiers entirely. To make that process a little easier, I rounded up the best pacifiers on the market based on advice from experts, my own experience as a mom of two (both of whom were pacifier-obsessed!) and the guidance of parents in the What to Expect community.

How I Chose the Best Pacifiers

Despite all looking pretty similar, there are some key differences among baby pacifiers on the market. To narrow down my recommendations, I first referenced pacifier safety information from the AAP and the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC). These leading expert groups recommend the pacifier you choose must:

Be a one-piece construction (to prevent choking hazards)

Have a shield with air holes that are at least 1.5 inches across (preventing it from accidentally fitting inside their mouth)

Be made of dishwasher-safe material (so it’s easy to keep clean)

In addition to ensuring my selections met all the above criteria, I also eliminated any novelty binkies with attachments, which can fall off and pose a safety risk. Plus, orthodontic pacifiers can be a good option for older babies with teeth, and especially for little ones who continue using pacis after their first birthday, experts say, so I also made sure to include a few options for this purpose.

I also spoke with six pediatric experts to get their advice on what to look for when buying a pacifier. In addition to Perez and Dr. Nguyen, I consulted Michelle Kelman , D.D.S., a Los Angeles-based pediatric dentist, lecturer at UCLA School of Dentistry and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board; Micah Resnick , M.D., F.A.A.P., a board-certified pediatrician in Cincinnati, Ohio, with TriHealth; Kara Larson , MS, CCC-SLP, director of the Feeding and Swallowing Program at Boston Children's Hospital; Ana Mendelson , M.S. CCC-SLP, a speech language pathologist with Nemours Children's Health in Pennsylvania. They all recommended pacifiers made from silicone that are BPA-free.

After that, I sought recommendations from other parents who relied on pacifiers. I used feedback from more than 200 parents who voted for their favorite pacifier in the 2024 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards . I also considered pacifiers suggested by parents on the What to Expect staff, as well as pacifiers I used with my own children. Based on all of this research, I identified the nine best pacifiers on the market (as well as a few notable pacifier accessories) that have:

A safe construction

Easy-to-clean materials

Shape and design that babies love

Lots of positive reviews from real parents

Best Pacifier Overall

Philips Avent Soothie

Widely available

Doctor-recommended

Easy to clean

Available in two sizes

Round shape means they can roll away if dropped

Material: Silicone

Price per pacifier : $3

Recommended Ages: 0-3 months and 3-18 months

Why We Love It

If your baby is given a pacifier in the hospital, there’s a good chance it was a Philips Avent Soothie. This pacifier is a constant favorite among parents in the What to Expect community, winning Best Pacifier in the What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awardmultiple years in a row — so if you’re wondering which pacifier brand is best, there’s a strong argument to be made that it should be Philips Avent.

. This pacifier is a constant favorite among parents in the What to Expect community, winning Best Pacifier in the

, there’s a strong argument to be made that it should be Philips Avent.

This baby pacifier is made from durable, medical-grade silicone and has an orthodontic-friendly nipple that ensures the natural development of baby’s teeth and gums. It’s also one of the most affordable options, coming in at around $3 per pacifier — and you can find it online as well as at just about any drugstore or retailer that sells baby products. So If one goes missing, say, while you’re visiting Grandma’s house, there’s a very good chance you’ll be able to find a quick replacement at the local pharmacy.

Both of my sons used Soothies, which were first given to us in the hospital; they quickly became a major part of our lives until we eventually weaned them off.

Many parents like the hole in the middle that you can put your finger in to help baby latch, too. Parents also say the simple, straightforward design makes them very easy to wipe down or clean.

Soothies are available in two sizes: 0 to 3 months and 3 to 18 months . Switch to the bigger size once your baby reaches the 3-month mark, as the larger version is made of stiffer silicone that little ones with teeth won’t be able to bite through.

. Switch to the bigger size once your baby reaches the 3-month mark, as the larger version is made of stiffer silicone that little ones with teeth won’t be able to bite through.

Community Reviews

“Avent is what all four of my babies preferred. Also what the hospital used.”

“The Avent Soothie ones that they give in the hospital are the only ones my boys ever took.”

“Mine has a lip tie. Philips Soothie has been a lifesaver.”

“My little boy is 5 weeks old and loves the green Avent Soothie pacifiers - I breastfeed and pump/give bottles, about 50/50, and he has those pacis in all other times. He used to suck his thumb in utero so he is very comforted by sucking on something. When I’m nursing sometimes he will comfort suckle at the end and I’ll unlatch him and put one of those pacis in—we obviously love them over here, haha! He doesn’t like any other kind.”

Editors’ Favorite Pacifier

MAM Original Start Baby Pacifier

Widely available

Variety of designs and colors

Stays in place well

Not as durable for older babies or toddlers

Material: Silicone

Price per pacifier : $3.25

Recommended ages: 0-6 month

Why We Love It

When I asked What to Expect staff members about their favorite pacifier, the MAM Original Start Pacifier came up as a top choice. With a range of reasons behind the recommendation, it’s clear that this pacifier checks all the boxes.

“I appreciated that they stayed in a little easier than others,” says Shelley Gingrich, What to Expect’s Executive Director of Brand Solutions and mom of two. This isn’t by chance — the pacifier’s symmetrical shape and curved shield are designed to sit comfortably in a baby’s mouth, no matter which way it’s inserted. Made from durable yet soft silicone, the pacifier is lightweight, adding to its comfort.

Many parents also find that this pacifier seems to support easier breathing for their little ones. “We tried a bunch of different pacifiers, and my kids liked the MAM ones because of the vents,” says Stephanie Porter, What to Expect’s Creative Director. She also notes the adorable patterns and glow-in-the-dark options, which are especially helpful at night.

Sarah Darby , What to Expect’s Director of SEO Content Strategy and mom of two, loved the variety of colors and patterns, as well as the affordability and availability.

, What to Expect’s Director of SEO Content Strategy and mom of two, loved the variety of colors and patterns, as well as the affordability and availability.

One thing to keep in mind: This pacifier may trap water more easily than some others. Sarah observed that her son “chewed holes in the nipple once he was a toddler, and they would get water in the nipple easily.” If this happens, you might consider switching to a more durable pacifier (this one is designed for babies 0 to 6 months, so you may want to change brands after that point) or beginning to wean your child off pacifiers altogether.

Community Reviews

"I have breastfed all my kids and they have all been different lol. My first daughter took any Mam pacifier but had to be Mam. My son didn’t like pacifiers at all. My March baby girl will only take Mam Comfort pacifiers. I bought a Mam variety pack with 3 different kinds in it. It had one in it and she only likes that particular kind. I’ve ordered more from Amazon so we have plenty lol."

"I tried a couple different ones. one with the more cylindrical shape, one classic shape bit my little girl didnt care for either one. then I found these [MAM Comfort Baby Pacifier] and she took right to them. she seems to enjoy the shape, which is why I tried them."

"I think each baby has their own preference! My baby was breastfed and hated the Phillips avent blue ones, but my friends baby who was also breastfed loved them! My baby liked the mam ones. They have infant ones that are very light and easy for them to hold.

"My daughter was breastfed and liked Mam and Boon pacifiers. She liked them because of their shape & size (I can only assume, lol) & I liked them because they were safe for oral development and they offered variations that came in one silicone piece. I saw a few posts where other pacifier brands would break in 2 pieces (the nipple + mouthpiece), making them a choking hazard."

"My first was exclusively breastfed and used the Mam, she didn’t like the Phillips. Mam also come by stages/age. Glow in the dark for nighttime struggles in finding it. Speaking of which it can be frustrating when they lose it in the night cries, you have to get up find it and give it to them for them to settle down and go back up sleep. I’ve always said with my next I’ll be on the fence about pacifiers but I can also guarantee you I have it on my list for this one."

“It worked very well for my baby. It stays in better than any of the other pacifiers we have.”

“This is the first pacifier he's expressed any interest in, and man does it calm him down quickly. He's 6 weeks old and is able to keep it in his mouth pretty well. It's not magic but it's as close as you can get with a newborn!”

Easiest Pacifier to Clean

Chicco PhysioForma Pacifier

Comes with a carrying case that doubles as a sterilizer

Lots of color options

Some felt the material is tacky

Material: Silicone

Price per pacifier: $3.50

Recommended Ages: 0-6 months, 6-16 months , 16-24 months

Why We Love It

All of the pacifiers on this list are dishwasher-safe, but if you’re after one that’s especially easy to clean, the Chicco PhysioForma Pacifier is a popular pick among What to Expect parents.

is a popular pick among What to Expect parents.

It comes with a clever reusable carry case that you can use to store your pacifiers, which also keeps them from gathering dust and lint in your diaper bag. You can use that same case to sterilize the pacifiers in the microwave in three minutes, making it a breeze to clean.

These pacifiers have a unique construction that was developed in partnership with an advisory panel of neonatologists, pediatricians and orthodontists to help position baby’s tongue forward to maintain an open airway and support better breathing. The orthodontic-friendly nipple also has a narrow base to support baby’s oral development.

In addition to its orthodontic shape, parents appreciate the large built-in loop handle, which makes it easier for little hands to hold. The silicone feels super soft against baby’s skin, and parents say the air holes also seem to help minimize skin irritation, another plus. What’s more, the brand recently added a Luxe option for this pacifier, which has the same design but a softly textured exterior that some little ones may prefer.

Community Reviews

“We ended up using Chicco PhysioForma and we’ve had no issues with BF!”

“I had the Chicco orthodontic pacifier from a sample and it works great.”

“I tried to find a pacifier that mimicked my nipple shape and ended up using a wide nipple from Chicco. Didn’t affect breastfeeding at all.”

“My first one didn’t take any, she would spit them right out. The only one which lasted around a month was the Chicco PhysioForma.”

Best Lightweight Pacifier

Tommee Tippee Ultra-Light Silicone Pacifier

Extremely lightweight

Material repels dust

Available in sizes up to 36 months

A little pricier than some other options

Material: Silicone

Price per pacifier: $3.99

Recommended Ages: 0-6 months, 6-18 months , 18-36 months

Why We Love It

Some pacifiers look enormous and are heavy on a newborn’s face, making Tommee Tippee Ultra-Light StayPut Silicone Pacifier a popular choice for the littlest babies. At 1.76 ounces, this pacifier is one of the lightest on the market. (Plus, the brand recently updated its Ultra-Light pacifier, and the new StayPut version is even lighter than the original, which you can still purchase if you prefer.)

a popular choice for the littlest babies. At 1.76 ounces, this pacifier is one of the lightest on the market. (Plus, the brand recently updated its Ultra-Light pacifier, and the new StayPut version is even lighter than the original, which

This lightweight design also makes the pacifier more likely to stay in place, which is helpful for newborns who can’t yet adjust it on their own, and the symmetrical shape means there isn’t a right or wrong side up, either. Parents say it remains in place nicely, is easy for even the youngest babies to use, and has a pleasant look and feel. Unlike some other lighter pacifiers, the handle also feels sturdy and solid — not at all flimsy.

As with the other pacifiers on this list, this one is dishwasher-safe and easy to clean, and the material also has hygienic, anti-static properties that prevent dust from settling on it.

There are a number of color options available, and it’s also one of the few pacifiers on the market that’s available in sizes up to 36 months: helpful if your newborn ends up loving theirs as they get bigger. (Although there is no hard-and-fast rule, the AAP recommends starting the pacifier weaning process around your child’s first birthday.)

Community Reviews

“We use the Tommee Tippee UltraLight pacifiers and my baby loves them! They have a 6-18 month size range that we’ll be switching to soon.”

“My little man loves these!”

“My son is 5 weeks now and loves [his pacifier]! We use the Tommee Tippee Ultra-Light Pacifiers.”

“Tommee Tippee. On my second babe and he loves it just as big sis did!”

Best Pacifier for Newborns

RaZbaby Jollypop Pacifier

Ideal for younger babies

Lots of color options

Easy to find

Limited age range

Material: Silicone

Price per pacifier: $2

Recommended Ages: 0-3 months

Why We Love It

Much like Philips Avent Soothies, a number of What to Expect parents say they received RaZbaby Jollypop pacifiers at the hospital when their little ones were born. This makes sense, considering Jollypop pacis are well known for being particularly good for newborns — preemies included.

Like many of the other best pacifiers on this list, the Jollypop is made of smooth, soft silicone and boasts an orthodontic design. The gently curved shape and smaller nipple is especially comfortable for the youngest babies. A number of parents highlight the lighter weight and newborn-friendly design, noting Jollypop pacis seem less likely than other options to fall out of a newborn’s mouth.

Also good: There are a number of fun, easy-to-spot color options, and Jollypop pacifiers are easy to find in packs of two, three, four, six or even 10.

Jollypop pacifiers are recommended for the first three months of a baby’s life, so the only downside is that you’ll need to switch to a brand that offers larger sizes if your child continues using a pacifier after that point.

Community Reviews

“She likes [this] one provided at the hospital!”

“They’re our favorite! Very easy to find multipacks on Amazon.”

“Jollypop! That's what my baby has used since birth and she was 5lbs 15oz when born.”

“The Jollypop. The hospital gave us some and they are the only binkey he will take.”

Best Pacifier for Breastfed Babies

Nanobébé Flexy Baby Pacifier

Extra-soft

Comfortable design that flexes to stay in baby’s mouth

Affordable

Lots of size options

Some babies find it top-heavy

Material: Silicone

Price per pacifier: $2.50

Recommended Ages: 0-3 months, 3-6 months , 4-36 months

Why We Love It

Consistently ranked among the best pacifiers for breastfed babies, the Nanobébé pacifier’s flexible (but still one-piece) construction contours comfortably on baby’s face, which some parents say helps it stay in place better. The soft, rounded nipple is designed to offer a familiar shape and feels nice to the touch. The built-in vent holes also allow plenty of airflow, helping provide comfort and prevent irritation.

Many pacifiers on the market are circle-shaped, so some parents appreciate that the slightly less round design of this Nanobébé pacifier makes it less likely to roll far away from you should you drop it on the ground (an always-frustrating situation for parents!). The downside is that these pacifiers are mostly clear, which can make them a little harder to locate in a diaper bag or in baby’s room at night. Keeping a pacifier holder like the one below may be particularly helpful for these.

Some parents do note that Nanobébé’s sizing can be a little confusing — there are three sizes available, but the largest is appropriate for little ones 4 months and older. So if you intend on continuing to use a pacifier after the 3-month mark, your best bet may be to invest in the largest size and skip the 3 to 6 month size, since you’ll otherwise have to replace it sooner.

Community Reviews

“My baby lovesNanobébé’s [pacifier]!”

“Nanobébéare the best for us. I did not buy them but got them as a free sample and my baby loves it.”

“Nanobébé pacifier, 100 percent. My son is NOT a pacifier baby however these are made to mimic mom and are smaller than the others I got so they fit his face and he will take it really well. I EBF and he has no issue latching or have any nipple confusion between me and this pacifier.”

“As for the Nanobébé , my almost 2-week-old seems to like it and he doesn’t seem to necessarily like pacifiers in general.”

Best Pacifier for Bottle-Fed Babies

Dr. Brown’s HappyPaci Silicone Newborn Pacifier

Affordable

Similar nipple shape as Dr. Brown’s bottles

Lightweight

Size can be overwhelming for some babies

Material: Silicone

Price per pacifier : $1.66

Recommended Ages: 0-6 months

Why We Love It

For babies who already use the brand’s popular bottles for feeding, Dr. Brown’s Happy Paci Silicone Pacifiermakes for an easy transition from bottle to binkie. This pacifier is designed to mimic Dr. Brown’s innovative nipple shape and size, so it will feel familiar to little ones who drink from the bottles. What’s more, many What to Expect parents whose babies use other bottle brands say the shape of this pacifier seemed to work well for their little ones, too.

makes for an easy transition from bottle to binkie. This pacifier is designed to mimic Dr. Brown’s innovative nipple shape and size, so it will feel familiar to little ones who drink from the bottles. What’s more, many What to Expect parents whose babies use other bottle brands say the shape of this pacifier seemed to work well for their little ones, too.

This pacifier’s lightweight, one-piece construction features a contoured butterfly-shaped shield that curves away from baby’s face for greater comfort. It has a large handle that’s easy for babies to grip, and at $1.66 per pacifier, it’s also the most affordable option on this list. There are a number of soothing colors to choose from (shades of pink, green, blue, and neutrals), and the pacifiers can be purchased as singles or in handy packs of three.

Just keep in mind that although this pacifier is nice and lightweight (at 1.44 ounces, it’s even lighter than the Tommee Tippee pick above) the size is a little bulkier than some other options, which means it might be too overwhelming for a newborn. It’s also only offered in a 0 to 6 month size, meaning you’ll have to wean your baby off of it or transition to another brand that offers a larger size around their half birthday.

Community Reviews

“I like Dr. Brown’s HappyPaci. It’s the same shape as the Dr. Brown’s bottles we use.”

“Our little one loves the Dr. Brown’s HappyPaci too!”

“My son has used pacifiers since day one and hasn’t had problems because of it. His favorites are the Dr. Brown’s brand.”

“My baby has struggled to find a paci he likes since day 1. We have finally found that he LOVES Dr. Brown’s HappyPaci.”

Best Pacifier for Teething

Ryan & Rose Cutie PAT Pacifier and Teether

Functions as both a pacifier and teether

Attractive design

Lots of colors

Expensive

Material: Silicone

Price per pacifier: $12

Recommended Ages: Stage 1 (for babies without teeth), Stage 2 (for babies with teeth)

Why We Love It

Once baby’s teeth start to come in, some pacifiers can be prone to tearing and become a choking hazard. Ryan & Rose’s PAT pacifier is made with durable, medical-grade silicone, so it can do double duty as a binkie on one side and a teether toy on the other side. (The handle has a bumpy texture that little ones can safely chew on.)

Once baby’s teeth start to come in, some pacifiers can be prone to tearing and become a choking hazard.

Though one of the priciest pacifiers on our list, What to Expect parents appreciate that this unique design offers longer-term use. Available in two sizes and three nipple designs (bulb, slant, and flat, based on the pacifier shape your baby prefers), this pacifier is convenient and easy to use. And although appearance is hardly the most important feature to consider, you can’t deny that Ryan & Rosie pacifiers are attractive, and parents love the variety of color options — from basic neutrals to hues like orchid and ivy that are easy to spot in a diaper bag or coordinate with your cutie’s outfits.

However, it’s important to mention that although Ryan & Rosie’s pacifier meets the AAP’s safety standards, you should skip the brand’s matching pacifier clip, which is sometimes sold in a pack with the pacifier. Attachments such as these aren’t considered safe by the AAP, since they could pose a strangulation risk. In general, you should never tie a pacifier to baby’s body or crib with any kind of cord or string.

Community Reviews

“We have two and my son likes them! He doesn’t use it constantly, but will take it and fall asleep. I got the three-pack to try, where it has a ‘flat’ one and stage 1 and 2. Lets you have options.”

“Another Ryan & Rosie addict here. I lovvveeee their [pacifiers] I always get compliments on them when LO wears them.”

“My EBF baby loves the Ryan & Rosie bulb paci. It’s the only one he takes.”

“I love the Ryan and Rose pacifiers, they have different types, they’re also teething pacifiers which I find very helpful. I just switched my baby from their cutie pat round 0-6 months to their cutie pat flat 0-24 months. The transition was very smooth, I highly recommend them.”

Best Orthodontic Pacifier

NUK Comfy Orthodontic Pacifiers

Affordable

Sold in a pack of five

Made in the U.S.

Some parents say lint and hair easily sticks to the material

Material: Silicone

Price per pacifier: $1.80

Recommended Ages: 0-6 months, 6-18 months

Why We Love It

If you’d like to prioritize a pacifier with an orthodontic shape, the NUK Comfy Orthodontic Pacifier is a solid choice. These pacis have an orthodontic design that promotes healthy oral development as well as a breast-like nipple, making them a good option for breastfed babies, too.

These pacifiers are affordable — just $1.80 each! — and sold in large quantities (depending on the retailer, you can find packs of five or three), so you’ll always have one on hand. The smaller size can be used until your little one is 6 months old, at which point you can size up to the larger 6 to 18 month pacifier. Parents report that they’re highly durable, too, and the larger size successfully holds up to the gnawing of little teeth.

Parents also really like the bright, soothing colors, which make these pacifiers easy to find in a pinch (say, if they’ve rolled out of your little one’s crib at night or are hiding at the bottom of your diaper bag). They’re available in neutral, pink, blue or assorted colorways, and for a pacifier, make a surprisingly stylish accessory.

While they’re easy enough to clean thanks to their streamlined design and dishwasher-safe silicone, some parents do say that the material seems to attract lint, hair and dust, so you might find yourself having to rinse these off more often.

Community Reviews

InHisImagePS139 “My LO rarely takes a paci now because he favors his thumb lol but in the chance he does take one, he’ll only take the Nuk Comfy Orthodontic pacifiers!”

youthinkthatsbad “My LO doesn’t like pacifiers but he did good with NUK brand.”

Best Pacifier Case

Ubbi On The Go Dual Pacifier Holder

Can hold two pacifiers in separate compartments

Has a handy clip

Sold in a pack of two

Slightly bulkier than some other pacifier holders

Why We Love It

Though it’s a little bulkier than some other pacifier cases on the market, the Ubbi On The Go Dual Pacifier Holdermakes up for its slightly larger size with excellent functionality. There are two compartments to hold baby’s pacifiers separately, which means they both stay clean while you’re on the go and won’t cross-contaminate each other. (After all, there’s no point in putting a pacifier that’s just dropped on the ground into a tiny container with another pacifier that’s clean.)

makes up for its slightly larger size with excellent functionality. There are two compartments to hold baby’s pacifiers separately, which means they both stay clean while you’re on the go and won’t cross-contaminate each other. (After all, there’s no point in putting a pacifier that’s just dropped on the ground into a tiny container with another pacifier that’s clean.)

They’re also sold in a pack of two. This means you can easily keep track of all of your little one’s backup pacis and make sure you’re never without — keeping one holder in the car, for example, and another on the stroller.

Also good: The silicone strap makes it easy to attach the case to a stroller or diaper bag, so you won’t risk losing it while out and about. Each pacifier compartment has a separate opening, and the lids are a breeze to snap open and closed with one hand. And best yet, the entire case can be thrown in the top rack of the dishwasher, so the entire thing is easy to clean.

Community Reviews

drunkendonuts “[The] Ubbi double sided pacifier holder [is] easy to wash and keep on your diaper bag if you are using binkys.”

Best Pacifier Wipes

Munchkin Arm & Hammer Pacifier Wipes

Makes it easy to keep pacifier and other teething toys clean on the go

Plastic lid closes securely to keep wipes clean

Not exactly eco-friendly

Material : Polypropylene

Price per wipe : $.11

Why We Love It

While your best bet is to regularly sanitize your child’s pacifiers (such as by sterilizing them in boiling water or running them through the dishwasher, depending on what the manufacturer recommends), there will be plenty of times when you’ll need to quickly clean baby’s binky on the go. Enter: pacifier wipes. The Munchkin Arm & Hammer Pacifier Wipes are little lifesavers and the perfect thing to stash in your diaper bag for those inevitable moments when baby’s pacifier drops on the ground while you’re out and about.

There are tons of pacifier wipes on the market, but parents appreciate that these Munchkin wipes are affordable, sold in large quantities (there are 36 wipes per pack, 72 if you buy two packs at once), and have a secure lid that keeps wipes moist over time. (Some pacifier wipes have flimsy “lids” that don’t stay fully closed, and as a result the top few wipes tend to dry out in between uses.) As another pro, these wipes don’t have a strong scent.

What’s more, these wipes will quickly become your diaper bag MVP because you can use them for far more than just pacifiers — quickly clean teething toys, bottles, or nipple shields with these handy wipes, too.

Community Reviews

wrinze09835 “I have the munchkin pacifier wipes for on the go.”

What to Look for in a Pacifier

In addition to important pacifier qualities such as having a one-piece design, there are a few other factors to keep in mind when shopping for pacifiers. Some of those include:

Material : Natural rubber latex and silicone are the most common materials for pacifiers. Although latex pacis are softer and more flexible, they tend to deteriorate faster. Silicone binkies, on the other hand, are typically more durable, longer-lasting, don’t retain odors, and can be boiled or placed in the dishwasher or boiled.

Shape : Pacifiers typically come in one of three nipple shapes: Standard-shaped pacifiers, which have a straight, cylindrical, elongated nipple; orthodontic pacifiers, which have a rounded top and a flat bottom; and “cherry” nipples, which have a trunk that becomes ball-shaped toward the end.

Size : Pacifiers come in different sizes, and should be chosen depending on your baby’s age. Make sure you always buy the size that matches your child’s age — and replace any too-small pacis once your little one outgrows the age range. “Pacifiers should be bigger for older children,” notes Dr. Resnick. “If your child is still using a pacifier at 1 or older, make sure you have upsized with their growth.” Not only are larger pacifiers better suited for your older infant’s mouth, but they’re also usually firmer, so your child can’t bite through them. While most experts, including the AAP, recommend trying to wean your baby off her pacifier sometime around their first birthday, many kids use binkies for longer. Make sure to switch to the larger size once your child meets the maximum age (sizes vary from brand to brand).

FAQs

What kind of pacifier is best?

With so many products on the market, you’re probably wondering: Which pacifier will my baby like best? When it comes to picking the best pacifier for your baby, there are plenty of styles and sizes to choose from. Plus, different babies will show a preference for different pacifiers, so there will likely be some trial and error before settling on the perfect one for your little one. Most importantly, though, your pacifier should meet the AAP’s safety recommendations, which means it has a one-piece construction; a firm shield with air holes; a shield that’s at least 1 1/2 inches across; and is safe to clean in the dishwasher or in boiling water.

How many pacifiers do I need?

As pacifiers have a tendency to get lost, it’s a smart idea to have multiple backup binkies handy, especially if your little one relies on them for help falling asleep. Having a few extra pacifiers on hand also means it’s easier to keep them clean because you can run dirty ones through the dishwasher while baby uses a clean one.

What pacifier is best for teeth?

Many parents prefer to invest in a pacifier that dentists recommend. And some pediatric dentists do suggest “orthodontic-friendly” pacifiers, as these are designed to allow the tongue to move more freely and encourage natural jaw movement. But ultimately, the best pacifier is the one that your baby will use, says Dr. Resnick.

“I think it’s better to find a pacifier your baby likes rather than an orthodontic pacifier,” he says. But, if your child is still using a pacifier after 12 months old, an orthodontic pacifier might have some benefit, he adds.

When is the best time to introduce a pacifier?

The time to introduce a pacifier depends on whether or not your baby is breastfed. This is because a baby’s sucking action is different on a breast nipple than on a pacifier. Generally, if your little one isn’t breastfed, you can offer a pacifier at any time. However, if you nurse your baby, it’s a good idea to wait until breastfeeding is established (usually about 3 to 4 weeks) before introducing a pacifier.

When should you wean your baby off of the pacifier?

There’s no hard and fast rule here as to when to wean baby off a pacifier, but leading experts, including the AAP, recommend reducing or stopping pacifier use sometime around your child’s first birthday.

“The earlier a sucking habit is stopped, the less chance the habit will lead to concerns with the tongue, the roof of the mouth, and the general occlusion,” says Dr. Kelman.

Prolonged pacifier use (which typically refers to use during the second year and beyond) can also lead to an overdependence on the pacifier for soothing and increase the risk of middle-ear infections.

“While there is no solid evidence that prolonged pacifier use causes speech delays, a recent study revealed a link between toddlers using pacifiers for multiple hours during the daytime and smaller vocabularies,” Mendelson says. “Prolonged pacifier use after 18 months can start to influence the development of the jaw, palate, and teeth.”

Larson adds that “intense” pacifier use is defined as over several hours a day. “And this has been shown in literature to have a negative impact on speech and language development, especially in children 2 to 3 years of age,” she says.

To make sure your child has plenty of opportunities to practice babbling and talking, avoid giving her the pacifier during the day, Mendelson says.

The good news? Most kids will stop using pacifiers on their own between ages 2 and 4. If your little one needs help breaking the habit, the AAP recommends using praise when they aren’t using a binkie to encourage them to stop. Replacing the pacifier with a “lovely” like a favorite blanket or stuffed animal can also help, Larson says. And, if your baby uses sucking to relieve boredom, make an extra effort to keep their hands busy or distracted by engaging in fun activities together. As always, reach out to your child’s doctor if you have questions or need help on how to wean them off.

WhatToExpect.com, Giving Baby a Pacifier , April 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Pacifier Weaning , June 2022. American Academy of Family Physicians, Pacifiers: Benefits and Risks , 2009. American Academy of Pediatrics, Pacifiers: Satisfying Your Baby's Needs , December 2012. American Academy of Pediatrics, Pacifiers and Thumb-Sucking , November 2020. American Academy of Pediatrics, Pacifier Safety , November 2018.

Your Next Read

7 Pacifiers Small Enough to Soothe a Preemie Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Our 10 Favorite Doctor-Approved Humidifiers to Help Your Baby During Sick Season Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 7 Best Baby Nasal Aspirators for Stuffy Little Noses Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Best Baby Toothpastes to Keep Little Teeth Clean Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

10 Best Sippy Cups for Babies and Toddlers, According to Parents Who've Used Them Medically Reviewed by Michelle Kelman, D.D.S.

7 Sweet Stories to Help Your Little One Say Goodbye to the Pacifier (Including the Book That Finally Worked for My Toddler) Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

When Should You Take Away Your Toddler's Pacifier? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Best Bottles for Preemie Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

7 Best Nipple Shields to Help With Latching and Minimize Pain Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

5 Best Formula Dispensers That You Can Safely Stash in Your Diaper Bag Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

How to Soothe a Crying Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window