The Newborn Sleep Basics Every Parent Should Know

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

sleeping newborn baby, newborn and baby sleep basics

Learn more about newborn sleep, how much babies sleep and how to put your newborn baby to sleep.

Whoever coined the term "sleep like a baby" didn't seem to know much about them, because newborns are notoriously restless sleepers who are hungry every few hours and rarely, if ever, make it through the night without waking up.

If you're wondering (or worrying) about your baby's sleep habits, remind yourself of these facts — then relax, enjoy that adorable child of yours, and try to get some well-earned rest yourself.

Key Takeaways

Newborn babies need to sleep between 14 and 17 hours a day in short stretches. Your little one will wake often to feed every two to four hours, spend about half his sleep in restless REM, and may confuse day and night in the early weeks.

To support your newborn's sleep, follow safe sleep practices (always on back with no loose items in the crib), use soothing aids like swaddles, white noise, dim lights, and massage, and maintain a comfy room temperature (68 to 72°F is ideal).

Newborns can be noisy sleepers. Most sleep noises (grunts, gurgles, whistles) are normal, but call your child's pediatrician if you notice rapid breathing, persistent grunting, nasal flaring, or chest retractions.

Newborn sleep overview

It helps to remember a few tenets of newborn baby sleep so you don't tear your hair out when you're up in the middle of the night time and time again:

Newborns sleep for most of the day

A newborn baby will sleep anywhere from 14 to 17 out of every 24 hours, give or take. And there's not much of a pattern to his sleep schedule. Your little one will probably only be awake for 30 minutes to an hour at a time, and will nap anywhere from 15 minutes to three hours at a stretch. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursKids and SleepSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursKids and SleepSee All Sources

Newborns need to eat around the clock

Newborns have very tiny tummies, so while it would be nice to load up your baby with breast milk or formula at bedtime and not hear from him until morning, it doesn't work that way (at least not yet). Newborn babies need to eat at least every two to four hours, including overnight. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources

So how do you know when your baby's whimpers are a call for food? The key is to learn to differentiate between "feed me!" sounds and his other cries so you can respond quickly when he's truly hungry (with the hope that, after a little treat, he'll drift back to dreamland quickly) or let him be if he's just making noises in his sleep.

Newborns are restless sleepers

While older children (and new parents) can snooze peacefully for hours, young babies squirm around and actually wake up a lot. That's because around half of their sleep time is spent in REM (rapid eye movement) mode — that light, active sleep during which babies move, dream and maybe wake with a whimper.

Don't worry. As he matures, his sleeping patterns will too, with fewer REM cycles and more periods of deeper, quieter sleep.

Newborns are noisy sleepers

Irregular breathing that may include short pauses and weird noises is rarely cause for alarm, but it can freak new parents out. Trusted SourceStanford MedicineBreathing ProblemsSee All Sources [3]

Breathing Problems

Here's a quick lesson on your baby's respiratory development to put things into perspective: A newborn's normal breathing rate is about 40 to 60 breaths a minute while he's awake, though that may slow to 30 to 40 breaths per minute once he's asleep. Or he might take shallow, rapid breaths for 15 to 20 seconds followed by a total pause in which he stops breathing entirely for a few seconds.

You can blame all this on the immature breathing-control center in his brain, which is still a work-in-progress.

Newborns typically confuse day and night

Before your little one was born, he lived in total darkness and became accustomed to snoozing the day away (since that’s when you were most active, lulling him to sleep with your movements) and kicking his heels up at night.

"Our LO will be 3 weeks tomorrow and life is wonderful! Her sleep schedule is so opposite of ours though," says What to Expect Community user Reynas909724. "She wakes up to eat during the day about every two hours, then goes right back to sleep. Around 7 to 8 p.m., she wakes up and is AWAKE. She cluster feeds like she’s starving and is so hard to get to sleep during the night."

Happily, his nocturnal ways are only temporary. As he adjusts to life on the outside, he’ll stop mixing up his days and nights , often by the end of the first month. That's when your baby starts making his own melotonin, a sleep-regulating hormone.

Your sleep habits affect your baby

Studies have shown what you probably already know: Well-rested parents are better able to help their babies regulate themselves. If you're exhausted, it will be that much harder to get your baby to calm down.

So please, ask for help if you need it, especially at night. It may seem obvious, but taking care of yourself is one of the best things you can do to help your little one get the right amount of quality sleep.

How much sleep do babies need?

Babies have different sleep requirements depending on age and stage. Here's a baby sleep chart that shows how much sleep they actually need for their health and development.

Newborn to 3 months

Recommended total sleep per day: 14 – 17 hours

Acceptable range: Not less than 11 hours or more than 19 hours

Nighttime sleep: 8 – 9 hours (waking up every 2 –3 hours to feed)

Naps: 7 – 9 hours (3 – 5 naps)

4 to 11 months

Recommended total sleep per day: 12 – 15 hours

Acceptable range: Not less than 10 hours or more than 18 hours

Nighttime sleep: 8 – 10 hours

Naps: 4 – 5 hours (2 – 3 naps)

How to get your newborn to sleep

Sometimes it's hard to fall asleep in strange places — especially when home was a warm, dark, and very cozy womb. When it comes to adjusting to life on the outside, your infant might appreciate sleep-enhancers that remind him of "home."

Try any or all of these baby sleep strategies to make sending your baby off to dreamland a little bit easier.

Follow safe sleep guidelines

How your baby lies down and gets to sleep is a matter of safety, not just comfort. Put your newborn flat on his back in his crib, bassinet or play yard without any loose bedding, pillows, blankets, stuffed animals, or crib bumpers. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources

Experts also recommend room-sharing until baby is at least 6 months old. These safe sleep practices prevent overheating and suffocation, and reduce the risk of SIDS, or sudden infant death syndrome. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsReduce the Risk of SIDS & SuffocationSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsReduce the Risk of SIDS & SuffocationSee All Sources

Try a massage

To help him drift off, give your baby an infant massage . Studies suggest that babies who are massaged before bed may produce more of the sleep-enhancing hormone melatonin. And it’s a nice way for you to bond with your little night owl.

Swaddle and keep him cozy

After spending nine months in a tight tummy, it’s no surprise that your newborn prefers a snug space now. Sure, he’ll grow into (and out of) the crib eventually, but for now, he might prefer sleeping in a bassinet or cradle, which offers your baby a cozier, more contained space to settle into.

Swaddling your baby with a blanket or dressing him in a sleep sack will offer an extra dose of security — and may even help him sleep a little longer . Just be sure to stop swaddling by the time he's 3 or 4 months old, when he can roll over and wriggle out of his swaddle or blanket.

Play white noise

Silence is golden, but not for most babies. Your newborn is used to your stomach’s symphony of gurgles and the beat of your heart. He might find the hum of a fan, soft music or a white noise machine or app very soothing.

On the other hand, he might prefer the sound of silence, like many adults. In that case, just keep it quiet in the nursery.

Temper the temperature in his room

Not too hot and not too cold — that’s the right climate for Baby Bear’s room. Why? Overheating may make your baby too sweaty to sleep, and it increases the risk of SIDS. As for too-cold rooms, infants get chilled easily, and will likely wake up if they’re uncomfortable.

Between 68 and 72 degrees usually does the trick. To figure out if the temperature is just right for baby , feel his neck. If it’s sweaty, he’s too hot; if it’s cold to the touch, bundle him up a bit more. But don't dress baby in layers or a hat for sleeping .

Dim the lights

Even though some babies can doze off anywhere, it’s probably better to dim the lights and create a dark, sleep-inducing atmosphere. The faster your baby learns that darkness signals slumber, the sooner he’ll start sleeping through the night .

Wait out those whimpers

Don't pick up your little one at the slightest stirring — wait until it’s clear that he's awake and ready for a feed or attention.

When should I put my baby on a sleep schedule and establish a routine?

If it seems like you and your newborn are operating on opposite schedules, it's probably not your imagination. But don't bother trying to establish a soothing routine right away — you both need a little time to adjust to your life together.

Once you've gotten used to your little one's daily and nightly patterns, in the first month or so, you can start giving hints — feeding, rocking, a soothing bath, a lullaby, and a story — that tell your little one it's time to settle down, relax and hopefully fall asleep. But most babies can't and shouldn't be put on a sleep schedule until they're at least around 3 or 4 months old.

You also can't sleep train a newborn . Crying is how a newborn communicates his basic needs, and the most important lesson he needs to learn now isn’t how to sleep on a schedule, but that when he cries, you’ll be there to comfort him — even in the middle of the night when you’re beyond exhausted.

When your little one is at least 4 to 6 months old, though, sleep training is an option. After all, everyone agrees that a key goal of new parenthood is a happy, well-rested baby. How you arrive at that goal is a bit more complicated.

When will my baby sleep through the night?

Babies aren't truly developmentally ready to sleep through the night , which is generally defined as sleeping six to eight hours at a stretch overnight, until they're between 4 and 6 months old.

By 6 months, if you're lucky, your little one could be clocking a solid seven or eight hours a night. But every child — like every adult — is different, so don't worry if it takes your baby longer.

What if my newborn won't sleep?

There are many reasons why your baby might be refusing to fall asleep:

Newborns often confuse day and night. A set of blackout shades and a white noise machine may help encourage dozing off when it's bedtime.

Your baby might object to being on his back. If that’s the case, swaddle him before putting him down or let him get drowsy in your arms first before putting him in the crib. Avoid rocking or holding your baby until he’s completely asleep, though. This could make it harder for him to go back to sleep on his own if he wakes up during the night.

Your baby could be overstimulated. It’s hard to sleep when the world is full of fun things to do, especially when it’s getting close to bedtime and everyone is home. If that’s the case, switch your bedtime routine into slow and boring mode, with rocking, simple storytelling, and some soothing music.

Your baby may be overtired . If that's the case, try adjusting bedtime or nap times accordingly to see if that helps him settle down better at night, and make sure to follow a consistent bedtime routine.

What if my baby won't sleep in a crib?

Sometimes babies just don’t want to transition from their parents' cozy arms into their own crib , no matter how cute it looks.

If that’s the case, blur the lines between you and the baby bed. Try calming him down in your arms until he's drowsy, then gently place him directly onto the bed without losing skin-to-skin contact.

A little massage or patting should help him nod off too. Make sure the temperature in your baby's room is comfortably warm. Dim the lights, and put on a white noise machine or fan to drown out ambient sounds.

Swaddling baby (until he's around 8 weeks old) or putting him into a sleep sack before placing him in the crib may make him feel extra secure and, hopefully, encourage him to fall asleep in his bed.

Newborn grunting and other baby sleep noises: Why is my baby so loud?

Babies are noisy sleepers, prone to grunting, wheezing, whining, and even crying in their sleep. Most nocturnal noises are nothing to worry about; even the occasional cry or shout doesn't mean you should rush to your baby.

One reason they're so noisy is their digestive and respiratory systems aren’t fully developed yet, so swallowing and breathing takes a little extra effort. They also breathe primarily out of their noses, not their mouths, so if they're the slightest bit congested, you're going to know it.

Here are the most common noises you're likely to hear while your baby is asleep:

Rattling . Your baby has mucus in his tiny nose, which can clog things up, resulting in rattling. If things get too stuffy, use nasal saline and an aspirator to help clear things out.

Whistling. Newborn babies breathe out of their noses, not their mouths, since this allows them to breathe and eat simultaneously. But that petite schnoz has petite air passages, so bits of mucus or dried milk can easily constrict the airways, resulting in a wacky whistling noise.

Gurgling. No big mystery here — he's just clearing his throat.

So when should you be concerned? Chances are excellent that you'll never see any of the following symptoms, but it's good to know the signs of trouble: Trusted SourceSeattle Children'sSigns of Respiratory Distress in Your InfantSee All Sources [6]

Trusted SourceSeattle Children'sSigns of Respiratory Distress in Your InfantSee All Sources

Rapid breathing. Your baby's breathing rate increases to more than 70 breaths per minute and stays up.

Persistent grunting. You hear a little grunting noise at the end of each breath as he struggles to open up blocked airways.

Flaring. His nostrils flare during breathing, showing he's working too hard to get air.

Retractions. The muscles in his chest (under the ribs) and neck are more visible and contracting much more deeply than usual.

If you notice any of these signs of respiratory difficulties, call the pediatrician right away, or if you can't get your doctor immediately, call 911 or head to the nearest ER or urgent care.

Want more newborn sleep tips? Open the What to Expect app for month-by-month sleep schedules, solutions for common baby sleep problems, and much more.

Baby sleep is something most parents stress about, which can add to their already epic exhaustion levels. As long as your little one seems happy and well-rested most of the time, don't worry about your baby's sleep schedule, patterns and habits, especially in the beginning. Things have a way of getting easier and smoother as you and your baby get used to your new life together.