The 9 Best Toddler Snowsuits, According to a Mom of 4 Living up North

Collage of the best toddler snowsuits featuring L.L. Bean, Reima, Columbia, and Patagonia

Quick Summary

The best toddler snowsuit is The North Face Kids’ Freedom Snowsuit , according to testers in the What to Expect community. When selecting a toddler snowsuit, experts recommend considering waterproof or water-resistant features, comfort and, of course, insulation for warmth.

The temperature is well below freezing in my Northeast town, meaning it’s time to transition my kids’ wardrobe to winter essentials. For my toddlers, who love playing outside regardless of the weather, that means investing in a snowsuit that’ll keep them warm and dry without totally limiting their mobility.

You may think a snowsuit isn’t needed; that lots of layers are enough to keep kids comfy out in the elements. But in some climates, where your little one can jump into snowdrifts (like mine), that’s just not enough. Sweatpants and sweatshirts are bound to get soaked.

“Because babies and toddlers are smaller than adults, they lose heat more quickly, putting them at higher risk of hypothermia and frostbite,” says Ansley Schulte , MD, pediatric medical director at KidsPeace. Younger toddlers also can’t easily communicate when they’re starting to feel chilly, further putting them at risk. A quality snowsuit should last for more than one season and reduce the possibility of becoming too cold too quickly, acting like a protective barrier against wind and snow. Wearing a snowsuit will afford your toddler more time to spend outdoors sledding, building snow people or hitting the slopes.

For the record, my 5-year-old still uses a London Fog hand-me-down from when I was a kid, and I bundle my 2-year-old in a snowsuit that was handed down from her big sister (and her now-college-aged cousin before that). But my youngest has outgrown her suit, which is admittedly a little raggedy at this point. Needless to say, I'm on the hunt for a replacement.

I started my search for a new toddler snowsuit with the brands the What to Expect community swears by. While the best toddler snowsuit is one that your child will actually wear, some are better than others. As a mom who's endured countless winters, here’s what I recommend looking for when shopping for the best toddler snowsuit.

How I Chose the Best Toddler Snowsuits

To choose the best toddler snowsuits, I consulted with two pediatricians — Ansley Schulte , MD, pediatric medical director at KidsPeace and Krupa Playforth, MD, a pediatrician at Warm Heart Pediatrics in Virginia and founder of The Pediatrician Mom — for their input on the importance of using a toddler snowsuit, as well as crucial features to look for in these products. I took their input into account and tapped parents in the What to Expect community for their recommendations, as well as my own shopping experience, prioritizing styles with reinforced knees (to endure the typical wear and tear of outdoor play) and water-resistant materials and seams. I then compared the suggested snowsuits to the pediatric guidance to narrow down my list to 7 snowsuits that received rave reviews for their cold-weather features, durability and mobility.

Best Overall Toddler Snowsuit

The North Face Kids’ Freedom Snow Suit

Easy to get on and off

Wide size range

Adjustable cuffs at the sleeves and legs

Expensive

Needs to be hand-washed

Material : Polyester Size range : 2T-7

Why We Love It

North Face’s Freedom Snow Suit is packed with thoughtful details you and your toddler will appreciate. This one-piece suit not only has a waterproof shell, but elastic leg gaiters to keep out snow and moisture. And the special Heatseeker insulation will keep your child warm without a ton of bulk, allowing them to freely run and jump around as usual.

your toddler will appreciate. This one-piece suit not only has a waterproof shell, but elastic leg gaiters to keep out snow and moisture. And the special Heatseeker insulation will keep your child warm without a ton of bulk, allowing them to freely run and jump around as usual.

The attached hood is helmet compatible — in case you decide to go skiing — and it even has an elastic rain guard for extra wetness protection. The front of the snowsuit has a chin guard to protect against chilly winds, while zippered pockets give your child a place to warm up or hold toddler essentials, like extra tissues or a small toy. You’ll appreciate the “good to grow” sleeve cuffs and bottom hem, which can extend each area by two inches, giving you more usage over time. Reinforced fabric at the knees and butt help keep your child from wearing through this snowsuit quickly. There’s even an ID label to prevent your kid's suit from getting mixed up with someone else’s.

Community Reviews

Duckduckgoose "For outside I have a puffy North Face snowsuit."

Best Value Toddler Snowsuit

Simple Joys by Carter’s 2-Piece Snowsuit

Affordable

Machine washable

Adjustable features

Prices vary by design and size — ranging from $41 to $58

Material: Polyester

Size range: 2T-8

Why We Love It

A decent two-piece toddler snowsuit under $100 is like a needle in a haystack, but this set by Carter’s checks all of my boxes and then some. The water-resistant shell is lined with a cozy, soft fleece to keep your kiddo warm and dry (one parent living in Michigan can confirm!). Ankle gaiters, adjustable straps and cuffs help keep water from slipping in behind mittens and boots. There are a variety of color commons and fun designs to choose from, including a dinosaur theme with a spike-lined hood and pretty block-print florals to suit your little one’s personal interests (and, say, bribe them to put it on).

A decent two-piece toddler snowsuit under $100 is like a needle in a haystack, but this set by Carter’s checks all of my boxes and then some. The water-resistant shell is lined with a cozy, soft fleece to keep your kiddo warm and dry (one parent living in Michigan can confirm!). Ankle gaiters, adjustable straps and cuffs help keep water from slipping in behind mittens and boots. There are a variety of color commons and fun designs to choose from, including a dinosaur theme with a spike-lined hood and

to suit your little one’s personal interests (and, say, bribe them to put it on).

Best Splurge Toddler Snowsuit

Deux Par Deux Two Piece Snowsuit

Highly adjustable and grows with your child

Adorable

unique patterns

Keeps your toddler warm in temperatures as low as -22 ° F

Very expensive

Material : Polyester Size range : 2-14

Why We Love It

Deux par Deux’s Two Piece Snowsuit isn’t the cheapest option, but it’s a highly adjustable pick that will keep your toddler warm in temperatures as low as -22 ° F over several seasons. And as someone who relied on hand-me-downs to get me through multiple winters without breaking the bank, I only wish I had come across this brand sooner.

-22 ° F over several seasons. And as someone who relied on hand-me-downs to get me through multiple winters without breaking the bank, I only wish I had come across this brand sooner.

The snowsuit features a special polyurethane coating that wards off snow and moisture, keeping your child dry underneath. It also has several adjustable features, including Velcro-strapped cuffs, adjustable suspenders and extendable sleeves and pant cuffs that promise to grow with your toddler. A chin guard helps protect your little one against cold wind, while the detachable hood also has a removable faux fur lining (talk about fashionable and functional!).

polyurethane coating that wards off snow and moisture, keeping your child dry underneath. It also has several adjustable features, including Velcro-strapped cuffs, adjustable suspenders and extendable sleeves and pant cuffs that promise to grow with your toddler. A chin guard helps protect your little one against cold wind, while the detachable hood also has a removable faux fur lining (talk about fashionable and functional!).

The knees, butt and hem are reinforced, making this snowsuit a good option for particularly active toddlers — there’s even an included polar fleece neck gaiter for added warmth. But what really separates this snowsuit style are the splurge-worthy features seasoned parents will appreciate, like mitten loops and backpack-style shoulder straps in the coat in case you need to carry your toddler on a whim.

Community Reviews

Mbauer12 "I used a Deux par Deux snowsuit and it was very warm."

Best Toddler Snowsuit for Growth Spurts

L.L.Bean Toddlers' Cold Buster Snowsuit

Cuffs grow up to 1.5 inches

Insulation isn’t bulky

Relatively affordable

Good price

Limited sizing

No pockets

Material : Polyester Size range : 2T-4T

Why We Love It

Toddlers grow fast, making it hard to keep clothes that fit them beyond a season or two. The L.L.Bean Toddlers' Cold Buster Snowsuit is specially designed to grow with your little one, with cuffs that can be extended up to a whopping 1.5 inches. The elastic waistline accommodates inevitable growth spurts. The suit has a full zip in front to make it easy to get your toddler in and out, along with Thinsulate insulation that keeps your child warm without adding bulk. The cuffs have adjustable Velcro cuffs, while the hood is also adjustable to help lock in warmth. There’s reinforcements at the knees, butt and cuffs to prevent this suit from wearing out quickly. This suit is resistant to wind and water, and has internal nylon gaiters to keep moisture out. Because L.L. Bean is known for making durable products that can be passed on, there’s a hand-me-down label for each user (that’s also what makes it one of the best baby snowsuits !).

Community Reviews

eande "I’d go for a full snowsuit because pants/jacket provide a gap for snow and cold to get into...We have the LL Bean snowsuit. It’s great."

Best Toddler Snowsuit for Play

Patagonia Snow Pile One-Piece

Easy to get on and off

Wide size range

Adjustable cuffs at the sleeves and legs

Expensive

Needs to be hand washed

Material : Polyester Size range : 3-6 months - 5T

Why We Love It

The Patagonia Snow Pile One-Piece offers plenty of insulation without dragging your child down. Patagonia designed this suit to move with your child, with special inseams and adjustable boot straps to keep the whole thing from slipping around as your toddler runs and jumps. Elastic cuffs at the sleeves and ankles fold up and down, giving you an extra 1 ¼ inches of adjustability and extra seasons of use.

offers plenty of insulation without dragging your child down. Patagonia designed this suit to move with your child, with special inseams and adjustable boot straps to keep the whole thing from slipping around as your toddler runs and jumps. Elastic cuffs at the sleeves and ankles fold up and down, giving you an extra 1 ¼ inches of adjustability and extra seasons of use.

While there are five pretty colorways to choose from, this suit isn’t just for looks. It also features waterproof sealed seams and a watertight zipper complete with an internal wind flap to keep your little one dry and cozy, even during intense play sessions. The hood is also removable and snaps off easily as needed.

Community Reviews

Oenomel "I love the Patagonia fit/style."

Best Toddler Snowsuit for Skiing

Burton Toddler 2L One-Piece Snowsuit

Hood is helmet-compatible

Reinforced seat and knees

Extendable cuffs

Several owners say it runs large

Material : Polyester Size range : 18 months - S

Why We Love It

Burton is known for keeping adults warm and comfortable on the slopes — and the brand makes pint-sized options, too. The Burton Toddler 2L One-Piece Snowsuit has all the same features as adult versions, so you can rest assured your toddler will be comfortable throughout the entirety of your next ski trip. Adjustable cuffs, external waistband adjustment (so you can make tweaks quickly and easily) and a chin guard ensure a tight fit to keep out wind and snow.

Burton is known for keeping adults warm and comfortable on the slopes — and the brand makes pint-sized options, too. The

your toddler will be comfortable throughout the entirety of your next ski trip. Adjustable cuffs, external waistband adjustment (so you can make tweaks quickly and easily) and a chin guard ensure a tight fit to keep out wind and snow.

You’ll also appreciate the reinforced butt and knees, to protect your child (and their snowsuit) in case of inevitable falls. A hook-and-loop glove attachment helps keep their accessories from getting lost. The hood is adjustable and removable, with enough space to accommodate a helmet, and the extendable cuffs and pant hems also help you get several seasons out of it, making it a worthy winter wardrobe investment. A nice perk: This snowsuit also comes with a lifetime warranty, just in case.

Community Reviews

Sharoniskaren "My 2 year old lasted many days outside last winter with Burton snowsuit, merino wool long underwear, fleece balaclava and hat, and down sweater under suit for really cold days."

Notyourjackbro "I got him some long John thermals, a hood, mittens, and the Burton snowsuit."

Best Down Toddler Snowsuit

Reima Aapua Waterproof Reimatec Down Snowsuit

Duck down insulation

Waterproof shell

Detachable foot loops

Expensive

Limited size range

Material : Polyester, duck down Size range : 12-18 months - 3T

Why We Love It

The Reima Aapua Waterproof Reimatec Down Snowsuit is packed with a mix of duck down and duck feathers to keep your child warm and toasty (down to -20 degrees!) without added weight. This one-piece is waterproof and windproof to stand up to crummy winter weather, and can even repel dirt. The snowsuit has an insulated seat for when your toddler plops into the snow, along with elastic cuffs and leg ends to keep cold from seeping in. Detachable silicone foot loops also help keep their pant legs from creeping up. A long zipper in front makes it simple to get your little one in and out. Plus, if your child isn’t in the mood for the adjustable hood (or its faux fur trim), just take it off.

is packed with a mix of duck down and duck feathers to keep your child warm and toasty (down to -20 degrees!) without added weight. This one-piece is waterproof and windproof to stand up to crummy winter weather, and can even repel dirt. The snowsuit has an insulated seat for when your toddler plops into the snow, along with elastic cuffs and leg ends to keep cold from seeping in. Detachable silicone foot loops also help keep their pant legs from creeping up. A long zipper in front makes it simple to get your little one in and out. Plus, if your child isn’t in the mood for the adjustable hood (or its faux fur trim), just take it off.

Keep in mind that Reima clothes tend to run big, so you may want to order down from your child’s usual size.

Community Reviews

Sashbel "We bought a Reima snowsuit after being recommended it. Says it’s good for temps -10 to -30C so that seems good. Reviews are great."

Best Two-Piece Toddler Snowsuit

Columbia Toddler Buga II Set

Pieces can be worn separately

Lack of puffiness makes it easy for kids to move

Extendable sleeves

Limited size range

Material : Polyester Size range : 2T-4T

Why We Love It

Columbia’s Buga II is a two-piece set that functions well together or apart, giving you plenty of mileage out of your purchase. This snowsuit features Columbia’s special Omni-Heat lining to reflect heat back at your child without the added bulk restricting your little one’s mobility (a welcomed detail, especially if they’re into winter sports). The suit also features sealed seams and waterproof fabric that parents say keep their children dry as a bone. Adjustable suspenders make it easy to extend the bottoms as your child grows, while extendable sleeves on the coat give you a few seasons of wear. This suit has reinforcements at the butt, knees and cuffs to protect against wear and tear (something I can’t stress enough). Other thoughtful features include leg gaiters and silicone grippers at the cuffs to seal in warmth and keep the elements out, as well as lined pockets to help keep little fingers warm sans mittens or gloves.

Community Reviews

Cssv21 "My toddler wore her Columbia in -25 weather for 4 hours and was toasty warm. She was 3 and I bought her a 4T, it's still baggy and she'll definitely fit it next winter and the arms and legs extend to fit as well. I wouldn't size up if you get a Columbia suit. It was also thinner and better for her to move in."

Best Toddler Snow Bibs:

London Fog Classic Snow Bib Snowsuit

Lightweight

Cargo side pocket

Adjustable buckle straps for easy on-and-off

Reinforced knees

Some parents say the material is a bit thin

Material: Polyester

Size range: 2T-16

Why We Love It

While I can’t say they’re made like they used to be, my 5-year-old still wears the same London Fog bibs that I did as a kid. So, if you’re looking for a durable, water-resistant underlayer that can be mixed and matched with any coat, this brand outlasts the competition (literally). Described by other parents for being “lightweight,” “warm,” and “worth the price,” you can scoop them up in a range of bright or neutral hues (like Fuschia pink, punk purple, gray and black), The strap buckles make it even easier to slip a can’t-sit-still toddler out of after outdoor play or activities who are ready just to sip a warm cup of hot cocoa. The elastic waist accommodates a bit of growth, though trust me when I say these will last long enough to be handed down for years to come. Do note, however, that these are offered in different girl and boy styles.

While I can’t say they’re made like they used to be, my 5-year-old still wears the same London Fog bibs that I did as a kid. So, if you’re looking for a durable, water-resistant underlayer that can be mixed and matched with any coat, this brand outlasts the competition (literally). Described by other parents for being “lightweight,” “warm,” and “worth the price,” you can scoop them up in a range of bright or neutral hues (like Fuschia pink, punk purple, gray and black), The strap buckles make it even easier to slip a can’t-sit-still toddler out of after outdoor play or activities who are ready just to sip a warm cup of hot cocoa. The elastic waist accommodates a bit of growth, though trust me when I say these will last long enough to be handed down for years to come. Do note, however, that these are offered in different

What to Look For in a Toddler Snowsuit

There are a few important elements to consider when shopping for a toddler snowsuit. Keep these in mind during your search:

Material. The right material can help insulate your child while keeping them dry. “Pick something that is waterproof and durable,” Dr. Playforth says. “In a younger infant who may not be playing outside in the snow, you can choose fleece, but for older babies and toddlers, choose something where the external fabric is waterproof or water-resistant.” Materials can vary, but that usually means some kind of polyester or Gore-Tex outer, with an interior made with fleece, down or synthetic fill.

Styles . Toddler snowsuits can usually be boiled down into three styles: A one-piece, overalls or two-piece. A one-piece is easy to put on and off and is harder to lose track of. However, toddlers who are potty training may have difficulty taking these off when they need to go. Overall styles allow you to use your child’s existing jacket and are often less expensive than full snowsuits, but they require you to have a quality jacket already. Two-piece styles, in my opinion, are your best bet for potty training, given that kids can quickly pull them down, but they’re more prone to snow getting in between the layers. “ Ultimately, convenience is essential since parents will be taking it on and off frequently,” Schulte says.

Fit. A secure fit keeps the cold and snow out, and directly impacts your child’s comfort. “Snowsuits are expensive, and it's tempting to pick something large for them so you can use it for more than one year, but picking something too large is dangerous, and increases the risk of them slipping in an already-slippery and wet environment,” Playforth says. “You want something that allows them to have mobility.” Look for features like elastic waistbands and adjustable straps to help your child get a secure fit. It can also be helpful to read the reviews to see what other parents have to say about how accurate the sizing of any particular snowsuit is.

FAQs Toddler Snowsuits

Why isn’t it safe for my toddler to wear a snowsuit or winter coat in their car seat?

“Most snowsuits or even coats are bulky and actually don't compress completely flat, so it is harder to cinch the car seat straps tightly enough,” Playforth says. “Waterproof fabric is also sometimes slippery, which means the car seat straps don't have enough grip.”

If you’re worried about warmth in the car, Schulte recommends draping a blanket or coat over the seatbelt straps instead of layering them underneath.

Are there any other differences between baby and toddler snowsuits besides the size?

It depends. Some brands will make the same snowsuit in sizes ranging from infant into the toddler years and beyond, but others are explicitly for toddlers or babies. Toddler snowsuits tend to have more features to suit an active lifestyle, like reinforced knees and stirrups to go inside boots. They’re also typically waterproof or water-resistant, while some baby snowsuits bypass this feature, given that infants are unlikely to be walking or crawling in the snow.

Can I expect my toddler to wear their snowsuit for more than one winter?

It depends on which snowsuit you purchase. Toddlers grow quickly, so there is a high likelihood your child may outgrow their suit from year to year. If you’re concerned about this and want to get more mileage out of your investment, consider purchasing a snowsuit with extendable sleeves and cuffs (nearly all of my picks offer this!). These tend to be in snowsuits that cost a little more, but buying one is still usually cheaper than getting a new snowsuit each year.

Where can I buy an affordable snowsuit for toddlers?

While one of our favorite value buys is no longer in stock — Costco’s Gusti Toddler Snowsuit — there are still plenty of other places to shop for a good deal. What to Expect Parents also recommend checking out Carter’s (they have two-piece sets under $60), Old Navy (these bib pants are just $20 ) and Target’s Cat & Jack line .

Personaly, you can’t go wrong with hand-me-downs. In my experience, you can’t go wrong with Long Fog’s classic snow bibs . They’re just $35 on Amazon and can be worn with any coat or toddler mittens you likely already have on hand.

Your Next Read

How to Dress a Toddler for the Weather Fact Checked by Jill Malter

The Best Winter Car Seat Safety Gear to Keep Baby Warm By Korin Miller, Contributing Writer

The 10 Best Stroller Footmuffs To Keep Your Baby Warm on the Coldest Winter Walks Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The Best Infant Life Jackets, According to Sailing Instructors and Boating Parents Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Dressing Toddlers By Maressa Brown, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Protect Babies and Toddlers in the Cold Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

12 Best Maternity Coats When You Can No Longer Zip Your Jacket, According to a Mom of 2 Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How to Dress a Newborn Baby for the Weather Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Best Convertible and All-in-One Car Seats, Tested and Reviewed by Real Parents Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

9 Best Swim Diapers to Keep Your Baby’s Poop Out of the Pool Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

Best Summer Toys for Toddlers By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

What to Know About Your Toddler's Car Seat: Get the Latest Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Winter Skin Care for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window