The 2-Year-Old Checkup

2 Year Old Check Up

Here's what will happen at your little one's 2-year well-child visit, including the physical exam, developmental milestones and shots.

What’s new when you’re 2? Plenty! Your toddler’s curiosity, resourcefulness and imagination know no bounds (or boundaries, as when she creates a marker masterpiece on the wall instead of on her easel, or tests her scientific theories — and your patience — about what floats in the potty and what doesn’t).

And speaking of potties, your 2-year-old may be showing all the signs that she’s ready to get the potty party started ... or none. If you’re thinking it may be time to ditch the diapers, ask the doctor for some potty-training pointers.

But keep in mind that many kids, especially boys, won’t be ready to hop on the potty-training train until age 3 — and there’s no point in pushing. Here’s what else you and your doctor will review at the 2-year well-baby visit.

The physical checkup

The doctor will once again complete a full physical examination and a check of those teeth , which will most likely include a full set of first molars. Most pediatricians will recommend a visit to the dentist , even if there are no dental concerns, but especially if there are.

Developmental milestones

"What’s that?" may be your eager learner’s favorite phrase — and she may ask it repeatedly even when she knows exactly what "that" is. That’s because it’s satisfying to ask questions and get answers. Your toddler’s brain is buzzing with activity and beginning to make sense of abstract concepts like "more" and "less."

At this checkup your doctor will be keeping an eye out for plenty of exciting milestones, which may include: Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Child by Two YearsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Child by Two YearsSee All Sources

Saying two to four words together in a sentence

Naming or identifying body parts

Pointing to objects and people in pictures and books

Kicking a ball

Running

Eating with a spoon

Using more gestures, like blowing kisses

Playing with multiple toys at once, like putting plastic food on a toy plate

Remember, every child acquires new skills at her own unique pace — and there’s a wide range of what’s considered normal when it comes to development. If you’re concerned about something in your toddler’s progress or if you just have a nagging feeling something’s not quite right, speak up.

Also check in if your 2-year-old doesn’t communicate in two-word phrases, doesn’t know how to use familiar items (like a hairbrush, spoon or phone), doesn’t copy words or actions, doesn’t follow simple instructions, doesn’t show emotion appropriately or loses skills she has mastered.

2-year-old vaccines

By now, most toddlers have received many of the childhood immunizations that will help keep them safe and healthy in the years to come — and that’s definitely something to celebrate. If your child missed a shot at a previous visit (for example, hepatitis B , DTaP or IPV ), your doctor will get her caught up.

Otherwise, the only remaining shots recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) that may be needed are hepatitis A (if your child hasn’t already had the second of the two-shot series), the influenza vaccine (if it’s around flu season) and the COVID-19 vaccine (if your child hasn't gotten yet). Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionChild and Adolescent Immunization ScheduleSee All Sources [2] The doctor might also do a quick blood draw to check for certain conditions, like anemia, lead exposure and high cholesterol.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionChild and Adolescent Immunization ScheduleSee All Sources

Questions to ask your doctor

As you watch your baby blossom into a talking, walking person, you may have more questions than ever. Here are a few to consider asking:

When should I switch from whole milk to non- or low-fat?

When should I think about preschool for my toddler?

How do I help my child express her feelings with words instead of throwing tantrums ?

My child is scared of the dark . How can I help her work through it?

Could she be having nightmares already? Sometimes she wakes up screaming.

How much TV or screen time is okay for my child now?

Should I be trying to teach her letters and numbers ?

She doesn’t like to sit still for books . Should I just not bother anymore?

When I try to brush her teeth , she clamps her mouth shut. Can I just ask her to brush her own teeth?

Believe it or not, the time of frequent well-baby visits is coming to an end. After taking your child for another appointment around her half birthday (when she's 30 months old), you'll book a 3-year checkup. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAAP Schedule of Well-Child Care VisitsSee All Sources [3] From then on, it’s just a single yearly visit.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAAP Schedule of Well-Child Care VisitsSee All Sources