The Second Half of Your Cycle: A Simple Guide to the Luteal Phase

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

luteal phase

There’s a lot going on during this second half of your menstrual cycle — and the end of it will either result in a pregnancy or a period.

Before trying to get pregnant, the arrival of your period may have been nothing more than a pleasant (or not-so-pleasant) surprise. But once you’re trying to conceive, you may start studying your menstrual cycle more closely.

Speaking of biology basics, your menstrual cycle has two phases: the first half, called the follicular phase, and the second half, called the luteal phase. The luteal phase kicks off after ovulation and ends in one of two ways: the start of your period or the start of a pregnancy. Trusted SourceFrontiers in Reproductive HealthLuteal Phase in Assisted Reproductive TechnologySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceFrontiers in Reproductive HealthLuteal Phase in Assisted Reproductive TechnologySee All Sources

Here’s what you need to know about this important part of your cycle.

Key Takeaways

The luteal phase is your cycle’s second half. This part follows ovulation when progesterone rises and your uterus gets ready to (maybe!) host a baby.

The luteal spans about 14 days. That’s the average amount of time for all cycles, though anywhere from 10 to 17 days is considered normal.

A shorter phase might need a look-see. Implantation can be affected by the luteal length so if you’re having trouble conceiving, get with your doc for testing and treatment.

What is the luteal phase?

The luteal phase is the second (read: latter) half of your menstrual cycle. It begins about midway through your cycle, after ovulation.

Ovulation, if you’ll remember, occurs when one of the follicles (i.e., fluid-filled sacs) in your ovaries releases an egg into the fallopian tube, where it will wait for about 12 to 24 hours to be fertilized by a sperm .

After the release of this egg, the ruptured follicle closes and forms the corpus luteum — thereby marking the start of the luteal phase. The corpus luteum then starts producing more of a hormone called progesterone, which helps support the lining of the uterus in preparation for receiving the fertilized egg.

If the fertilized egg attaches to the uterine wall, a pregnancy occurs. If a pregnancy doesn’t occur, the corpus luteum begins to deteriorate — a process that averages about 14 days — and your levels of progesterone start to decline. This causes your uterine lining to shed (i.e., the “period” stage) which ends the luteal phase and kickstarts of a whole new menstrual cycle.

Have more TTC questions? Download the What to Expect app for trusted support, expert info, and a friendly community of like-minded folks on the same baby journey,

How do you know if you’re in the luteal phase?

The luteal phase begins at the time of ovulation, and there are ways to determine if you’re ovulating. Some signs of ovulation include a change in your cervical mucus (it will probably be thin, stretchy, and clear or pale white — think: the color and consistency of egg whites), mild cramps in your lower abdomen, breast tenderness, bloating, or a rise in your basal body temperature .

Many over-the-counter ovulation test strips can also identify the LH (luteinizing hormone) surge, and predict the timing of ovulation.

The luteal phase continues from ovulation until the first day of your period. That day, which kickstarts a new cycle, ushers in the first phase of the menstrual cycle, known as the follicular phase.

How long is the luteal phase?

No matter how short, long or irregular your menstrual cycle is, the time after ovulation (the luteal phase) averages 14 days, although 10 to 17 days can be considered normal. Trusted SourceMerck ManualMenstrual CycleSee All Sources [2]

Menstrual Cycle

For example, whether your menstrual cycle is 27 days or 32 days, there’s a good chance that your luteal phase is still 14 days long. The difference in length probably occurs during the follicular phase — the first phase of the menstrual cycle, in which the body is ramping up its production of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), which readies the ovaries to release a mature egg.

What does it mean to have a short luteal phase?

Usually, the luteal phase lasts for 14 days, but some people have a short luteal phase, which lasts for 10 days or less. This is also called luteal phase deficiency or defect (LPD), which is characterized by lower levels of progesterone and a uterine lining that may not be ready for implantation of an embryo.

When to talk to your doctor

There’s a wide range of normal when it comes to your menstrual cycle — some cycles last for a shorter 21 days, whereas others last for a longer 35 days — so unless you’re having trouble conceiving, you may not need to seek your doctor’s help.

If you are having trouble getting pregnant , however, you may want to talk to your OB/GYN about a fertility evaluation. A doctor can detect whether you have a short luteal phase by doing a blood test, and can make recommendations (like progesterone treatments, if necessary) based on your results.

What to Expect Community parent Jessica14el reports a short luteal phase and sought some help. “I’ve been having an 8 day luteal phase (ovulate day 20, period on 28) so my OB put me on letrozole.”