The Best Pregnancy Shoes for Swollen Feet, Backed by Podiatrists and Moms

Best Shoes for Pregnancy

QUICK SUMMARY

The best pregnancy shoes are the Kizik Lima Hands-Free Sneaker, a slip-on style that moms-to-be love for its ease of use and supportive fit, according to experts and testers from the What to Expect staff and user community.

When you’re pregnant, you expect your belly to grow and your cravings to take interesting turns. But some bodily changes may catch you off guard. Your feet typically stop growing by early adulthood, yet by the third trimester, they may feel like they’ve doubled in size.

Swollen feet and ankles are common pregnancy symptoms caused by the extra weight you're carrying, hormone shifts that loosen ligaments, and an increase in water retention (hello, edema !). Shoes that fit just fine before your pregnancy announcement may suddenly feel too snug, and if your feet are sore after periods of standing or walking, it could be a sign it’s time to shop for new footwear.

Sure, compression socks can help with swelling, but they aren't a cure-all for most foot discomforts brought on by pregnancy. That's why finding pregnancy-friendly footwear is more than a fashion choice — it's about making yourself feel a little more comfortable and supported before (and after!) baby arrives.

How We Chose the Best Shoes for Pregnancy

There are a dizzying number of shoes on the market, and pretty much all of them claim to be comfortable! Finding a pair that can adapt to the swelling and shape changes caused by pregnancy can feel a lot like searching for a needle in a haystack. To help narrow down the options, we combined expert advice from two podiatrists and hands-on testing feedback from moms in the What to Expect community and editors on staff.

First, we spoke with Ashley Lee , D.P.M., a foot and ankle reconstructive surgeon in Hinsdale, Illinois, and Emily Splichal , D.P.M., a podiatrist based in New York City, to idenfity the most important features in pregnacy-friendly footwear:

We also referenced the American Podiatric Medical Association (APMA) Seal of Acceptance Program , which awards a seal to products that promote good foot health. (Many of the shoes selected for this list have received that award!)

And, as it's important to note that you won't know how comfortable a shoe is until you've walked a mile in it, we also assessed personal experiences from moms who wore them throughout every trimester and beyond.

By marrying medical know-how with mom-vetted brands, the result is 12 of the best shoes for swelling caused by pregnancy that you'll still enjoy wearing long after your little one arrives.

Doctor's Note on Why Feet Swell (And How Shoes Can Help)

A growing belly isn't the only thing changing in size right now — edema affects about three-quarters of pregnant women. It can start as early as the middle of the second trimester, and when it does appear, it will likely stick around until you give birth. “This is due to the extra fluid in the body and the pressure from a growing uterus,” explains Dr. Lee. “Gravity pulls this fluid to the feet and ankles, which can cause painful swelling.”

“Pregnancy usually results in weight gain, which is normal, but this can cause problems with your feet,” Dr. Lee adds. That's because you’re experiencing increased weight on your feet, as well as swelling in your feet and ankles due to your body increasing its water content during pregnancy.

Plus, at the same time that you're experiencing swelling, the ligaments and tendons in your feet may also go through changes due to an increase in hormones like relaxin . “During pregnancy, it's common for these ligaments and tendons to relax , causing the feet to ‘expand,’” says Dr. Lee. It might also make your arches flatten and cause your shoes to feel a little tight.

You may be wondering: Will my feet ever go back to normal? In fact, it's actually a pretty common ask in the What to Expect community forums . Many moms shared their personal experience with swelling postpartum — one user noted that it took roughly eight weeks for their shoes to fit again , whereas another shared, "My feet ended up a half size bigger with my first and did not return to original size."

Experts recommend giving yourself time and drinking lots of fluids. In the meantime, your pregnancy-friendly shoe purchase will certainly come in handy! Dr. Lee suggests buying wider shoes or sizing up, because wearing too-tight shoes can lead to pain and long-term complications.

Best Overall Shoes for Pregnancy

Kizik Lima Hands-Free Sneaker

Slip-on style

Completely hands-free

Very comfortable fit

Good size range

Some wished there was more arch support

Size range: 5-12

Number of colors: 10 (including three new, limited-edition options)

Why We Love It

Few pregnancy-friendly shoes have received quite as many rave reviews as Kiziks. This sneaker brand is unique in that every pair is designed to be completely hands-free: Simply slip them on by sliding your foot inside (the heel collapses then springs right back without crushing your foot). This is a huge selling point for moms in their third trimester, at which point your bump can make it impossible to bend over to tie shoelaces. Despite the slip-on element, they look like “normal” shoes — a fact many moms-to-be appreciate.

In addition to ease of use, Kiziks are also seriously comfortable. The brand also offers a variety of styles from running shoes to lifestyle shoes to the futuristic-looking Roamer , but the Lima Hands-Free Sneaker is a particularly good choice for pregnancy since it offers extra cushioning, ankle padding, a roomy toe box, supportive insoles, and plenty of traction on the rubber sole.

In addition to ease of use, Kiziks are also seriously comfortable. The brand also offers a variety of styles from running shoes to lifestyle shoes to the

, but the Lima Hands-Free Sneaker is a particularly good choice for pregnancy since it offers extra cushioning, ankle padding, a roomy toe box, supportive insoles, and plenty of traction on the rubber sole.

And although it’s on the pricier side, moms-to-be say the ultra comfortable fit and ability to put them on hands-free makes Kiziks well worth the price. It's also why the What to Expect community has dubbed the brand the best slip-on shoe overall !

Tested by Sarah Darby , mom of two and What to Expect Senior SEO Strategist, who “absolutely loves” hers:

“They look just like casual sneakers (not too sporty), so I feel like they pair well with almost every outfit."

Community Reviews

“For casual/ light activity, I swear by Kiziks! All of their shoes are designed to slip on and off without bending over and tying them. Game changer for busy moms or perfect as you get further in the pregnancy! I have three pairs in all different styles and love them all so much.”

“Kiziks! I love mine!”

“I got a pair of Kiziks and I love them!”

“I bought Kiziks, they are seriously the most amazing shoes I’ve ever owned. They’re slip-on, but well-fitting sneakers. They’re wide for my swollen feet and have a supportive sole and flexible, mesh toe box. My feet immediately feel 1,000 times better when I put them on.”

Best Slip-On Shoes for Pregnancy

Allbirds Women's Tree Loungers

Lightweight

Breathable

Soft and stretchy fabric

Washable

Not available in wide or half sizes

Size range: 5-11

Number of colors: 6

Why We Love It

While the Kiziks above look like a “normal” sneaker, the Allbirds Women's Tree Loungers have a more minimalist design that some prefer. They’re shockingly lightweight and stretchy, and include a cushioned midsole and roomy fit. Most of the benefits can be attributed to the eucalyptus tree fiber construction; as a naturally breathable material, these will wick away moisture, making them idea for moms with sweaty feet (and allowing you to wear them without socks!)

“I owned these shoes pre-pregnancy, but they quickly became one of two shoes I wore during pregnancy,” says Leah Rocketto, What to Expect’s Associate Commerce Director. And even though this shoe is incredibly lightweight, Leah adds that she appreciated how much support they offered her flat feet. They’re also completely washable, so you can keep them looking brand new throughout your pregnancy.

“I owned these shoes pre-pregnancy, but they quickly became one of two shoes I wore during pregnancy,” says Leah Rocketto, What to Expect’s Associate Commerce Director.

Tested by Leah Rocketto , soon-to-be mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Shopping Director:

“They were great to wear for more casual activities, like running errands or grabbing a coffee with friends. The fabric is incredibly stretchy, so even as my feet swelled throughout the day, the shoe stretched to make room for them, never feeling too tight.”

Community Reviews

lnortizr “Look for Allbirds shoes. They're excellent.”

kalierosebud “I love Allbirds, they’re super squishy and soft!”

Best Slides for Pregnancy

Oofos OOahh Slide

Ultra lightweight and supportive

Great arch support

APMA-approved

Not the most stylish option

Size range: 5-16

Number of colors: 19

Why We Love It

Although many moms will admit that Oofos OOahh Slides aren’t exactly the most fashion-forward shoes, there’s no denying how incredibly comfortable they are. Made from machine-washable foam, this slide delivers superior comfort with arch support, a cushioned footbed to reduce the pressure on your feet, and a soft strap that won’t dig into skin.

It also has the podiatrist stamp of approval: Dr. Splichal recommends this brand for moms-to-be, and it also has an APMA seal , ensuring the shoe has been found to be beneficial to foot health.

Tested by Karen Sly, What to Expect’s Finance Director, who wore these during her pregnancy:

“Oofos slides are easy to get on and you can wear them with cozy socks."

Community Reviews

halloweenmom31 “I swear by Oofos! They have clogs and various other shoes for work, but I also highly recommend their sandals or slippers as house shoes.”

Best Sandals for Pregnancy

Birkenstock Mayari Sandal

Wide sizes available

Good arch support

Adjustable

Pricey

Size range: 4-12.5

Number of colors: 30

Why We Love It

With their cushy footbed, wide, adjustable straps and versatile styling options, Birkenstock sandals are a classic pregnancy pick. And although you can’t go wrong with Birkenstock's popular original or waterproof EVA Arizona , the Mayari Sandal is an especially popular top choice in the What to Expect community, thanks to the adjustable, buckle straps. Moms-to-be also rave about the arch support, wide sizes, and contoured footbed that gently cradles sore feet when it comes to this particular style.

With their cushy footbed, wide, adjustable straps and versatile styling options, Birkenstock sandals are a classic pregnancy pick. And although you can’t go wrong with Birkenstock's popular

, the Mayari Sandal is an especially popular top choice in the What to Expect community, thanks to the adjustable, buckle straps. Moms-to-be also rave about the arch support, wide sizes, and contoured footbed that gently cradles sore feet when it comes to this particular style.

The Mayari sandals are also a favorite style because of the loop for your big toe, which helps them stay on, unlike other slide styles of Birkenstocks that some people find slip off easily.

Tested by Jeanne Beacom , What to Expect’s Senior Campaign Reporting Manager, who wore these through two pregnancies:

“I have a permanent Birkenstocks tan that really started with my 2021 pregnancy and has continued on through postpartum and my 2023 pregnancy. [The Mayari sandals] are easy to slide on, and you can adjust the straps via the buckles for swelling — I had really bad swelling — and they do have arch support. Plus, they go with everything.”

Community Reviews

“I got my first pair (Florida) in 2018 during my summer pregnancy, still have them now. Finally purchased my second pair in 2021 (Mayari). I always wear them, So worth the money! Really wanting another style but can’t make up my mind on which one.”

I live in Birkenstocks! Amazing arch support!

“100% Birkenstocks if your feet swell.”

“??I’ve been living in my Birkenstocks.”

Best Walking Shoes for Pregnancy

Skechers Go Walk 6 Slip-On Sneaker

Easy to slip on

Wider toe box

Breathable materials

Good for all-day wear

Not the biggest size range

Size range: 5-13

Number of colors : 6

Why We Love It

For light exercise and errands, look no further than the Skechers Go Walk 6 . Another slip-on sneaker (you can slide your foot into the back, though it does have laces you can use to adjust the fit), the Go Walk 6 is highly comfortable and supportive. Made of mesh with an air-cooled memory foam insole, it’s breathable and ideal for keeping feet cool on hot days or while exercising, and the springy soles help absorb impact, making them supportive enough for all-day wear.

Community Reviews

“Skechers saved my feet last pregnancy — I was getting terrible heel pain and as soon as I put on Skechers, the pain went away.”

“Skechers have some super comfortable shoes. And they do fit wide feet too.”

“I bought some Sketchers slip-ons in the spring and they’re great! Memory foam insole. Very comfortable.”

Best Work Shoes for Pregnancy

Vionic Kensley Loafer

Large size range

Available in wide sizes

Good traction

APMA-approved

Some reviewers say the patent leather takes some time to break in

Pricey

Size range: 5-13

Number of colors: 17

Why We Love It

“Work shoes” — which often include styles like loafers and flats — are notorious for having a tighter fit and narrow toe box. But if you’re looking for an office-appropriate shoe that won’t overly squeeze your feet, one from APMA-approved brand Vionic is a great choice. The Kensley loafer has a generous size range (from 5 to 12) and is sold in both regular and wide sizes, perfect for accommodating moms-to-be with edema , which is when your feet swell. The on-trend thick rubber lug sole delivers solid traction (good for minimizing the risk of slipping) but is made from light materials that won’t weigh feet down. Finally, as with all Vionic shoes, the orthotic insole provides plenty of arch support and ultra-comfy cushioning.

Community Reviews

cmpel1994 “Vionic are by far the best shoes I’ve ever worn. My feet were ruined from working in retail management & being on my feet for 50 hours a week. I swear by these shoes!”

whisperingwind “Vionic shoes are my go to.”

Best Gym Shoes for Pregnancy

On Cloud Sneakers

Great for intense workouts and leisure walks alike

Stretchy mesh uppers and elastic laces accomodate swelling

Stylish

Popular among moms and the running community

Pricey

Sizes: 5-11

Colors: 39+ combos

Why We Love It

If your workout routine includes a bit more than daily walks around the neighborhood, you might want to consider investing in heavy-duty pair of trainers. On Cloud has quickly gained popularity among What to Expect moms (and the entire internet, really) for its CloudTec midsole. The funky foam bottoms are extremely cushioning, providing pregnant wearers with support and comfort in every step. It's the kind of athletic sneaker we envision Dr. Lee recommending. While the style What to Expect's contributing writer, Jessica Booth, tested isn't as widely available anymore, the newest editions (and brand offerings overall) are just as great.

Tested by Jessica Booth , What to Expect contributing writer and mom of two:

"I bought myself a pair of On Clouds when planning a trip to Disney World with my two girls. They arrived only one day before we left — but they never needed to be broken in. I wore them for 12-plus hours straight without any pain, blisters or uncomfortable rubbing."

Community Reviews

"I just got on clouds for a disney trip and they are insanely comfortable. I got the on cloud 5s but I have heard great about all of the versions they have"

"A bit pricey, but On Cloud shoes are my favorite!"

"I usually wear converse, vans or docs. I've just been wearing my running shoes. I wear the On Cloud cloud flow."

Best Slippers for Pregnancy

Bronax Pillow Slippers

Affordable

Extended sizing

Waterproof

Some found them to be large

Size range: 4/5 to 15/16

Number of colors: 19

Why We Love It

“Like a cloud” is a common description of the Bronax Pillow Slippers . Made of EVA, a rubber-like material known for being lightweight and flexible, and featuring a thick supportive sole, moms-to-be in the What to Expect community rave about how comfortable these slippers are. They feel wonderfully plush on your feet and are roomy enough to accommodate pregnancy swelling (the band is nice and wide, and the brand provides instructions to custom fit them to your feet). Bronax also offers one of the widest size ranges on this list, from size 4 to 16, and there are countless colors available.

And though technically slippers, there’s nothing stopping you from wearing them outside of the house — many moms say they wear their Bronax slippers running errands or going for a walk around the neighborhood. And because the EVA is waterproof, a few note that they’ve even packed their trusty slippers for the hospital to wear as a shower shoe.

Community Reviews

“Just a PSA for everyone experiencing foot swelling… I just received my Bronax Cloud Slides and I am OBSESSED. I’ve been wearing them around all day and don’t want to take them off. They are so cushy and comfy. I am definitely going to be wearing them the rest of the summer.”

“They are super comfy. Especially for swollen prego feet.”

“I have a few pairs of these! Love them!”

Best Boots for Pregnancy

Vionic Chelsea Bootie

Easy to pull on

Good traction

APMA-approved

Not available in wide sizes

Size range: 5-12

Number of colors: 7

Why We Love It

The Vionic Chelsea Bootie is another excellent APMA-approved pick. Boots can be tightly fitting (a tricky proposition for moms-to-be with edema) or have too high of a heel, but this Chelsea boot checks all the boxes for comfort while pregnant. They’re easy to pull on with a rear pull-tab so you won’t have to bend over and tie laces or pull up a zipper, and the cushioned insole has plenty of arch support. The sole of this shoe is also flexible with good traction, which is a nice feature to help reduce the risk of slipping on wet or snowy days.

Although the toe box isn’t overly narrow and many reviewers say they don’t feel too tight, this style is not available in wide sizes — so if you’re experiencing serious edema, this may not be the best pregnancy shoe for you.

Best Pregnancy Shoes for Winter

Merrell Women’s Winter Pull On

Highly durable

Easy to pull on

Good traction to prevent slipping

Pricey

Size range: 5-11

Number of colors: 3

Why We Love It

Merrell is known for high-quality all-terrain shoes, and the brand’s Winter Pull On boot is no exception. The faux fur lining and slouchy suede leather uppers look super cozy, but don’t be fooled — the rubber sole offers excellent traction, making these a solid enough winter boot to weather, well, the weather. If your pregnancy will occur during the wintertime — particularly if you’ll be in the later stages at this time — you’ll appreciate how easy it is to pull these supersoft boots on, too.

Though on the more expensive side for winter boots, many moms-to-be say the brand’s shoes are so durable and made from such high-quality materials that they’re well worth the price.

Community Reviews

annabelleonyx “I only wear shoes made by Merrell. They are soo comfortable and have reduced all of my foot troubles to nothing. They've even helped my knees. They aren't cheap but I usually get about two years out of them before they need to be replaced.”

mouseearstx “I'll second Merrell shoes! I am on my feet all day, and my feet still feel fine at the end of the day. They are a bit pricey, but worth every penny!”

Best Flats for Pregnancy

Dr. Scholl’s Wexley Ballet Flat

Wide sizes available

Foam footbed

Some moms say they run a bit big

Size range: 6-11

Number of colors: 7

Why We Love It

Ballet flats are versatile and stylish, but this type of shoe is also notorious for its narrow silhouette and insufficient arch support. Luckily, the Dr. Scholl’s Wexley Ballet Flats (and Mary Janes !) allow moms-to-be to wear flats without compromising comfort. Not only does the Wexley deliver a supportive foam footbed, but it’s available in both regular and wide sizes — and opting for a wider size is a smart choice if you’re experiencing edema.

Moms even say it’s one of the rare pairs of ballet flats they’ve tried that doesn’t immediately give them blisters. Also good: The footbed is made of antimicrobial foam, which helps to minimize odor.

Community Reviews

mcall12 “Low key Dr Scholl’s makes some fairly cute shoes.”

Best Wedges for Pregnancy

Dr. Scholl’s Ellie Espadrille Wedge Sandal

Elevates a look but isn’t too high

Lightweight cork wedge

Ankle strap

You’ll need to bend over to buckle the straps

Size range: 6-11

Number of colors: 4

Why We Love It

Dr. Lee says wedges, especially lower ones, are preferable for moms-to-be because they offer more support than heels. As with ballet flats, this is a type of shoe that Dr. Scholl’s does especially well: The brand’s Ellie Espadrille wedge can elevate a look without compromising comfort. The insoles on this pair, made from the brand’s special foam cushioning, are especially cushy and comfortable. Plus, there’s sufficient arch support and a lightweight, flexible cork sole that’s just high enough at two inches. It’s available in four versatile colors and also has an ankle strap for a little extra support.

What To Look for in Pregnancy Shoes

Based on feedback from Dr. Lee and Dr. Splichal, information from the APMA and feedback from moms on our editorial team and in the What to Expect community, these are the factors to consider when buying shoes for swollen feet caused by pregnanc:

Comfort: It’s no surprise that comfort is key when it comes to pregnancy shoes. Look for features that prioritize comfort, such as a contoured footbed, shock-absorbing foam, adjustable straps and lightweight, breathable materials.

Ease of use: It’s no secret that the further along in pregnancy you get, the harder it is to see your feet — making it increasingly tricky to put on your shoes, especially in the third trimester. Slip- or pull-on styles can be very helpful for this reason, so you can put on your shoes without needing to bend over so much.

Type: The podiatrists we spoke to noted that sneakers generally tend to be some of the most supportive pregnancy shoes, so that might be the best style to opt for when shopping. With other styles such as flats, boots and sandals, you should prioritize wider shoes because too-narrow options could be constricting when you’re experiencing foot and lower leg swellings. If you want a shoe that you can use to dress up, look for low wedges or flats over heels, as these options provide support to the entire bottom of the foot, whereas heels put pressure on only the ball and heel of your feet, according to Dr. Lee.

Arch support: This is essential in pregnancy shoes, Dr. Splichal says. “Foot support during pregnancy is particularly important as the woman enters the 3rd trimester,” she explains. “Increasing body weight coupled with elevation of the hormone relaxin places high stress to the arches of the feet, [which] can result in foot pain and arch fatigue.” Given this information, you should look for shoes with built-in arch support. Dr. Splichal also notes that you may want to consider insoles (she likes the ones from Powerstep ) for additional support.

FAQs

What are the best shoes to wear during pregnancy?

Ultimately, the best shoes to wear during pregnancy are whichever pair you feel comfortable in that provide support and aren’t overly tight — and that’s especially important as you enter the third trimester. Shoes that come with the American Podiatric Medical Association (APMA)’s seal of acceptance, a special seal given to products that promote good foot health, are especially good choices.

In general, gym shoes and sneakers tend to be the most supportive options for moms-to-be. Any flats you choose should have good arch support with soft, flexible uppers to accommodate swelling, Dr. Splichal says. And if you want something a little dressier, Dr. Lee suggests flats or low wedges over heels, as these options provide support to the entire bottom of the foot, whereas heels put pressure on only the ball and heel of your feet. Not to mention, there’s lower risk of falling when in these shoes, she says.

What shoe styles help with ankle and arch support in pregnancy?

To help minimize lower extremity swelling, Dr. Lee recommends wearing compression stockings , limiting your salt intake, and elevating your feet when seated. The right shoes can also help keep you comfortable. To give your swollen feet the most support, Dr. Lee says to turn to gym shoes and sneakers, particularly those with cushioned midsoles.

Should I size up during pregnancy or after swelling?

If your shoes feel snug now, don’t wait until swelling peaks — it’s better to size up (or choose a wider width) during pregnancy to prevent discomfort and long-term foot issues, according to Dr. Lee. Swelling can come and go throughout the day, so adjustable shoes that can expand with your feet are ideal. Many moms find their shoe size returns to normal in the weeks after birth, but for others, ligament changes can make those new measurements permanent.

Are slip-ons better than lace-up shoes for late pregnancy?

Moms and moms-to-be are equally big fans of slip-on shoes . These hands-free designs are easy to put on and take off, especially when you can no longer bend over to see your toes. According to one of What to Expect's contributing writers, Jessica Booth, she says she reaches for these types of shoes more than any other option in her closet. And now, with a 3- and 5-year-old in tow, slip-on shoes help her get out the door even faster.

Which shoes can handle both indoors and outside with swelling?

Slippers are a super popular slip-on shoe that moms love to wear indoors, but not all can be worn outside. You'll want to pay close attention to design details such as non-slip, durable soles with decent tread. For instance, our favorite pair of cozy slip-on shoes — the Minnetonka Tempe Slipper — can take on all terrain.

Other indoor- and outdoor-friendly brands that moms love include Crocs and other clogs, such as HEYDUDEs .

*What to Expect When You’re Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Edema (Swelling of the Ankles and Feet) During Pregnancy , October 2022. American Podiatric Medical Association, Seal of Acceptance/Approval Program , 2024. Ashley Lee, D.P.M., a foot and ankle reconstructive surgeon in Hinsdale, Illinois. Emily Splichal, D.P.M., a podiatrist based in New York City.

Your Next Read

Yes, Your Feet Really Are Getting Bigger: Why 75% of Pregnant Women Experience Swelling Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The Surprising Reason You're Stubbing Your Toes Every Day Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Products to Make Pregnancy Sex More Comfortable Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

10 Best Home Remedies for Varicose Veins When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

How to Manage Pregnancy Back Pain, from Belly Bands to Ice Packs Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Saying “I Do” While Expecting: Having a Comfortable Wedding When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Walking for Two: How This Simple Workout Helps You (and Baby!) Stay Healthy Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises That Keep You (and Baby!) Feeling Great Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

These Pregnancy-Safe Leg and Booty Moves Boost Stability And Ease Aches Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Varicose Veins During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is This the Self-Care Secret to Easing Pregnancy Swelling and Soreness? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Why Swimming is the ‘Secret Weapon’ for a Smoother Labor Experience Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Is Reflexology Safe During Pregnancy? Here's How It Works and When to Try It Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Hot Days, Cool Mocktails, and a Baby Bump: What Summer Pregnancies Really Feel Like Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window