Could Your Child Be Going Through the 2-Year-Old Sleep Regression?

2-year sleep regression, little toddler boy lying awake in bed

Your toddler used to be an ace sleeper, but now he’s fighting the Zzzs. Here’s why a sleep regression at the 2-year mark happens and how to deal with it.

Toddler sleep is usually something you can bank on, as these cuties tend to crash at the end of a busy day of running and exploring. And yet, you might suddenly find yourself dealing with a tot who’s once again waking up at night, refusing to go to bed or rising for the day when it’s still dark. What gives?

It could be the 2-year-old sleep regression. These sleep setbacks aren't uncommon, and you may have even faced them one or more times before. Indeed, sleep regressions can occur at multiple points during the first year, which can include a 4-month sleep regression , a 6-month sleep regression , plus 8-month and 12-month sleep regressions . They're also common in the second year and beyond, and can happen at 15 months , 18 months , 2 years and 3 years. It’s a wonder new parents ever get any shut-eye!

Take heart and know that this bump in the sleep road is likely very temporary and soon your toddler will be heading back to dreamland as usual. In the meantime, here’s what a 2-year-old sleep regression entails as well as how long it can last and tips for handling it at your house.

What is the 2-year-old sleep regression?

The 2-year-old sleep regression is just what it sounds like — a disruption in your toddler’s nighttime routine that’s causing him to wake up in the wee hours, miss a nap here and there, or appear in front of you super early in the morning. This change in your child’s sleep schedule can seemingly pop up out of nowhere, even after months of easy put-downs and regular napping.

Keep in mind that at the 2-year mark, toddlers should be getting a total of 11 to 14 hours of sleep a day, which includes a daily nap. And at this age, a child’s daytime snoozing has probably transitioned from two naps a day to just one , usually lasting between an hour-and-a-half and two-and-a-half hours.

How long will the 2-year-old sleep regression last?

As with any sleep regression during the infant and toddler years, it shouldn’t take more than a couple of weeks to figure out what’s going on with your little one and then address the issues. As you work on it, redouble your efforts at nailing your tot’s nighttime routine so he knows what to expect each time he tucks in and you can nip the 2-year-old sleep regression in the bud.

Signs your toddler is going through the 2-year-old sleep regression

Getting some pushback at naptime and bedtime? The truth is, most children this age don’t long to tumble into bed the way adults do. And since your toddler is more aware of what’s happening when he’s sent to bed, he probably doesn't want to miss out on all the potential fun with his favorite people — his parents, of course, and older siblings if he has them too.

Common signs of the 2-year-old sleep regression include:

Waking up at night more than usual or after a long stretch of not waking overnight at all.

Taking longer than usual to settle down at bedtime or naptime.

Delaying going to bed by asking for things like another story, another glass of water, another song.

Short-changing his nap by refusing to nap or napping for shorter periods of time.

Waking up very early , well before his normal wake-up time.

Causes of the 2-year-old sleep regression

There are a variety of reasons your toddler might suddenly decide that sleep isn’t for him. Here are some of the more common causes behind a 2-year-old sleep regression:

Teething. A toddler’s mouth may ache when new teeth are coming in, just the way it did when he was a baby. If nighttime waking is an issue, it could be because his 2-year-molars are erupting, a dental event that starts around the 23- to 25-month mark.

More words. Your bigger kid’s vocabulary has exploded by age 2, which means he may know up to 50 words and now likes using them from the crib (as in, “come here!”).

New skills. Walking is old hat for 2-year-olds! Climbing, jumping and running are the fun new gross motor skills your tot is honing right now — and it’s these tricks that he’d rather practice instead of sleeping.

Nightmares. A greater understanding of language and books plus exposure to TV will yield a tot with a vivid imagination. The result? A possible fear of the dark or nightmares .

Separation anxiety . While many toddlers have outgrown separation anxiety by this age, it could still be plaguing your tot and getting in the way of his sleep.

He’s too tired. Yup — being overtired could also feed into sleep trouble in toddlers, especially if yours is in the process of dropping a nap from his schedule.

Illness. A cough, cold, fever or ear infection could be behind a 2-year sleep regression.

Change in his life. A big change like a new sibling, house or babysitter can interrupt a toddler's sleep at this age and cause the 2-year-old sleep regression.

Tips for handling the 2-year-old sleep regression in your toddler

As frustrating (and exhausting) as it can be to deal with this nighttime disruption, try to handle it as matter-of-factly as you can. Here are some smart 2-year-old sleep regression tips:

Stick to the routine. Be firm with your toddler’s bedtime and reinforce the relaxing schedule you’ve set up, with a bath, stories, a short song and some cuddling.

Stay calm. Don’t get worked up if your toddler resists his bedtime (he may feed off your reaction and continue to stonewall). Instead, gently walk him back to his room repeatedly each time he gets up.

Check for illness. Of course, you need to rule out fever or sickness — and it’s smart to watch for signs of toddler teething, which include less of an appetite, drooling, irritability, chewing on fingers, tugging at the ears and redness where the teeth are coming in.

Add a lovey. If your tot hasn’t already selected a favorite friend to sleep with, suggest a few options. Having a lovey close by can help calm a child in the middle of the night.

Try a night light. Bad dreams are real to toddlers, so installing a night light may help ease his fear of the dark or what’s in the closet.

Nix screen time. Watching videos on a smartphone, tablet or TV can mess with a child’s sleep patterns. Your best bet is to limit TV at this age to at most one hour a day of age-appropriate programming, avoid screens around bedtime (turning them off at least two hours before bed), and refrain from keeping these devices in your child’s bedroom.

Make it dark . If you’ve got an early riser on your hands, putting up black-out shades or curtains in the windows could help him stay abed a little longer in the morning.

When to call the doctor

You can always ask the pediatrician about your child’s sleep needs and pick up tips for creating a better bedtime routine too. But don’t wait more than a few days to a week to call if you notice snoring or loud breathing, if your child is sleepy during the day, or if his daytime behavior is affected because of poor sleep at night.

And if nightmares are very disruptive, have them evaluated by your health care provider, as they could be a concern related to a sleep disorder or anxiety. Speaking with the doctor will also help you learn that many of these issues are very normal — and knowing this can ease your mind.