The 14 Best C-Section Recovery Items Every New Mom Needs

Quick Summary

As a mom who’s been through both a planned and unplanned C-section, I know how important it is to stay ahead of postpartum pains that come with major abdominal surgery. To help you recover more comfortably, here's everything essential I recommend having on hand, from belly binders to compression socks.

After not one but two C-sections , I can tell you this: Recovery is no small feat. Whether your C-section was planned or totally unexpected, the days and weeks afterward can be a whirlwind. I remember vividly the mix of physical pain (those first few times getting out of bed — not to mention going to the bathroom — are no joke) and the mental exhaustion of learning how to care for a baby while my body was still recovering from major surgery.

The ups and downs of postpartum are completely normal, but the key to navigating it all is having the right tools on hand. My C-section recovery essentials list includes a mix of expert-recommended and mom-tested essentials — from the best belly bands to successful scar treatments to comforting must-haves worth packing in your hospital bag — that have proven to make things more manageable. It’s basically a survival kit I’d put together if I had to do it all over again.

How We Tested and Selected the Best C-Section Recovery Items

C-section healing and recovery is personal, and what works for one mom might not work for another. That’s why I approached this list from every angle — I factored in my own experience, medical advice from the experts, and the wisdom of other moms who’ve been through it, too. Here’s a detailed breakdown on how I started pulling products:

Personal experience: I added what worked for me after two C-sections, from belly binders that made moving more bearable to the scar care products I wish I’d started using sooner.

Expert advice: I consulted OB-GYNs, Sheetal Dedania, M.D ., and Matthew Carroll, M.D. , about the healing process and asked for specific product recommendations for incision care, pain relief, mobility support, and more.

Community wisdom: I gathered feedback from What to Expect community members and editors on staff who’ve been there, because everyone’s recovery journey is different.

Research: I cross-checked expert advice with the American College of Gynecologists and Obstetricians (ACOG) guidelines to ensure each item is safe and truly helpful during recovery.

Based on the above, I then went on to make sure every recommendation met the following criteria:

Comfort and fit for post-C-section bodies: From soft, breathable fabrics to adjustable sizing, every pick had to feel good on a healing belly.

What’s worth paying for vs. hospital freebies: Some items you can stock up on from the maternity ward, while others are worth the splurge for better quality and long-term use.

FSA/HSA eligibility when possible: Because products can add up fast, I prioritized products you might be able to pay for with pre-tax dollars.

Long-term usefulness: The best recovery tools shouldn’t just collect dust after the newborn phase. I selected products that can support you well into your postpartum journey, not just the first six week.

Easy to use (even when you can’t bend, twist, or move much): Everything here is simple to put on, take off, or apply — even when you’re sore, tired, and constantly carrying a newborn baby.

Supported by medical experts: Last but tnot least, every product had to pass the “would an OB-GYN recommend this?” test, so you can feel confident it’s safe for recovery. Remember: Your doctor will tell you to take it easy and scale back any activity. Make sure to follow your doctor's advice so that you don’t put undue strain on your incision — which takes time to heal — and your energy levels.

A Doctor's Note on C-Sections

A C-section, or cesarean section, in case you’re not familiar, is the surgical delivery of a baby through incisions in the belly and uterus. As it is a surgical procedure, physical and emotional recovery typically takes longer than it does after a vaginal birth . You can expect to spend around three to four days in the hospital, and it will take at least four to six weeks at home before you’ll feel back to normal.

Roughly one in three babies (or about 32%) are born via C-section in the U.S. While any surgery warrants careful consideration, approaching it with some mental and emotional preparation can help you feel confident and empowered if a C-section becomes part of your birth plan. With that, scroll on to shop the best products for C-section recovery.

Contributing writer Korin Miller originally contributed to this story.

Best C-Section Pain Reliever

Advil Liqui-Gels

Safe for breastfeeding

effective

easy to find

Might upset your stomach

Dosage: 200 mg

Why We Love It

Trust me, you’ll want to make sure you have pain relief like ibuprofen — which is considered safe if you’re breastfeeding — within reach following a C-section delivery, and not just for your incision site. Even if you deliver by C-section, your uterus will continue to cramp until it shrinks back down to its pre-pregnancy size.

— within reach following a C-section delivery, and not just for your incision site. Even if you deliver by C-section, your uterus will continue to cramp until it shrinks back down to its pre-pregnancy size.

If your doctor gives you the go ahead to take ibuprofen, I'd stock up on Advil Liqui-Gels . It's the pain reliever of choice of plenty of What to Expect parents, aincuding me, and it's FSA/HSA eligible with most retailers. The coated liquid capsules are easy to swallow and work more quickly (typically within 30 minutes), absorbing faster than traditional tablets, reducing pain for four to six hours. Just remember to take any medication (even OTC painkillers like these) on schedule as prescribed by your doctor. It’s better to treat your pain ahead of time than to let it get so bad that you end up stuck in bed. And always be sure to take a pain reliever with food to reduce the risk of upsetting your stomach or dealing with ulcers.

If your doctor gives you the go ahead to take ibuprofen, I'd stock up on Advil Liqui-Gels . It's the pain reliever of choice of plenty of What to Expect parents, aincuding me, and it's

FSA/HSA eligible with most retailers. The coated liquid capsules are easy to swallow and work more quickly (typically within 30 minutes), absorbing faster than traditional tablets, reducing pain for four to six hours. Just remember to take any medication (even OTC painkillers like these) on schedule as prescribed by your doctor. It’s better to treat your pain ahead of time than to let it get so bad that you end up stuck in bed. And always be sure to take a pain reliever with food to reduce the risk of upsetting your stomach or dealing with ulcers.

Community Reviews

“I’m 4 weeks postpartum and still take Advil twice a day. My doctor said to keep taking it as long as I need to.”

“I made sure to move around following my C-section and stayed on top of the Advil.”

“The recovery is tough sometimes, but make sure you’re staying on top of the pain meds. I took Tylenol and Advil around the clock for probably 2 weeks post-surgery. But when I missed doses, I definitely knew it. Just stay on top of the pin and you’ll be great!”

“It takes time to heal. I was taking Tylenol and Advil for a full month, maybe even 6 weeks after my first C-section.”

Best Postpartum Stool Softener

Colace Clear Stool Softener

Easy to take

works for many

Isn't effective if you're super backed up

Dosage : 50 mg

Why We Love It

TMI: That first postpartum bowel movement can be truly terrifying, even more so if you’ve just undergone major abdominal surgery. Experts recommend checking with your practitioner about taking a stool softener like Colace for the first few days afterwards. This tried-and-true product (recommended by many WTE moms during and after pregnancy!) works wonders. As one WTE mom put it: “Colace is the hero of the postpartum bathroom story!”

This tried-and-true product (recommended by many WTE moms during and after pregnancy!) works wonders. As one WTE mom put it: “Colace is the hero of the postpartum bathroom story!”

Colace adds water to your stool to soften it, making it much easier to pass. Not only will this make your trips to the restroom a bit more tolerable, but it will also prevent straining that could irritate your incision even more. This is especially important if you’ve been prescribed opioid painkillers, since they can increase the chances of constipation.

Colace adds water to your stool to soften it, making it much easier to pass. Not only will this make your trips to the restroom a bit more tolerable, but it will also prevent straining that could irritate your incision even more.

This is especially important if you’ve been prescribed opioid painkillers, since they can increase the chances of constipation.

Community Reviews

“Colace clear! It’s very gentle and dye-free!”

“Colace clear! It’s very gentle and dye-free!”

“I definitely take the colace at first because postpartum constipation is on another level lol, but eating a ton of fruit and staying well hydrated was helpful too. I only needed Colace in the first couple of days.”

“I started taking Colace as soon as I got home from the hospital and had no problems!”

“I dealt with constipation during pregnancy, so I was taking Miralax and Colace daily prior to my C-section. After my C-section, they gave me Colace in the hospital, and I continued taking Miralax daily as well. I had my first bowel movement on day 3 after my C-section, and it came out easily without difficulty.”

Best Breastfeeding Pillow for C-Section Recovery

Boppy Original Nursing Support

Easy to wear

machine-washable covers

Lightweight

Some babies outgrow it sooner than others

Materials: 65 percent polyester, 35 percent cotton (slipcover), 80 percent polyester, 20 percent cotton (pillow cover), 100 percent polyester fiber (pillow filling) Weight: 2.72 lbs Dimensions: 20 x 16 x 5.5 inches

Why We Love It

My core strength was pretty much non-existent after both of my C-sections, and I relied heavily on the Boppy to get in a good position for feeding without having to move around too much. It kept the pressure and weight off of my tender tummy without minimal effort, thanks to its simple C-shape.

to get in a good position for feeding without having to move around too much. It kept the pressure and weight off of my tender tummy without minimal effort, thanks to its simple C-shape.

What sets this nursing pillow apart from others is just how high it sits around your waist, providing baby with a safe place rest while feeding. It's also a fan-favorite among all new parents (C-section or not!) for its cushy feel and removable cover that’s can be tossed in the washing machine without worry. Not to mention, the strapless design makes it easy to take on and off — after a C-section, you'll want to reduce as much strain potential as possible. Even better, the pillow’s seam-free panel also ensures that nothing uncomfortable will rub on your incision site.

What sets this nursing pillow apart from others is just how high it sits around your waist, providing baby with a safe place rest while feeding. It's also a fan-favorite among all new parents (C-section or not!) for its cushy feel and removable cover that’s can be tossed in the washing machine without worry.

Also worth noting: You can use this later on for tummy time and sitting support when baby gets older. Just never have your baby sit on it unsupervised, and they should never sleep in it.

Community Reviews

“My boppy was a lifesaver in the hospital.”

“I had my second C-section last week, and I really like using my boppy. I know some don’t like it, but it’s what works for me. Good support for babe and protects my stomach. Also, if you can get an abdominal binder to offer extra protection to your stomach, it may help.”

“Boppy pillow really helps for keeping your incision protected while breastfeeding or holding baby.”

“My number one must-have is a comfortable nursing pillow! I personally love my Boppy pillow, and it was literally the only way I could hold my firstborn for about a week because of the pain. My second was less painful, but it was still more comfortable to hold him using a pillow for a few days.”

“I liked the boppy pillow for breastfeeding and always had a lot of support pillows around me for my back.”

Best C-Section Scar Prevention Sheets

Nuvadermis Silicone Scar Sheets

Soft and flexible

Long-lasting

Can be cut to fit your scar

Adhesive may lose stickiness if you get extra sweaty

Count: 4 sheets

Size: 5.7 x 1.57 inches each

Why We Love It

These medical-grade silicone sheets by Nuvadermis create a breathable, protective barrier over your C-section scar to help soften, flatten, and fade it over time. The flexible design moves with your body, so you can wear them under clothes without irritation. My C-section scar was tender and sensitive for months, but applying silicone sheets like these regularly helped protect it and really promoted the healing process. These particular sheets are great because you can trim each sheet for a perfect fit over your incision, and each sheet can be used for up to a week at a time.

by Nuvadermis create a breathable, protective barrier over your C-section scar to help soften, flatten, and fade it over time. The flexible design moves with your body, so you can wear them under clothes without irritation. My C-section scar was tender and sensitive for months, but applying silicone sheets like these regularly helped protect it and really promoted the healing process. These particular sheets are great because you can trim each sheet for a perfect fit over your incision, and each sheet can be used for up to a week at a time.

Tested by Tika Fender , mom of one and Senior Art Director at What to Expect:

"My scars tend to heal a bit thick, so the scar sheets really helped minimize the appearance of such a large scar. I noticed a huge difference between my C-section scar and my appendectomy scar, where I had open surgery and didn’t use any preventative scar treatments."

Community Reviews

“I started using the sheets 6 weeks postpartum. I’m now 18 weeks postpartum, and my scar looks amazing. Some areas are barely visible. I highly recommend, it’s definitely not too late to start.”

“I’ve used them for all 3 C-sections and it really helps.”

“I used silicone sheets for 5 months and they helped a ton!”

Best C-Section Scar Prevention Cream

Skinuva Scar+ Cream

Includes SPF

Creamy texture

A little goes a long way

Pricey

Formula: Highly selective growth factors, Hyaluronic acid, silicone, vitamin C, centella asiatica, and zinc oxide

Why We Love It

For some moms, silicone sheets may be more irritating than helpful (and, to be honest, those patches weren't even really a thing after my own deliveries!). Creams and gels with silicone have also been proven to work just as well. It's really up to your personal preference. For instance, What to Expect's Shopping Director, Liz Buxton, first tried similar scar trips that her OB had recommended, but found that they didn't do much. She also hated pulling them off her still-tender incision. A friend swore by Skinuva post-op, so she gave it a shot and never looked back.

Tested by Liz Buxton , mom of one who had an unexpected C-section:

"It’s a cooling silicone gel that feels super soothing and easy to apply twice a day (I do it when I wake up and before bed). Bonus: It got me into the habit of massaging the scar, which I wasn’t doing enough with the strips. It also has SPF to help prevent discoloration. Pricey, yes — but totally worth it. My scar is noticeably smoother, flatter, and less red."

Doctor's Note:

Hold off on using until your incision site has completely healed.

Best Postpartum Belly Binder

KeaBabies Revive 3-in-1 Belly Support Recovery Wrap

Fully adjustable for targeted compression

Breathable and stretchy fabric

Can feel bulky under tight clothing

Material: Elastic mesh

Size range: M/L, XL, 2XL

Why We Love It

After a C-section, having the core support of a good belly binder can make moving, standing, and even laughing much less painful. The best binder after cesarean is one that helps stabilize your midsection while your abdominal muscles and incision heal. The KeaBabies Revive is an adjustable wrap system that has three separate bands to support your belly, waist, and hips. You can use one, two, or all three bands, depending on how much compression you need and where. Plus, you can loosen it easily when you need to sit or nurse.

After a C-section, having the core support of a good belly binder can make moving, standing, and even laughing much less painful. The

after cesarean is one that helps stabilize your midsection while your abdominal muscles and incision heal. The

is an adjustable wrap system that has three separate bands to support your belly, waist, and hips. You can use one, two, or all three bands, depending on how much compression you need and where. Plus, you can loosen it easily when you need to sit or nurse.

"I really liked this binder because it comes with a pelvic belt that provides extra support to the lower abdomen.”

Doctor's Note from Sheeta Dedania , M.D.:

“I advise wearing the band low around the hips where it covers the incision. High placement makes it more uncomfortable and restrictive, especially for deep breaths. The belly bands help with comfort, especially when coughing, laughing, and sneezing.”

Community Reviews

mamadani02 “I’m 3 weeks postpartum today (2nd C-section) and have been using one since day 3. It helps with my posture so much, and I have very minimal back pain. I didn’t start wearing one after my first C-section for a few weeks, and once I started, I wish I had started sooner.”

DaniFbaby “I had an emergency C-section. I wear mine a lot of the day. I like the extra support.”

Best Supportive Postpartum Underwear

The All-In Panty by Bodily

High-waisted

Machine washable and durable

Gentle on skin

Pricey

Materials: 95% cotton, 5% spandex

Size range: XS–XXL

Why We Love It

Specifically designed for postpartum bodies, The All-In Panty by Bodily stretches where you need it but stays in place when you’re moving around. The high waist is perfect for keeping your scar area covered and comfortable during those first sensitive weeks. These high-waisted panties are made from ultra-soft, breathable cotton with light compression to gently support your midsection. The wide waistband sits well above your incision, so there’s absolutely no rubbing or digging.

stretches where you need it but stays in place when you’re moving around. The high waist is perfect for keeping your scar area covered and comfortable during those first sensitive weeks. These high-waisted panties are made from ultra-soft, breathable cotton with light compression to gently support your midsection. The wide waistband sits well above your incision, so there’s absolutely no rubbing or digging.

Tested by Liz Buxton , mom of one and Shopping Director at What to Expect:

"I’m usually a commando girly, but postpartum called for a little more support. These were the only undies I could tolerate near my healing incision — insanely soft, buttery, and stretchy in all the right ways. They held up great in the wash (no pilling!) and somehow still look cute, not like grandma panties. I’m nearly a year out and still wear them to bed. That’s how comfy they are."

Doctor's Note from Sheeta Dedania , M.D.:

“Mesh underwear, especially the disposable kind, is helpful in the immediate post-c-section timeframe. After that, I generally recommend underwear that will either be below or above the incision, and that does not sit right on the incision, to be the most comfortable.”

Community Reviews

“Kind of pricey but soo soft and comfy.”

“I’ve been wearing them with pads since I got home from the hospital.”

“I got the Bodily All-In Panty in a few colors a month or so ago and am ordering more. They’re so comfortable and will be perfect for postpartum too! Highly recommend!”

“The Bodily All In Panty is great. I've been wearing them during pregnancy, and plan to afterwards as well. Their site has some really great things to choose from.”

Best High-Waist Leggings for C-Section Recovery

Lululemon Align Leggings

Lots of sizes

lengths and colors available

super comfortable

durable

Epensive

Material: 90% nylon, 10% lycra elastane lining and body

Size range: 0-20

Why We Love It

Not only are Lululemon’s famed Align leggings a big hit with moms-to-be, they're also beloved by those of us who have been through a C-section. The leggings boast a buttery soft fabric and a high waistband that helps support your midsection without irritating your scar.

a big hit with moms-to-be, they're also beloved by those of us who have been through a C-section. The leggings boast a buttery soft fabric and a high waistband that helps support your midsection without irritating your scar.

Truth be told, these are the exact leggings I wish I had invested in during my C-section recovery because now I wear them regularly and know firsthand just how comfortable they truly are. While these leggings are admittedly an investment, one pair has lasted me years.

But the stretchy fit isn't the only reason you should buy them. An invisible pocket in the waistband holds your phone or credit card when you venture out, and they work nicely as workout leggings or just for lounging with your newborn. And with many sizes and three different inseams available, it’s easy to find your perfect fit.

Tested by Olivia DeLong , mom of one and Senior Health Editor at What to Expect:

“I loved them post-C-section because they were super comfortable with regards to compression (rather than super tight) and I felt they helped hold things in around my tummy area. I sized up during pregnancy, but found that after birth, I was able to wear both sizes, which I loved since I truly got the most use out of everything I purchased.”

Community Reviews

“They are a little pricey, but I usually find them on sale in their overstock section of the website. “Lululemon Align leggings are amazing for PP. They are high-waisted and super comfy.”

“Lululemon’s aligns, 100% worth it!”

“Lululemon Align is so worth the investment. I wore all of pregnancy and now post-c-section almost daily. They stretch the perfect amount.”

“I wore lululemon align leggings mostly. They aren’t overly compressive and high-waisted. They’re stretchy enough that I wore them my whole pregnancy (I had a huge bump), so they were great postpartum too.”

Best Loose PJs for Postpartum Resting

Kindred Bravely Clea Bamboo Long Sleeve Sleep Shirt

Soft and comfortable

nursing friendly

More expensive than other nightshirts

Material: 95% bamboo viscose, 5% Spandex

Size range: S-XXL/1X

Why We Love It

Comfort is key during C-section recovery, and that goes double when it’s time for bed. This loose-fitting nightshirt from mom-approved brand Kindred Bravely won’t put pressure on your scar, allowing you to feel cozy at night or in between feedings. It also unbuttons quickly for easy nursing access if you’re breastfeeding. Hidden pockets at the sides are the right size for holding your phone, binkies and other essentials when your hands are otherwise occupied.

Comfort is key during C-section recovery, and that goes double when it’s time for bed. This loose-fitting

from mom-approved brand Kindred Bravely won’t put pressure on your scar, allowing you to feel cozy at night or in between feedings. It also unbuttons quickly for easy nursing access if you’re breastfeeding. Hidden pockets at the sides are the right size for holding your phone, binkies and other essentials when your hands are otherwise occupied.

“I loved this shirt because it was sooo soft and cozy — and honestly, I felt somewhat put together when I wore it (a hard feeling to come by as a new mom recovering). I was in the hospital for a few weeks prior to giving birth, and I purchased this while there and wore it pre- and post-birth.”

Community Reviews

“I have the nursing nightgowns from Kindred Bravely! Sooo comfy and def easy access!”

“I also have been loving nightgowns. I bought one from Kindred Bravely that’s super soft and comfy and will be great for postpartum!”

“Last time was a planned C-section and I brought my favorite kindred bravely nursing gown and my robe, and I showered and changed into them the next morning. I felt so much better/put together. I plan to do the same this time, too.”

“I wear Kindred Bravely nursing gowns and get so much use out of them even post-nursing. I’m going to buy more this time!”

Best Heating Pad for Easing Incision Pain

Pure Enrichment PureRelief XL Heating Pad

Works quickly

Auto shutoff

Oversized design and surface area

Must be plugged in

Size: 12 x 24 inches

Why We Love It

Per the ACOG, using a heating pad may be helpful for incision scar pain relief after a C-section. This heating pad from Pure Enrichment is oversized to cover your entire pelvis, bringing soothing heat to all your sore areas. (WTE moms report using heating pads on their incision scars, lower back, and shoulders to relieve trapped gas — yes, that’s a real thing! I genuinely thought something was wrong until my doctor explained that gas can more easily become trapped after birth and cause sharp pains. )

I genuinely thought something was wrong until my doctor explained that gas can more easily become trapped after birth and cause sharp pains.

Pro tip: I also loved sitting on my heating pad to help calm the pain in my tailbone where I got my epidural.

This one from Pure Enrichment warms up fast, with six different settings to allow you to get the right temperature for your needs. The soft microplush fabric cover won’t irritate your skin, and it can be tossed in the wash when you’re done. A nine-foot cord gives you a little room, so you’re not stuck right next to an outlet. It also shuts off automatically after two hours for extra peace of mind.

Community Reviews

“I had a scheduled C-section with my second child, and for me, my heating pad was a total lifesaver !! I took it to the hospital with me and used it the whole time, which really helped me feel better.”

“I got induced and labored/pushed, then ended up with a C-section. I brought a heating pad for labor but used it a ton postpartum to deal with the shoulder gas pain (super common) and the crazy hormone temperature fluctuations.”

“I used a heating pad, and it provided me with a lot of comfort. I keep it on my nursing chair so I can use it while I feed baby girl.”

“A heating pad—I brought this last time for trapped gas that I’ve always gotten after a C-section. That time, my doctor had me up and walking asap and no trapped gas! It was a miracle. I still used the heating pad for the after pains though, and it was lovely.”

Best Body Wipes for Cleaning Post-Op

Nurture Valley Ultra Thick Body Wipes

Easy to use

disposable

no water needed

Some found the wipes were too big

Count: 1 pack of 40 wipes Size: 9 x 9 inches

Why We Love It

Heads up: It usually takes a day or so before you’re cleared to shower after a C-section. Then, between having major surgery and caring for a newborn, you may not feel like showering at all — and that’s okay. These body wipes will help you get clean without the hassel of getting undressed, stepping into a tub, and scrubbing. I know all too well the desire to not move much at all post-op.

No rinsing is needed with Nature Valley's generously-sized, 9-by-9-inch wipes. Just pull one out, wipe yourself down, and go about your day. These deodorize thanks to Chamomille extract, while the addition of aloe vera and vitamin E leaves your skin feeling moisturized.

Community Reviews

mirandamistretta “I seriously smelled so bad after my first, and wasn’t able to shower until day 2. Body wipes saved me.”

WhoaMama “At my hospital, they won’t let you shower right away. But the OR makes your skin super dry and itchy. All the surgical scrubs they use on you dry and feel gross to me. There’s adhesive on you from all the leads, IV and everything. Body wipes and dry shampoo can make you feel more human before they’ll let you shower.”

Best Large Water Bottle for C-Section Recovery

Nalgene Sustain Tritan Wide-Mouth Water Bottle

Durable

large size

lightweight

Need two hands to open lid

no straw

Volume : 32 ounces

Why We Love It

Staying hydrated is important, both for your recovery from surgery and breastfeeding. This Nalgene water bottle holds up to 32 ounces and has a wide mouth for easy drinking. The bottle is BPA-free and has a screw cap that connects to the bottle with a loop you can hook around your diaper bag strap for quick access. Clear metrics on the side help you keep track of how much water you’ve had.

Other perks of the classic water bottle, according to a WTE mom superfan: "They are cheap, absurdly sturdy (like, you buy one and it'll hold you for your entire natural life) and come in an absolute plethora of colors and lots of different themes.” The only downside is that they don’t come with a straw and might be too wide to fit in some cupholders.

Community Reviews

northelizabeth You need a ton of water to produce milk. The best way I found for myself to make sure I drink enough is to keep one of those 32 oz Nalgene bottles next to me. You should drink four a day, and the fact that it's 32 oz makes it super easy to keep track!

Best Peri Bottle for Postpartum Bathroom Trips

Frida Mom Upside Down Peri Bottle

Genuinely helpful

easy to use

Better than the hospital freebie

Expensive for what it is

Material: Plastic

Dimensions: 3.1 x 3.1 x 6.7 inches

Volume:10 ounces

Why We Love It

Even if you didn’t have a vaginal delivery, a peri bottle — which sprays clean water over your nether regions to cleanse — can be incredibly useful when recovering from a C-section. You’ll still bleed postpartum, so a peri bottle can keep you feeling fresh without needing to bend and reach to clean yourself (which can be so hard right after surgery).

While hospitals often give new moms a peri bottle to use, WTE community moms swear by the more upscale Frida Mom version . A few tweaks on the classic design, like an upside-down nozzle for easier handling and a large canister to hold 10 ounces of water, make it much more user-friendly than your typical peri bottle. It also comes with a carrying case to bring with you to the hospital or on the go.

. A few tweaks on the classic design, like an upside-down nozzle for easier handling and a large canister to hold 10 ounces of water, make it much more user-friendly than your typical peri bottle. It also comes with a carrying case to bring with you to the hospital or on the go.

For something a bit fancier and far more luxurious, many moms swear by bidets, like those from Tushy .

Doctor's Note from Matthew Carrol, M.D.:

“For patients who had to push before ultimately having a cesarean, a peri bottle might be a comfort for that area as well.”

Community Reviews

“I think the Frida mom peri bottle was good cuz it is hard to bend over, and that is angled, so it works really well compared to the bottle they give in the hospital.”

“[Wiping] didn’t hurt for me, but I still used the bottle. They gave me a regular one in the hospital, but I bought the Frida one because it curves and was easier to use.”

“I really liked the Frida Mom peribottle for both my postpartum experiences.”

“I loved the Frida mom Peri bottle. Was super easy to use and just use warm water.”

Best Compression Socks for C-Section Swelling

Fitrell Compression Socks

Breathable fabric

Graduated compression

Snug fit but doesn’t cut off feeling

Can be tricky to pull on without help right after surgery

Material: Microfiber Nylon

Size: S/M or L/XL

Pressure Level: 20-30mmHg

Why We Love It

I didn’t realize I would need compression socks after my first C-section, but I made sure they were in my hospital bag before I had my second. Post-surgery swelling in your legs and feet is common after a C-section — especially since you’ll be lying down a lot. Compression socks can help reduce that puffiness and keep your blood moving, which is especially important after surgery.

after my first C-section, but I made sure they were in my hospital bag before I had my second. Post-surgery swelling in your legs and feet is common after a C-section — especially since you’ll be lying down a lot. Compression socks can help reduce that puffiness and keep your blood moving, which is especially important after surgery.

These graduated compression socks apply gentle pressure from your ankles up to your calves to improve circulation and reduce swelling. Don’t be afraid to ask for help if you need it when putting them on right after surgery if you’re not feeling up to bending and reaching quite yet.

apply gentle pressure from your ankles up to your calves to improve circulation and reduce swelling. Don’t be afraid to ask for help if you need it when putting them on right after surgery if you’re not feeling up to bending and reaching quite yet.

"I didn’t realize foot swelling was normal after a C-section. It was so uncomfortable to walk or put any pressure on my feet, but the compression socks really helped reduce the swelling and made walking more manageable."

Community Reviews

“This time around, I am getting compression socks because the swelling was insane.”

“Mine was unscheduled, but I was SO glad that I had compression socks. My feet & ankles have been totally fine throughout the entire pregnancy. Had a C-section and they blew up for a week”

“I was insanely swollen after my C-section for about a week or two. Compression socks made a huge difference.”

What Doctors Want You to Know About C-Section Recovery

Recovery after a C-section isn’t one-size-fits-all experience, but there are common milestones. Here’s the general timeline of what to expect:

The first few days: Pain, swelling, and limited mobility are normal. You’ll likely still be in the hospital for part of this period. Dr. Dedania says the first days are “quite challenging — navigating the pain, mobility, and caring for a newborn.”

Around two weeks: Many moms notice a big improvement in mobility and energy. You may be able to do more activities independently, but still avoid heavy lifting or intense exercise.

Six to eight weeks: Most people are cleared for normal activity by this point, provided there are no complications. Your provider will confirm whether your incision has healed and if you can resume exercise or sexual activity.

Beyond two months: You may feel “close to normal,” but some soreness, swelling, or sensitivity can last up to three months.

Contact your provider right away if you notice any of the following:

Increased redness, swelling, or warmth around your incision.

Fever or chills.

Pus or foul-smelling discharge from your incision.

Severe pain that’s not relieved by medication.

Heavy vaginal bleeding or large clots.

These may be signs of infection or other complications that need immediate attention.

Aside from these physical cocerns, C-section recovery can take a toll emotionally, too. Some moms feel frustrated by the slower healing pace, but you can also feel sad or guilty if your birth didn’t go as planned — I definitely did, particularly after my first C-section. Dr. Dedania emphasizes that “everyone’s recovery pace is different, and patients should listen to their bodies.” This applies to your mental health as much as your physical recovery.

If you’re feeling down, anxious, or disconnected from your baby, reach out to your provider. Postpartum mood changes are common and treatable, and seeking support can make a huge difference.

If you’re feeling down, anxious, or disconnected from your baby, reach out to your provider.

are common and treatable, and seeking support can make a huge difference.

C-section Recovery FAQs

How long does it take to recover from a C-section?

According to Dr. Dedania and Dr. Carroll, most people need about six to eight weeks before they’re ready to resume normal activity. The first few days are the toughest, but you’ll likely notice a big improvement around the two-week mark. (That’s when many moms are cleared to drive again.) Recovery speed varies, so listen to your body and your doctor.

When can I start walking or light movement safely?

Gentle movement, like short walks around your home, can usually start in the first few days after surgery — as long as you feel up to it, that is. Avoid anything strenuous until your provider clears you, although that's typically at your six-week postpartum check.

Should I use ice or heat on the incision area?

Ice can help reduce swelling and discomfort in the early days. Once your doctor confirms healing progress, gentle heat from a heating pad may help with stiffness or soreness, but always check before starting.

What kind of underwear is best when healing?

In the hospital, disposable mesh underwear is your absolute best friend. Once you’re home, Dr. Dedania recommends choosing underwear that sits either well above or below your incision to avoid irritation. High-waisted styles are a go-to for many moms (just like my favorite from Bodily).

How soon can I massage my scar safely?

Massaging your scar — especially if you’re considering a scar massage tool — should wait until your provider confirms your incision is fully healed, usually around six weeks postpartum. At that point, Dr. Dedania suggests options like cocoa butter, scar creams, or silicone scar sheets over massagers.

Do I still need a peri bottle after a C-section?

Yes! Even though it’s more often associated with vaginal births, you’ll still have postpartum bleeding and discharge (lochia) for several weeks. A peri bottle (aka a perineal rinse bottle) is a small bottle that typically has a long neck that is designed to help you rinse off and keep your area clean. Using a peri bottle personally made bathroom trips much more comfortable for me.

Yes! Even though it’s more often associated with vaginal births, you’ll still have postpartum bleeding and discharge (lochia) for several weeks.

What C-section recovery product factors should I consider before purchasing?

There are a few factors you may want to consider when searching for C-section recovery products. Those can include:

Type of relief provided: There are a range of products that can help you feel better after a C-section, and each does something different. Some products (like ibuprofen) might help reduce pain and swelling, while others might help you address common postpartum complaints (like constipation or abdominal discomfort). Consider the kind of side effects the product addresses, and how it may be helpful.

Multiple purposes: If you are short on space or budget, you may want to consider products that can be used for a variety of purposes, not explicitly just C-section recovery.

Fit: The way items fit after a C-section is crucial. In general, you want things that are either loose or high-waisted to avoid putting direct pressure on your C-section scar, which takes time to heal.

Wound-specific items: Some items are especially designed to help with your C-section scar by making it less painful or helping it heal faster.

American Academy of Dermatology, Scars: Diagnosis and Treatment , Undated. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, FAQs: Cesarean Birth , October 2021. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, FAQs: Postpartum Pain Management , August 2022. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Your Pregnancy and Childbirth Month to Month , 5th Edition, 2021. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Elastic Abdominal Binders Reduce Cesarean Pain Postoperatively: A Randomized Controlled Pilot Trial , May 2018. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Opioid Induced Constipation , August 2022. National Library of Medicine, PubChem, Docusate sodium , February 2023. Matthew Carroll, M.D. , Assistant Professor, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. Christine Greves , M.D., OB-GYN, Winnie Palmer Hospital for Women and Babies, Orlando, Florida. Jennifer Wider , M.D., New York City, New York.

Your Next Read

What to Expect After a C-Section: Real-Mom Tips for Healing and Newborn Care By Heidi Murkoff

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's How Your Body Changes After Having Twins or Multiples Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Postpartum Recovery Timeline Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Products to Make Postpartum Sex More Comfortable Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Sex After C-Section Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Best Products for Postpartum Stretch Marks Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Having a C-Section? Here’s What You Should Know Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Breastfeeding After a C-Section Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

C-Section Scars: Types, Care and Healing Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your No-Nonsense Hospital Bag Checklist: What to Pack and What to Skip Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Postpartum Symptoms You Might Experience After Giving Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

What I Wish Someone Told Me About Pelvic Floor Recovery Before I Gave Birth Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Postpartum Pelvic Floor Exercises Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window