The $6 ‘Instant’ Blackout Hack That Actually Keeps a Nursery Dark

RediShade blackout blinds installed in a nursery

Bright sunshine was waking my baby before dawn, so I tried a $6 DIY solution.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

After I stumbled into my crying baby’s room and blinked at the too-bright rays, I knew we had a problem. The summer sunlight was waking up my three-month-old at the actual crack of dawn, and I was over it messing up her sleep routine. But like most people, I didn’t have $100 to drop on premium blackout blinds or curtains. As I tried to rock my very awake baby back to sleep, I searched for dupes and found the perfect solution: $6 paper shades.

RediShade blackout blinds installed in a nursery

Available at Walmart, RediShade blinds are the perfect dupe to pricey blackout curtains. At $5.47 each, they can be cut to the exact size of your window using a box cutter. Plus, they have double-sided adhesive for quick installation. Want proof? I had these both cut and installed in less than 15 minutes.

But do RediShade blinds work as well as blackout curtains? As soon as I got the paper shades installed, I shut off the lights. To my relief, the room was pitch black. And it was almost time for the real test: nap time. My baby, who was firmly stuck on 32 minute naps, slept for over an hour! And the next day? She slept until almost 7 a.m.! I was officially sold.

RediShade blackout blinds installed in a nursery

For a paper product, these blinds are remarkably high-quality: a thick, strong, nearly indestructible material. (They haven’t torn even once since installation, despite opening and closing the window frequently and pulling the blinds up most mornings.) Nearly two years later, these are still on my now-toddler’s windows and they continue to do a fantastic job keeping the light out so she can sleep soundly during naps and bright early early mornings.

The only issue I had with these shades is that they don’t stay up when you actually want to let in some light. I solved this issue by placing Velcro squares on the bottom of the blinds and the window frame.

RediShade Blinds

Your New Nursery Dupe

As a mom of two, I’ve bought a lot of stuff for my kids, but I have found very few life-changing products that cost this little money. I did get fancy blackout blinds for my first baby and in hindsight, I wish I had known that these RediShade paper blinds existed! Now, I tell all of my friends they should skip the pricey blackout curtains – and you should too.

Your Next Read

How to Use the Bedtime Fading Sleep Training Method Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Smart Tips for Getting Your Baby to Sleep Anywhere (Yep, Even on Vacation) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Teach Your Baby the Difference Between Day and Night So Everyone Gets More Sleep Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Understanding Wake Windows by Age and How to Time Baby's Naps for Better Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Toddler Afraid of the Dark? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Babies and Toddlers Adjust to Daylight Saving Time (and Back Again!) Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Creating a Nursery on a Budget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Space-Saving Tips for Baby’s Nursery By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

14 Ways to Save Money on Diapers Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Sundown with a Newborn Was the Absolute Worst — Here's How I Came Out the Other Side By Jess Darrington, What to Expect mom

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window