The 4-Month Well-Baby Visit

baby at doctor, four month well baby visit

Here's what will happen at your little one's 4-month well-baby visit, including the physical checkup, developmental milestones and shots.

Rolling over, reaching, grabbing and giggles — at 4 months old, your infant’s changing so fast that it’s hard to keep up! Your baby’s doctor will want to note every adorable new skill at this month’s checkup, which will also include another round of vaccines. Here’s what you can expect.

The physical checkup

It’s checkup time — and that means you get to check out your little one’s growth. Your baby’s doctor will look at the overall trend of your baby’s length, weight and head circumference measurements. Are your baby’s length and weight increasing at a healthy pace? Is he happy, active and alert? Is development on target?

If the answer to these questions is yes, then whether he’s in the 10th or the 90th percentile at his 4-month visit doesn’t matter ... he’s just the right size for him!

Your doctor will also perform checks of baby’s eyes, hearing and overall health.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that moms be screened for postpartum depression at the 4-month checkup, so ask if you have any questions about your moods or your partner’s.

Developmental milestones

Your little one does much of his developing while he sleeps — although you may be wondering when he’ll develop the ability to sleep through the night! Some (but certainly not all) babies start to sleep for longer stretches at night around 12 weeks, and some even sleep through the night.

The doctor will want to know all about your infant’s sleep patterns , including naps and nighttime sleep, so keep notes handy. Your baby’s doctor will also want to know if your baby is ...

Doing baby push-ups — raising his head and possibly his chest while on his tummy

Rolling from tummy to back ; some babies will have started flipping over, while others may not

Holding his head up when in your arms or even when held upright

Paying attention to small objects and trying to reach for everything he sees

Watching an object move in a 180-degree arc, from one side to the other

Mixing up those breathy coos with some consonants and other sweet sounds (laughing! giggling!)

Remember, every baby is one-of-a-kind — and there’s a wide range of normal when it comes to development. Still, if you have any concerns about your little one’s milestones , make sure you check with your doctor. You can also ask him or her about ways to keep your baby’s development on track or boost it.

4-month shots

With a cuddle, a favorite toy or pacifier, your baby will likely sail through this month’s vaccines.

Most will be the second dose in a series, and each one of the recommended doses is vital in helping protect your little one against serious illnesses. Vaccines given at the 4-month visit include:

Questions to ask your doctor

With new milestones, there are sure to be new questions. Here are some things you may want to ask the pediatrician about at this well-baby visit :

My baby is starting to sleep for longer stretches overnight. Is it time to start sleep training ?

He's drooling up a storm and sucking on everything — could he be teething already?

My baby is starting to suck his thumb. Should I discourage him from doing it?

When should we transition him from a bassinet to a crib ?

Is it safe to keep swaddling him?

How many poops should he be doing a day now?

As always, don’t forget to make the next appointment — this time for baby’s 6-month visit — before leaving the doctor's office.