The 8 Best Postnatal Vitamins Are Packed With Nutrients and Easy To Swallow

Best Postnatal Vitamins: Six different bottles of various postnatal vitamins including Ritual and Nature Made

QUICK SUMMARY

According to OB/GYNs and moms, the best postnatal vitamin is the Nature Made Postnatal with DHA because it packs all the nutrients new moms need in a small, easy-to-swallow pill.

with DHA because it packs all the nutrients new moms need in a small, easy-to-swallow pill.

I would have paid (almost!) anything for a pill to make me feel more like myself after childbirth. Although no magical postpartum pill exists, there are plenty of postnatal vitamins that promise to fortify your body with nutrients your diet may be missing after pregnancy. As a mom of four little ones, it feels like I’ve tried them all.

Yes, it’s technically possible to get all the essentials through a balanced diet rich in animal proteins, beans, and lentils. But David Ilceski, M.D ., a board-certified OB/GYN at UnityPoint Health in Fort Dodge, says nothing beats the convenience of a postnatal vitamin — especially if you aren’t eating the most consistently balanced diet in the weeks following childbirth.

“I’m a fan of postnatals,” agrees new mom and dietitian Jessica Cording, R.D ., also author of The Little Book of Game-Changers . “Your nutritional needs are higher to support the healing process. There’s a lot of recovery that needs to happen.” And, if you’re breastfeeding, it’s crucial to do what you can to take care of things on the nutritional front for both you and your baby, points out Christine Greves, M.D ., a board-certified OB/GYN at the Winnie Palmer Hospital for Women and Babies in Orlando, Florida.

While it’s just fine to finish up your prenatal vitamins , or return to vitamins you took pre-pregnancy, postnatals are designed to deliver specific nutrients new moms need to keep energy levels up and help ensure breast milk contains all the essential nutrients that exclusively breastfed newborns need.

How I Tested and Chose the Best Postnatal Vitamins

The best postnatal vitamin has to do it all: Provide the right nutrients (and the right amount of them) to support your body through the postpartum period, and be something you’ll willingly take daily. With so many options at the pharmacy, I narrowed down the eight best postnatal vitamins by:

Leaning heavily on my experience using postnatal vitamins after four pregnancies (I’m currently postpartum and using one of these supplements religiously, too.)

Consulting with Drs. Ilceski and Greves, as well as Cording and Jill Purdie, M.D ., a board-certified OB/GYN in Atlanta, Georgia to learn what nutrients are needed in a good postnatal vitamin.

Reading through postnatal vitamin reviews in the What to Expect Community message board, paying close attention to ones that were recommended for their tolerability and cost.

Each vitamin that made the final list also needed to meet the following criteria:

Certified by governing bodies: Since the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) doesn’t regulate supplements like postnatal vitamins, I only considered those that have been certified by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) and United States Pharmacopeia (USP) , indicating the vitamins are tested for quality and safety.

Easy to tolerate: Pill size, flavor and aftertaste can impact your willingness to consume a postnatal vitamin, making these important factors.

Cause minimal side effects: “Some people may tolerate certain vitamins better than others in regards to GI-related side effects, like nausea or constipation,” says Dr. Purdie.

Have a relatively affordable price tag: Rarely are new parents flush with extra funds. To ensure your dollars are well-spent, we considered the cost per supplement serving.

A Doctor’s Note on Postnatal Vitamins

Doctors recommend keeping a few things in mind when it comes to taking a postnatal vitamin:

You don’t have to take one of these. As we mentioned above, you can technically get all of your nutritional needs from your diet. But many new moms are busy, making good nutrition less of a priority during this time. A postnatal vitamin easily allows you to fill in those nutritional gaps.

You can finish up your prenatal vitamins. Dr. Greves points out that you can technically take your prenatal vitamins in the postpartum period (I’ve done this, too). But these are designed for pregnancy, and you may not be filling all of your nutritional gaps as well if you take these supplements during the postpartum period.

Talk to your doctor if you’re unsure. Many will recommend taking some kind of supplement during this period in your life, according to Dr. Greves. But they can help answer your questions about any individual needs you have, as well as suggest certain nutrients to focus on.

Best Postnatal Vitamin

Nature Made Postnatal +200mg DHA

USP-certified

Gluten-free

No artificial flavors and colorings

Large pill size

Form: Softgel

Serving size: 1/day

Cost per serving: $0.35

Why We Love It

Nature Made's postnatal vitamins provide all the key nutrients found in prenatal supplements plus an extra dose of the ones you need a bit more of while nursing, such as vitamin A, C, D, and E. You get all this plus the all-important omega-3 fatty acids, which research suggests can help fend off mom brain and support breastfed babies’ brain and eye health, in a single pill. And, according to moms, there’s no fishy aftertaste. (I can confirm that, too!) Coming in at $0.35 per serving, it’s as friendly on the wallet as it is on the palate.

provide all the key nutrients found in prenatal supplements plus an extra dose of the ones you need a bit more of while nursing, such as vitamin A, C, D, and E. You get all this plus the all-important omega-3 fatty acids, which research suggests can help

according to moms, there’s no fishy aftertaste. (I can confirm that, too!) Coming in at $0.35 per serving, it’s as friendly on the wallet as it is on the palate.

I initially was intimidated by the larger size of this 1-inch capsule, but it goes down easy. I had no issues while taking it and, like many moms, I appreciated the lower price tag. It’s hard to compare the impact of supplements during the postpartum period, but I felt good and energized when I took Nature Made after having my baby. Many other moms report similar results.

Vegetarian and vegan moms, however, should take note: The vitamin contains soybean and animal ingredients such as gelatin and beeswax.

Community Reviews

KeengMama “I use Nature Made postnatals. Affordable and have been beneficial for me.”

Best Affordable Postnatal Vitamin

One A Day Postnatal Complete Multivitamin

Contains DHA and EPA

Gluten-free

No synthetic coloring and high fructose corn syrup

Not vegetarian

Form: Softgels

Serving size: 1/day

Cost per serving: $0.35

Why We Love It

One A Day’s postnatal multivitamins deliver a buffet of nutrients designed to tick every box on the list of postpartum nutrition needs, from B vitamins to improve low energy to biotin for hair and nail health.It also contains omega-3 DHA derived from anchovies, sardines, and tuna, though you’d never guess this from the taste.

for hair and nail health.It also contains omega-3 DHA derived from anchovies, sardines, and tuna, though you’d never guess this from the taste.

While I’ve tried a range of postnatal vitamins, One a Day has been my frequent go-to. This softgel’s coating makes it go down easily. Plus, I have minimal fish burps with it, especially when I take it with breakfast. It’s relatively affordable and frequently on sale, so I try to stock up when I find a lower-than-usual price. I like that the company delivers a consistently high-quality product, too.

Community Reviews

“I used Nature Made but they got harder to find so I’ve been doing One a Day.”

“I bought the women’s one a day postnatal complete, planning to still supplement with natal choline and DHA omega 3!”

Best Vegetarian Postnatal Vitamin

MegaFood Baby & Me 2 Postnatal Multi Vitamin

Free of common allergens and GMOs

Can be taken on an empty stomach

Includes ingredients that may support milk production

Large pill

Have to take two per day

Form: Capsule

Serving size: 2/day

Cost per serving: $0.44

Why We Love It

Free from common postnatal vitamin ingredients such as fish oil, gelatin, and beeswax, MegaFood’s postnatal vitamin is an ideal option for vegetarian moms. Formulated from foods like oranges and brown rice, this postnatal vitamin contains ample servings of all the standard postnatal nutrients needed. It also contains moringa leaf , which limited research suggests may help increase your milk production by delivering protein, iron, and vitamin. (Some users, however, reported that the supplements reduced their milk supply, so take that with a grain of salt.) At $0.44 per serving, this is still on the lower end of the price range for postnatals. Just be aware that you’ll need to take two tablets over the standard one in order to get your daily dose.

Community Reviews

peachprincess435 “I really like my postnatal, I take MegaFood’s postnatal multi, I used their prenatal too and thought it was great!”

BMDbb3 “Megafood Baby & Me 2 postnatal (I swear by this brand)!!”

Best Vegan Postnatal Vitamin

Ritual Postpartum Essentials Multivitamin

Free of major allergens and gluten

Subscriptions available

Some complain about pill taste and smell

Doesn’t contain calcium

Form: Softgel

Serving size: 2/day

Cost per serving: $1.47

Why We Love It

Ritual postnatal vitamins deliver D3 , magnesium , and boron to boost bone health and calcium absorption, plus an alphabet full of nutrients ( A, C, and D ) to support immune functioning. It’s also got biotin , iodine , and zinc to keep your energy metabolism churning.

) to support immune functioning. It’s also got

The absence of animal products has no bearing on this third-party-certified supplement’s quality: Although its omega-3 fatty acids comes from microalgae rather than fish, and its vitamin D comes from the fungi-algae lichen rather than fish liver or sheeps wool, a 12-week clinical study of over 100 postpartum women conducted by Auburn University and published in the medical journal Frontiers in Nutrition found that Ritual’s ingredients increased blood levels of both ingredients.

Free of GMOs and sustainably packed in 100% recyclable container and shipping materials, Ritual stands out from alternatives that contain animal-based ingredients; provide less transparency in ingredient sourcing; and/or individually pack pills that result in excess waste.

It’s worth noting that the vitamin is free of calcium, though the National Institutes of Health say it’s easy enough for vegans to get the nutrient from tofu and fortified plant-based milks.

Tested of Lisafe Carreon, mom of What to Expect's Senior Product Manager, who also loves Ritual's prenatal:

“They’re easy to swallow, have a fresh citrus aftertaste, and the clear bottle makes it super easy to see how many are left — a lifesaver for my forgetful mom brain.”

Community Reviews

“I second Ritual. I took their prenatal throughout my pregnancy and I’ve been taking the Ritual postnatal since I gave birth (my baby is 7months) and I didn’t have any hair loss or other symptoms that usually come after giving birth.”

“I have loved ritual postnatal vitamins.”

“I’ve made the switch to Ritual postnatal and I am loving them! Way less hair loss and I’ve never had a drop in my milk (knock on wood). I’m sooo thankful because there are plenty of days where I don’t eat how I should but I’m thankful to be getting the vitamins needed for breastfeeding.”

Best Postnatal Gummy Vitamin

Centrum Postnatal Multivitamin Gummy

Delicious strawberry taste

USDA organic

Can be used before and after pregnancy

FSA-elligible

Contains added sugar

Form: Gummies

Serving size: 2/day

Cost per serving: $0.71

Why We Love It

If you struggle with tablets or softgels, gummy postnatal vitamins are an easier way to get the nutrients you need. MaryRuth Organics Prenatal & Postnatal Vitamins deliver ample amounts of vitamin A, D, folate and B12, along with biotin, which research suggests may improve hair and nail growth. It's also designed to be used during the pregnancy and postpartum periods, making for a seamless transition.

If you struggle with tablets or softgels, gummy postnatal vitamins are an easier way to get the nutrients you need.

suggests may improve hair and nail growth. It's also designed to be used during the pregnancy and postpartum periods, making for a seamless transition.

Cording says she’s had several new mom clients do well with Mary Ruth’s. This gummy is certified USDA organic and free of common allergens like dairy, soy, and nuts. Just be aware that each serving contains 4 grams of added sugar (you’ll want to factor that into your overall sugar intake for the day). But these chewable gummies come in a delicious strawberry flavor, and yes, they taste like a treat.

Best Postnatal Vitamin for Breastfeeding Moms

Naturelo Postnatal Vitamin

Vegan

Free of common allergens

Capsules can be opened and mixed into food

Lacks DHA

Have to take 3 capsules per day

Form: Capsule

Serving size: 3/day

Cost per serving: $0.57

Why We Love It

If you choose to breastfeed your baby, you’ll want to make sure your postnatal vitamin has nutrients that benefit your baby (in addition to the nutrients you need, of course.) Natuelo’s postnatal contains iodine and choline , which are essential for growth in breastfed babies. Naturelo postnatal vitamins also include a blend of ingredients like fenugreek , blessed thistle , fennel , stinging nettle , and alfalfa , all of which have been studied for their ability to increase milk production and/or quality.

, which are essential for growth in breastfed babies. Naturelo postnatal vitamins also include a blend of ingredients like

, all of which have been studied for their ability to increase milk production and/or quality.

One thing worth noting is that Naturelo’s postnatal vitamins don’t contain DHA, so new moms might want to take a dedicated DHA supplement, too. Another consideration is that Naturelo capsules are designed to be taken three times a day, which may be hard to remember, particularly for parents who are sleep-deprived. In other words? If you want an all-in-one (and one-and-done) vitamin, then this may not be the best option for you.

Community Reviews

340mommycw “I love naturelo and use it for pre and post natal.”

Best Postnatal Vitamin for Hair Loss

Baby Blues Postpartum Hair Vitamin

Gentle on the stomach

Contains ingredients found to help with hair loss

Fun passionfruit taste

Expensive

May need additional supplementation

Form: Gummies

Serving size: 2/day

Cost per serving: $1.01

Why We Love It

If your postpartum hair loss is causing concern, you may want to consider a postnatal vitamin that is extra rich in nutrients that combat hair loss and encourage hair growth. Many new moms recommend Baby Blues Postpartum Hair Vitamin , saying they notice a definitive difference in hair growth after several months of taking this vitamin. The gummy vitamin contains a host of nutrients with direct ties to hair health, including vitamin A for cell growth, collagen to build up hair proteins, and biotin to increase hair follicle growth. Although some research suggests the benefits of these ingredients may be overstated, user feedback — and some pretty incredible before-and-after photos — suggest otherwise.

If your postpartum hair loss is causing concern, you may want to consider a postnatal vitamin that is extra rich in nutrients that combat hair loss and encourage hair growth. Many new moms recommend

, saying they notice a definitive difference in hair growth after several months of taking this vitamin. The gummy vitamin contains a host of nutrients with direct ties to hair health, including vitamin A for cell growth, collagen to build up hair proteins, and biotin to increase hair follicle growth. Although some

suggests the benefits of these ingredients may be overstated, user feedback — and some pretty incredible before-and-after photos — suggest otherwise.

This supplement does, however, fall short on delivering 100% of lactating womens’ daily needs for vitamin C, D, iodine, and zinc. If you do decide this is the best option, then you should discuss supplementation with your doctor to ensure all your needs are met.

Community Reviews

londonbaby2023 “I have a 7 month old and have been taking Baby Blues for several months. Love them!!”

laurainebennett30 “I have them + their probiotic on subscription. Not trying to sound spammy but they literally transformed my hair last baby.”

Best Postnatal Vitamin Subscription

PinkStork Postnatal Vitamins With DHA

Easy to subscribe and save

Free of gluten

Packaged with a scented heart for palatability

Expensive

Form: Capsule

Serving size: 2/day

Cost per serving: $0.93

Why We Love It

New moms have enough on their plate, without having to remember to order or pick up their postnatal vitamins. Although PinkStork offers a one-year subscription service for new moms directly through its site, you can also take advantage of Amazon's "Subscribe and Save" coupon, which knocks 20% off your first order.

In addition to offering a super convenient service, PinkStork provides a nutrient-rich postnatal vitamin that’s designed to support postpartum recovery thanks to 20 clinically-proven ingredients, including copper for energy; B vitamins for fatigue; and biotin for hair and skin health.

Community Reviews

emoore618 “I take the Pink Stork postnatals and like them. I’m 4.5 months PP and have had some PP hair loss but from everything I’ve heard you really can’t do all that much to stop it.”

Parker123 “I’m taking pink stork: postpartum + dha, postpartum mood support and a lactation probiotic.”

Essential Postnatal Vitamin Ingredients

When analyzing the ingredient label of postnatal vitamins, experts recommend looking out for the following.

Iron: Iron is an essential nutrient that is an important component of hemoglobin, a protein in red blood cells that helps carry oxygen around your body. Blood loss and anemia (a condition where your body has lower-than-usual red blood cells) is common after childbirth, making it crucial to make sure you get enough iron, Dr. Greves says. Iron is also important for breastfeeding moms who don’t eat animal products to ensure their breast milk provides ample stores — especially after your period returns, since iron is lost through menstruation.

Vitamin D : This nutrient plays a lot of roles in the body, including supporting your immune system and brain health, according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) . “It also may help with mood,” Dr. Greves says. One more thing to consider: Vitamin D helps your body absorb calcium , to promote strong bones and support your bone mineral density.

Choline: Helpful for brain development, according research , choline is found in foods ranging from animal proteins to vegan favorites like nuts, seeds and beans. Because your body needs 550 milligrams daily while nursing, it’s best to pop a postnatal pill that fills in where food leaves off.

Omega-3 fatty acids (DHA and EPA): Supplementing with the docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) found in fish oil can help fortify your breastmilk with the healthy fats that support fetal brain development, according to a small study published in Current Research in Food Science. While some vegan formulas derive DHA from microalgae, others include fish oil.

Folic acid: Folic acid is the synthetic form of folate, which research suggests supports cell accelerated growth during infancy. Breastfeeding women need 500 mcg (0.5mg) of folic acid daily to ensure there’s an ample amount in their breastmilk. That’s less than is needed during pregnancy, but more than a generic multivitamin typically provides.

Iodine: Added to certain types of table salt, iodine is a trace mineral that supports both brain development and overall growth in breastfed infants, plus thyroid hormone production, according to the NIH . Nursing women need about 290 micrograms daily, with 150 micrograms of iodide, a form that’s easily absorbed, via supplementation.

Calcium: Getting too little calcium could impact your own bone density, especially during a long breastfeeding journey: Research suggests lactating women lose up to 1000 mg of calcium a day to breastmilk. As such, the RDA for lactating women is 1,200mg/day, some of which you’ll find in certain postnatal supplements to pad a diet low in dairy.

And, if you don’t eat animal products, you'll also need vitamins that are rich in:

Vitamin B12: Found in animal products like meat, fish, eggs, poultry and dairy, plus fortified breakfast cereals and nutritional yeast, B12 can protect against the neurological delays that can result from this nutrient’s deficiency, according to a review in the Pan African Medical Journal.

Zinc: Found in meat, poultry, seafood, eggs, legumes, seeds, and whole grains, zinc is a key nutrient for immune functioning as well as infant growth and weight gain. Because research shows that a nursing mother’s intake of zinc has no bearing on the zinc content of her milk, supplementing with the nutrient can help ward off low zinc levels to keep the immune system at the top of its game.

Freelance writer Elizabeth Narins originally contributed to this article.

FAQ

How long should you take postnatal vitamins?

Most doctors recommend taking postnatal vitamins for the first Six months postpartum right through your last breastfeeding session, says Dr. Ilceski.

What's the difference between prenatal and postnatal vitamins?

Because nutritional needs shift after pregnancy, postnatal vitamins look a bit different than prenatals. The biggest difference? “[Prenatal vitamins] have an increased amount of folic acid and iron necessary for fetal development, but typically exceed the requirements needed for postpartum mothers,” says Dr. Ilceski.

Postnatal vitamins designed to support lactating mothers usually contain iodine and choline, two nutrients you need more of when you’re nursing. So although many OB-GYNs do condone taking prenatal vitamins postpartum as a matter of practicality — and because there’s no great research that shows postnatal vitamins are superior to prenatal, according to Dr. Purdie — it’s best to choose and stick to a postnatal formula.

Are postnatal vitamins necessary?

Women who are vegetarian or vegan should take postnatal supplements with vitamin B12, since the nutrient is only found in animal-based foods, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

Among nursing mothers, maternal vitamin deficiencies can impact quantities of both fat- and water-soluble vitamins in milk. In other words, if your diet comes up short on certain vitamins, your baby’s breastmilk will, too.

Are postnatal vitamins FSA-eligible?

Typically, only prenatal vitamins are FSA-eligible.

Do postnatal vitamins help with postpartum hair loss?

It’s a little complicated. Some research suggests that certain vitamins like biotin (which are often found in postnatal vitamins) may help with hair regrowth, but postpartum hair loss is different. Postpartum hair loss is typically due to the natural hormonal changes that happen after birth, and Dr. Greves says that vitamins will not change that. “However, postpartum vitamins could help with the replenishment of hair,” she says.

Are prenatal gummies, capsules, or powder better when breastfeeding?

One supplement form isn’t considered better than the other when it comes to breastfeeding, according to Cording. “Choose a supplement from a reputable brand,” she says. “But whatever form makes the most sense to you is best.” She suggests thinking about your lifestyle, as well as convenience, when choosing a type.

Interviw with David Ilceski, MD , a board-certified OB/GYN at UnityPoint Health Interview with Jill Purdie , MD, board-certified OB/GYN and medical director at Pediatrix Medical Group National Institutes of Health, Omega-3 Fatty Acids , July 2022 Scientific World Journal , Fetal and Neonatal Levels of Omega-3: Effects on Neurodevelopment, Nutrition, and Growth , October 2012 Nutrients , Vitamins and Minerals for Energy, Fatigue and Cognition: A Narrative Review of the Biochemical and Clinical Evidence , January 2020 National Institutes of Health, Biotin , January 2022 National Library of Medicine, Moringa , October 2023 Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition , Investigating the Impact of Moringa oleifera Supplemented to Kenyan Breastfeeding Mothers on Maternal and Infant Health: A Cluster Randomized Single-Blinded Controlled Pilot Trial Protocol , August 2022 National Institutes of Health, Vitamin D , September 2023 National Institutes of Health, Magnesium , March 2021 National Institutes of Health, Boron , June 2022 National Institutes of Health, Dietary Supplements for Immune Function and Infectious Diseases , June 2023 Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism , Iodine, Iodine metabolism and Iodine deficiency disorders revisited , January 2010 National Institutes of Health, Zinc , September 2022 Frontiers in Nutrition , Effects of 12-Week Multivitamin and Omega-3 Supplementation on Micronutrient Levels and Red Blood Cell Fatty Acids in Pre-menopausal Women , July 2021 National Institutes of Health, Calcium , January 2024 Skin Appendage Disorders , A Review of the Use of Biotin for Hair Loss , August 2017 Early Human Development , Fatty acids and early human development , December 2007 Nutrients, Breast Milk Iodine Concentration Is Associated with Infant Growth, Independent of Maternal Weight , Debruary 2020 Nutrients, Feeding a Mixture of Choline Forms during Lactation Improves Offspring Growth and Maternal Lymphocyte Response to Ex Vivo Immune Challenges , July 2017 National Library of Medicine, Moringa , October 2023 National Library of Medicine, Fenugreek , December 2023 National Library of Medicine, Blessed Thistle , February 2022 National Library of Medicine, Fennel , March 2023 National Library of Medicine, Stinging Nettle , December 2021 National Library of Medicine, Alfalfa , June 2021 Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology , Myths and media in oral collagen supplementation for the skin, nails, and hair: A review , February 2022 National Institutes of Health, Copper , October 2022 National Institutes of Health, Vitamin B12 , December 2023 National Institutes of Health, Iodine , October 2023 Advances in Nutrition , The Importance of Maternal Folate Status for Brain Development and Function of Offspring , May 2019 Current Research in Food Science , Pilot study of the effect of EPA + DHA supplementation on the fatty acid profile of erythrocytes and breast milk of lactating women from Sonsón, Colombia , April 2022 The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism , Calcium and Bone Metabolism in Pregnancy and Lactation , June 2001 The Pan African Medical Journal , Vitamin B12 deficiency: case report and review of literature , March 2021 National Library of Medicine, Nutrition During Lactation Frontiers in Nutrition , Nutritional and Non-nutritional Composition of Human Milk Is Modulated by Maternal, Infant, and Methodological Factors , September 2020

Your Next Read

The 9 Best Prenatal Vitamins That OB/GYNs Recommend — and Moms Actually Take Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Prenatal vs. Postnatal Vitamins: What’s Actually the Difference? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Your Postpartum Nutrition Guide Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Which Vitamins Do I Need During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Can You Take Prenatal Vitamins Without Being Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

How Early Should You Start Taking Prenatal Vitamins? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Pregnancy Superfoods: Building Your Baby Bite by Bite Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Vitamins and Breastfed Babies Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Can’t Stomach Your Prenatal? Try This Powder Instead By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Vitamin D for Babies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Eating Vegetarian and Vegan During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

How Much Vitamin C Do You Actually Need During Pregnancy? A Doctor-Approved Guide Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Pregnant and Low on Vitamin D? Here’s How to Boost Your Levels Safely Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Do Fertility Supplements Really Work? What the Science Says Before You Try Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Nutritional Needs of Babies: the First 12 Months Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window