The One Rule That Saved My Sanity During the Holidays With Kids: No Extended Family

snow globe with house inside

We've held true to what we want for six years now — and have never looked back.

By Monica Bailey, as told to Mariah Maddox.

As soon as my husband and I got married, holidays became hectic. We were trying to juggle seeing every family and friend, but ended up spending hours and hours in the car. Then, when we had kids, things became really difficult.

One year, we planned to make the hour drive from Sandy, Utah, to the Ogden area with our 3-month-old son to spend Thanksgiving dinner with my husband's side of the family. As first-time parents, we were overwhelmed, but determined to attend the holiday celebration. But the roads were icy, so the trip took longer than expected. Once we arrived, dinner was behind schedule, and we couldn't find a quiet corner for our son to nap. It started to feel really hard. My son was crying non-stop, and I was stressed and worried that his crying would ruin the rest of the family's holiday meal.

The next couple of years went by; we'd had our second son, and we still tried to stretch ourselves too thin to make all of our families happy. By the time I was pregnant with my third, our daughter, this constant on-the-go mentality was no longer working for us.

That year, we hosted everyone at our house instead, but some insensitive comments about things we could have done differently from friends and family came a day later. That sent us over the edge.

The next year, we only invited a few people, and then the year after that, we made a big decision: we spent our holidays at home as a family of five. We didn't spend the holidays trying to please everyone. Our kids didn't miss their nap time, they ate well, and we all had so much fun.

That Thanksgiving night, we were sitting at the table with full bellies after dinner, and decided this was going to be our new tradition — to spend our holidays at home, intimately, as a family of five.

We've been doing it for six years now, and we have absolutely no regrets.

We ditched people-pleasing for a peaceful holiday at home

When we were talking that Thanksgiving evening about why we wanted to keep our holidays intimate at home, we ultimately asked ourselves what we actually cared about during the holidays and what really mattered.

What we landed on was this idea that our family culture isn't defined by our holiday plans . We try to create memories with our kids every single day, week after week; that is what the family culture is. So, we decided to live our holidays no longer satisfying the demands of others and instead do what brings us peace and happiness.

Our children still have holiday traditions with extended family that they get really excited about; they're just spread out on other days, and the holidays gain a few days (or even months!), which the kids love.

We've created our own magical traditions

Our holidays are still merry and bright without extended family visits and external obligations. A few days before Christmas, we like to go see the Nutcracker ballet. On Christmas Eve, we have a cozy day at home where we bake cookies, read the Bible, and have the kids sleep in our room to wait for Santa to come (something we wouldn't get to do if we were too busy packing bags and organizing travel for the next day).

A few years ago, when our kids were 8, 5, and 3, they started to express that they wanted to give their siblings gifts. Before then, it was all about receiving. So, now, our favorite tradition of all is that every Christmas Eve, our children give one another gifts that they have picked out themselves.

We were stuck for years trying to please everyone around us instead of caring for ourselves.

One by one, we take them on shopping dates so they can pick out the gifts, and they even wrap the presents themselves. Seeing the joy on their faces when they open up each gift is truly so special. Each year, we hear the dialogue between them as they're giving each other hints and trying to guess what their gift is. On Christmas day, each sibling is so excited to see their gifts opened, and then they discuss it afterwards with such pride. It's still the part of Christmas Eve they talk about the most.

Another tradition I love is our Christmas evenings. Since we don't have to travel home from any larger family events, we get to have a big Christmas feast for dinner, where we make a steak tenderloin with Béarnaise sauce, potatoes, and lots of sides. It's the grand finale to our Christmas day. The kids even help out with prepping and cooking the dinner. Each of them get a different assignment, like helping me make a side (such as potatoes or rolls) or the main dish. Things may take longer to get on the table, but we have so much fun doing it. Last year, my daughter made placecards for the table and decorated the table with napkins and handmade crafts . It's something they really enjoy partaking in.

Slowing down was the best thing we did for our family

My husband and I run our own company, and our schedules are very hectic. When we finally stopped to imagine our ideal holiday, what we realized was that we felt drawn to days that were simple, quiet, and peaceful. Being cozied up on our couch at home, watching Christmas movies, not worrying about checking off boxes, are some of the greatest, most snuggliest moments we've had with our kids to date.

When I share our decision with others, so many say they wish they could do the same, but worry about disappointing their families. And I understand that because we were stuck there for years, too, trying to please everyone around us instead of caring for ourselves.

@thebaileys.official 5 Years Ago We Decided To Stop Inviting Our Extended Family To Holidays ? original sound - Donald and Monica Bailey

We didn't make a big announcement about our change — we just started living differently. We stopped accepting invitations to holidays with extended family, and when asked, we shared about our decision, but also let them know we would still love to spend time with them on a different day.

There was some pushback from family at first, but overall, they were flexible and flowed with our boundaries after we held true to our needs and wants. This has made their lives easier, too, and we quickly figured out that our family loves us no matter what.

Now, our holidays look different — we slow down, we're less stressed, we feel more connected as a family, and we're unplugged from all the noise going on beyond our home's walls. It feels sacred. We're protecting our peace, and we are more present to enjoy all the small moments that make the holidays truly special.

Your Next Read

My Husband and I Have 2 Kids and Live on 1 Income — Here's How We Make It Work Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

I Chose to Have One Child For My Mental Health Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

You Don't Have to Move to a Bigger Home When You Have a Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

I Didn’t Vaccinate Any of My 6 Children — Then I Changed My Mind Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Motherhood Almost Broke My Marriage — Here's What Actually Helped Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

When Grandparents Spoil Your Little One By Heidi Murkoff

Moms Reveal Exactly How They Decided Whether to Have Another Baby — or Not Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

How to Manage Overeager In-Laws When Raising a Baby Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Yes, It's Worth Having a "Newborn Bubble" — Here's How to Do It Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

I Was Worried About Having Another Kid — But I Didn't Need to Be By Nicole Fabian-Weber, Contributing Writer

Easy-to-Take Holiday Photos You’ll Cherish for Years to Come By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

How to Cut Back on Saying "No!" to Your Child Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

'I Had a Nesting Party Instead of a Baby Shower and I'm So Glad I Did' Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Your Guide to a Calmer, Cozier Holiday Season During Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window