The 9 Best Baby Floor Seats, According to Parents and Experts

best baby floor seats

Baby floor seats can be a godsend for both you and your child. Parents like these seats because they provide a safe place to keep your little one secured and occupied when you need your hands free, whether you’re folding laundry or starting dinner. A baby seat can also give your little one a chance to sit up and have an exciting new vantage point from which to view the world before they’re able to sit up on their own.

These floor seats, which are best suited for babies 3 to 5 months old who are able to control their heads, can help your little one learn how to sit up, a very important milestone.

How We Chose the Best Baby Floor Seats

We spoke with Meghan Hunter, DO , a pediatrician with Phoenix Children’s Pediatrics , for guidance on how to safely use a baby floor seat as well as what features to look for when shopping for a floor seat. Per her guidance, each floor seat this list is supportive of baby’s neck, back and thighs and includes a safety harness.

We spoke to four members of the What to Expect editorial team who have six kids between them and have tried several of the floor seats included here.

We combed through the What to Expect Community of millions of parents to see which baby floor seats parents use and recommend to one another, evaluating each pick based on the following criteria:

What to consider when buying a baby floor seat

Baby floor seats come in different styles, be made of different material, and feature different add-ons like activity centers or snack trays. Here are some factors to consider as you start your research.

Fit: Babies come in all shapes and sizes, and even if they fall within the weight and height guidelines for a certain seat, they may not necessarily fit comfortably in it. For instance, one common complaint of floor seats is that the leg holes aren’t large enough for chubby thighs. If you can't try the seat in person to see how it fits your baby, order from a site with an easy return policy just in case it isn’t comfortable for baby. "The best and most development-friendly baby floor seats will provide enough support for your baby without being too restrictive," says Dr. Hunter. In short, you’ll want a seat that baby can’t fall or wriggle out of, but also one that isn’t too constricting.

Ease of cleaning: Floor seats get gunky quickly, so consider how you're going to degrime it. Plastic and foam are simple to wipe down, and if your seat has fabric panels, they should be easy to detach and machine wash. This is especially important if your floor seat doubles as a booster chair and you're planning to use the seat at mealtimes.

Interactiveness: "Look for seats with developmentally-appropriate toys to help stimulate your baby’s development," says Dr. Hunter. This may include an activity center with buttons, knobs and rattles to encourage fine motor skill development, or a musical bar that will introduce them to new sounds. Your baby floor seat may also include a removable tray. "This is convenient for feeding or playtime and provides additional support to prevent the baby from toppling forward," says Dr. Hunter.

Age-appropriateness: Some seats are meant for young babies only, while others can convert into booster seats and be used well into the preschool and toddler years. These seats can be good investments because you can use them for many years, but might not be necessary if you already have a high chair or other feeding gear.

Portability: You’re likely planning on using a floor seat around the house, whether you need to sit baby on the floor while you fold clothes or in the kitchen as you cook. Because of this, it may be ideal to prioritize seats that are lightweight and easy to move around without hassle. Some are designed to fold easily while others are made of lightweight material like foam.

Are baby floor seats safe?

Baby floor seats are safe when used correctly. Here's what you need to know about how to safely use a baby floor seat.

Keep it on the floor: Sometimes reviewers' online photos show baby floor seats placed on tables or counters, but this is a serious no-no. “As the name implies, baby floor seats should only be used on the floor, not higher surfaces such as a table, bed or counter,” says Dr. Hunter. “No matter how safe the seat looks, there is still a chance that the baby can topple over.” The exception: Some floor seats come with straps that attach to high-backed chairs and can do double-duty as boosters. Under no circumstances, however, should these be used on a backless chair or stool.

Wait until your baby has neck strength: Make sure your baby has proper head and neck control before setting them up in their new spot. "It is very important to not use floor seats until your baby can hold their head up on their own,” says Dr. Hunter, which usually happens between three and five months .

Set up safely: "Floor seats should be kept out of range of dangerous objects such as electrical sockets, cords, and sharp objects," says Dr. Hunter. Find an open space where your baby won't be tempted to grab anything that could harm them.

Limit the time: Dr. Hunter recommends only allowing your baby to use the floor seat for a total of 30 minutes each day, broken up into 15-minute increments. "When babies are confined to a 'container' such as a baby floor seat, they lose some freedom of movement,” says Dr. Hunter. In fact, this containment can be restricting, especially to their spine and hips. It can potentially impact their anatomical development and cause delay in gross motor skills, she adds.

Encourage movement: No matter how cool your new chair looks, or what the company claims, it isn't going to teach your child how to sit — the muscles needed for sitting must be developed simply by using them. "You want to make sure your baby has plenty of free time away from their seat to learn to use their muscles and gain strength," says Dr. Hunter.

Supervise: You'd be surprised by the trouble babies can get into even when you just duck out for a second to answer the doorbell. "Parents should never leave their baby unattended in a floor seat," says Dr. Hunter. Floor seats should not be used as a replacement for supervision and should always be used while you’re with baby.

With these safety tips and buying guidelines in mind, check out the best baby floor seats below.

Best Overall Baby Floor Seat

Fisher-Price Sit-Me-Up Floor Seat

Foldable

includes toys

has tall back for extra neck support

removable seat for cleaning

No tray

no cushioning

Why We Love It

The Fisher-Price Sit-Me-Up Floor Seat is beloved by parents in the What to Expect Community. The chair provides your baby with a wide base that’s less restrictive than some other models on the market because of its soft fabric base. It also provides extra support for baby’s neck to keep her comfortable while she sits, and some parents found they were able to use it for younger babies as a result. And, it comes with two attachable toys that baby can grab to practice her fine motor skills.

Although Christine Mattheis, Group VP of Content & Brand Solutions at What to Expect, was only able to use this seat for a few weeks before her daughter grew out of it, she found that it was a hit. “She used it for a few weeks and would sit there smiling, looking around — sitting up was a whole new experience for her,” she says. “But soon, her chubby little legs wouldn't fit through the holes.”

But Kate Monahan, Senior Manager Data Operations at What to Expect, found that the seat lasted quite a while for her kids. “I have the Fisher-Price seat with both kids and I really liked it,” she says. “I bought a second one for our youngest because I wanted one on multiple floors. He’s on the long, lean side and sat in it up until about 9 months.”

When you’re done using it, the seat folds and is pretty lightweight so you can easily tuck it away. Or, you can move it around the house to always have your baby seated safely by your side. And you’ll be glad the seat is removable and machine-washable — some parents reported that their babies poo whenever they’re in this chair! When considering price, portability, sensory stimulation and comfort, the Fisher-Price floor seat checks several boxes to make it a solid overall best pick.

Weight: 5.44 Pounds

Dimensions: 8.27 x 10.43 x 12 inches

Age/weight limit: 25 pounds

Community Reviews

"I ordered the Fisher Price Sit Me Up Floor Seat for my 3 month old daughter. She loves it! She always wants to be sitting upright, looking around at what's going on and this seat is perfect for that. She has pretty good head control, but the seat is supportive and comfortable for her."

"This is a little bigger them the bumbo. I like it better, the leg holes are bigger. LO will be able to use it longer then she would use the bumbo."

"My son likes his too. He likes sitting up and he has very good head control. It's also cute to see him learning how to use his hands and now he grabs the toys and he thinks it's the greatest thing."

"We take them with us when we go to people's houses so we're not stuck holding the babies all the time and it's an additional way to get them off their backs to prevent the flattening head when not doing tummy time."

Most Supportive Baby Floor Seat

Upseat Baby Chair Booster Seat

Expert-designed to support the hips and spine

booster seat option

includes tray

Expensive

Why We Love It

The Upseat floor seat was designed with the help of physical therapists to keep your baby’s spine aligned in an upright posture. It has a high, 8-inch back to help support baby’s neck and allows for safe development of baby’s hips because of the seated position it puts baby in. It does so by letting baby’s hips fall naturally apart, unlike other seats where their hips are pressed close together. This way, baby’s hips are free to move in order to help natural hip development. Parents also raved about the wide thigh openings and found that it was the only floor seat that could accommodate chubby thighs.

Jamison Hermann, Senior Video Producer at What to Expect, used the Upseat for both of his daughters. “It's really nice to have a secure place where we can put her while we're playing together in the living room,” he says of his youngest. “Her coordination and gross motor skills (especially neck strength) have definitely improved since we started having her sit in the seat.” The only con he noted was that crumbs can accumulate in the strap slots.

Another bonus for parents who go from room to room, the seat is lightweight and has a handle for easier carrying.

Although it’s quite expensive, it works as a floor seat and booster that you can attach to a chair and comes with a removable tray for snacks and meals. So, you’ll likely be able to use this seat for several years. Though, you can also take a note from Jamison and purchase the Upseat Boost once your child hits the toddler years.

Although it’s quite expensive, it works as a floor seat and booster that you can attach to a chair and comes with a removable tray for snacks and meals. So, you’ll likely be able to use this seat for several years. Though, you can also take a note from Jamison and purchase the

once your child hits the toddler years.

Weight: 5.4 pounds

Dimensions: 8 x 6.5 x 4 inches

Age/weight limit: 30 pounds

Community Reviews

bbyupinhere "We have the upseat and I really love it. Baby is super stable in it and we use it everyday for her dinner. We bring it to restaurants with us and strap it to a chair and she sits there. She’s way too small for a restaurant high chair so for us it was a good purchase. The only thing that I don’t love is the tray isn’t dishwasher safe lol like that’s my only complaint. The straps are so easy to take out and wash off. It wipes down really easily and I haven’t had anything stain it yet."

Best Affordable Baby Floor Seat

Regalo 2-in-1 Booster Seat and Grow with Me Floor Seat

Affordable

high weight limit

Tray and seat belt mechanisms can be tricky to fasten

Why We Love It

The affordable Regalo floor seat is a versatile option that is even more valuable because it also grows with your child. Your little one can start using it as a floor seat around 4 months, and become a booster seat for mealtime as your baby starts eating solids. The molded insert is comfortable and can be removed once your child has outgrown it so you can get even more use out of your purchase.

The large tray is removable, so it’s easy to wipe down once your baby is finished eating. You’ll also appreciate that the chair is curved without grooves, nooks or crannies that food might get stuck in. Parents found that they could wipe the chair down as often as needed without fuss, which became especially useful for toddlers. One reviewer noted that they prefer using this as a booster over their high chair because of how easy it is to clean.

Weight: 4 pounds

Dimensions: 16 x 16 x 12 inches

Age/weight limit: 50 pounds

Most Versatile Baby Floor Seat

Skip Hop Silver Lining Cloud Baby Chair: 2-in-1 Sit-up Floor Seat & Infant Activity Seat

Includes tray and toys

removable seat for cleaning

Can be hard to get baby in and out

Why We Love It

Skip Hop’s baby seat and activity center is a versatile option because it offers both a tray and developmentally-focused toys that are already attached. The dual design allows you to rotate between the tray and toys, providing more options for keeping baby stimulated while in her chair. Each toy also does something different, as one spins, another clacks, and the third one includes beads that move. All three are aimed at helping baby practice her fine motor skills while sitting in the seat. Many parents raved about the versatility of the tray and toy options because they could get more use out of it by feeding baby in the seat and giving them time to play.

The Skip Hop floor seat also has soft fabric with a sturdy, wide-leg base that’s safe without being restrictive. Parents noted that the design was slightly snug in order to allow for enough support, yet still comfortable for their babies to move around in. Plus, the seat is removable and machine-washable, and the toys and tray can be wiped down with warm, soapy water.

Weight: 5.65 pounds

Dimensions: 23 x 19.75 x 15 inches

Age/weight limit: 25 pounds

Community Reviews

tonini3059 "Mine loves hers. She had good head control so we started using it pretty early for short periods of time. In the beginning I would tuck a blanket around her to help support her a bit."

Best Baby Floor Seat with Toys

Summer Infant 3-Stage Deluxe SuperSeat

Booster seat option

includes tray

removable seat insert

The plastic tray feels flimsy

Why We Love It

The Summer Infant floor seat not only has a three-in-one design so you can use it for several years, but it also comes with a bunch of stimulating toys to capture baby’s attention. It has a tray with several toys for baby to grab and spin, plus an arch that baby can reach for the hanging toys as she gets older. In addition to the toys keeping baby entertained, one parent noted that they also appreciated how durable they are saying they could be pulled, bitten, chewed and hit. The versatile chair also has a foam insert that is supportive for infants and can be removed entirely to accommodate baby as she grows. The three-point harness also means that you can use it as a standard booster seat for toddlers, and it’s made of BPA-free plastic that’s easy to wipe down.

The Summer Infant floor seat not only has a three-in-one design so you can use it for several years, but it also comes with a bunch of stimulating toys to capture baby’s attention. It has a tray with several toys for baby to grab and spin, plus an arch that baby can reach for the hanging toys as she gets older. In addition to the toys keeping baby entertained, one parent noted that they also appreciated how durable they are saying they could be pulled, bitten, chewed and hit. The versatile chair also has a foam insert

that is supportive for infants and can be removed entirely to accommodate baby as she grows. The three-point harness also means that you can use it as a standard booster seat for toddlers, and it’s made of BPA-free plastic that’s easy to wipe down.

Weight: 5.22 pounds

Dimensions: 21 x 22.25 x 22 inches

Age/weight limit: 33 pounds

Community Reviews

IGotURNose "We got the summer infant super seat over the bumbo and so far its worked well for us. The foam insert can be detached once the LO outgrows it and you can use it as a booster seat then, it has straps that can attach to a chair. Comes with a detachable tray though we haven't used it yet."

Best Musical Baby Floor Seat

Infantino Music & Lights 3-in-1 Discovery Seat and Booster

Booster seat option

music bar expands into tray

With tray on

seat may be too tight for some babies

Why We Love It

Your little one will never get bored when strapped into the Infantino Music & Lights baby seat . The removable tray features a total of six developmentally-appropriate toys to encourage her fine motor skills, including a light-up piano that plays 20 songs and sounds with plenty of buttons to push. The toy tray slides out to reveal a snack tray with a cup holder, so you can use it while baby is on the ground or as a booster seat (with the included straps to secure it to a chair). Because of the musical board and booster seat, several caregivers said that they appreciate how this toy will grow with their babies. Note that some parents found there was too much space between baby and the tray for smaller children and allowed for wiggle room.

Weight: 1.57 pounds

Dimensions: 17 x 9.38 x 17 inches

Age/weight limit: 33 pounds

Best Foam Baby Floor Seat

Bumbo Foam Floor Seat

Lightweight

no set-up required

Some babies outgrow it quickly

Why We Love It

When parents think of floor seats, Bumbo is often the brand that comes to mind. The classic floor seat was developed with a deep seating surface and elevated leg openings to help your baby feel comfortable while sitting in an upright position — especially when she’s doing so for the first time. Parents love this seat not only because of its high-quality foam that is soft and comfortable for baby, but also because it’s so easy to clean. Without any nooks or crannies, you can clean the Bumbo with a few quick wipes.

is often the brand that comes to mind. The classic floor seat was developed with a deep seating surface and elevated leg openings to help your baby feel comfortable while sitting in an upright position — especially when she’s doing so for the first time. Parents love this seat not only because of its high-quality foam that is soft and comfortable for baby, but also because it’s so easy to clean. Without any nooks or crannies, you can clean the Bumbo with a few quick wipes.

Joyce Slaton, Commerce Editor on the What to Expect editorial team, used the Bumbo with her daughter who loved sitting in it. “She'd clap and smile whenever I put her in it,” she says. “The foam material was very lightweight, it was easy to take the chair along to grandma's house. It was also easy to wipe clean, and comfortable for my daughter until she outgrew the leg slots.” Joyce — like many other parents — found that her baby outgrew the Bumbo faster than anticipated because the openings were too narrow for chubby legs.

Weight: 2.91 pounds

Dimensions:15 x 15 x 9 inches

Age/weight limit: 3 to 12 months

Community Reviews

MommyMunn "My little one loves her bumbo. She started using it just before 3 months and is still using it at 6 months! She watches baby einstein in it, eats dinner in it, she loves it. She is starting to get too long now, so she can touch the ground with her feet and try to push out, but we never leave her unsupervised in it. I too think it's kinda expensive, we paid $ 35, but she doesn't have a high chair, so for us it was worth it. It saves space and is easy to travel with!"

rmiska79 "Love ours. Bought the tray & used it for feeding when she was still to small/short for the highchair. Its also nice to take along when we go to our families houses so she has somewhere to sit."

Most Comfortable Baby Seat

The Original Hugaboo Infant Sitting Chair

Machine-washable

lots of cute patterns

Not enough support for some babies

Why We Love It

The Hugaboo seat is extra comfortable thanks to the polyester fiber fill versus the harder plastic of other seats. Some babies may prefer the softer, less restrictive design of the Hugaboo. Plus, it’s lightweight design means that it’s easy to move throughout your home and great for taking on trips to Grandma's house or a family getaway. Parents liked the softness of the material and appreciate the features like a carry handle and machine washable cover. And, because of the flexible material, it’ll allow for more space for chunkier babies.

is extra comfortable thanks to the polyester fiber fill versus the harder plastic of other seats. Some babies may prefer the softer, less restrictive design of the Hugaboo. Plus, it’s lightweight design means that it’s easy to move throughout your home and great for taking on trips to Grandma's house or a family getaway.

Parents liked the softness of the material and appreciate the features like a carry handle and machine washable cover. And, because of the flexible material, it’ll allow for more space for chunkier babies.

Weight: 3.8 pounds

Dimensions: 17 x 7 x 15 inches

Age/weight range: 3 to 10 months

Community Reviews

jweber13 "Hugaboo seat. It’s amazing and so comfortable for baby! She loves it. I’ll sit her in it on the floor of whatever room I am in and I just talk to her while she plays with her toys or watches me clean. She absolutely loves it."

danib2425 "With my first I got a hugaboo seat and I love it! They’re a bit pricey, but since I’ve been able to use it for 2 babies now, it’s been worth it. It works really well for all those chubby thigh babies...thank goodness!"

Best Baby Floor Seat with Tray

Ingenuity Baby Base 2-in-1 Booster Seat

Includes tray

booster seat option

many color options

Crevices can trap food

bulky

Why We Love It

Designed to be used both on the floor or when strapped to a chair, the Ingenuity 2-in-1 Booster and Floor Seat is special because it includes a storage spot for the dishwasher-safe tray, which looks neat and saves space. Although several other seats have trays, many parents love that this one tucks away within the chair so you’ll never misplace it and so it doesn’t create more clutter when not in use.

The foam insert also comes in a few different tasteful colors for added variety and can be removed as your baby grows and used as a booster seat, making it a sound investment. In fact, many parents in the What to Expect whose babies didn’t fit in the Bumbo said that they used this instead and got much more use out of it. Some parents found that the seat was too large for their dining chairs, so make sure to measure carefully. Assembly is required, but reviewers found it to be straightforward, and the plastic and foam parts are easy to wipe down with a damp cloth.

Weight: 2.53 pounds

Dimensions: 17.25 x 15.25 x 11.75 inches

Age/weight limit: 50 pounds

Community Reviews

"My baby is in the 95th. We got this for him the blue rubber can come out as he gets bigger and there is a tray table that stores underneath."

"We originally brought the bumbo but took it back because our little miss didn’t fit her legs in it at all. We got an ingenuity and it was great."

"I love that the ingenuity can be clipped to a regular chair or coffee table too so that baby can be off the ground but still safe. It even fits in a suitcase - we took it travelling with us when baby was 7mo and still on solids, it made feedings in a hotel much easier! Probably the only downside is that it’s a bit harder to clean as it has more pieces."

Interactiveness: "Look for seats with developmentally-appropriate toys to help stimulate your baby’s development," says Dr. Hunter. This may include an activity center with buttons, knobs and rattles to encourage fine motor skill development or a musical bar that will introduce them to new sounds. Your baby floor seat may also include a removable tray. "This is convenient for feeding or playtime and provides additional support to prevent the baby from toppling forward," says Dr. Hunter.

Your Next Read

6 Best Standing Toys to Help Your Baby Meet a Milestone Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is Your Baby's Car Seat Safe and Up-to-Date? Check These Infant Car Seat Safety Tips Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

What to Know About Your Toddler's Car Seat: Get the Latest Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

7 Best Convertible and All-in-One Car Seats, Tested and Reviewed by Real Parents Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

What Different Car Seat Features Really Mean and Whether They're Worth Your Money Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

When Should Your Child Switch to a Forward-Facing Car Seat? Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Spot Fake Baby Products Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Best Activities for a 6-Month-Old Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Is It Safe for Babies to Sleep in Car Seats? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Buckle Your Newborn Into a Car Seat Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Clean a Car Seat Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Use the Chair Method of Sleep Training to Get Your Baby to Sleep Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Safe vs. Unsafe Baby Sleep Environments: The Ultimate Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window