The 18-Month Well-Baby Visit

18 Month Well Baby

Here's what will happen at your little one's 18-month well-baby visit, including the physical checkup, developmental milestones and shots.

What a difference a few months make. At 18 months old, your curious cutie has been busy putting his many new skills to use, from conquering the stairs at home to chatting up the family pet. One word that might be increasingly familiar: "No!"

Here’s what else to expect at this month’s checkup.

The physical checkup

It’s time to weigh in and measure up (never an easy feat with a squirmy toddler) to make sure growth is staying on the approximate trajectory that’s right for him. The doctor will also complete a full physical examination.

Developmental milestones

Catch him if you can — it won’t be easy! At 18 months , your intrepid toddler can scale a counter or take off down the block in the blink of an eye, so keep your eyes on him and always overestimate his ability to get himself into trouble.

Every day your ever-bigger kid is picking up nifty new skills in language, balance and coordination. And oh that silly — and often hilarious — sense of humor!

With so many tricks up those little sleeves of his, the doctor will spend the bulk of this visit checking whether your toddler can: Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Child by Eighteen MonthsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Child by Eighteen MonthsSee All Sources

Say at least three words besides "mama" or "dada"

Scribble on his own

Understand simple commands ("pick up your blankie, please")

Climb on and off a couch or chair without your help

Help undress himself

Try to eat with a spoon (though fingers are likely still preferred)

Remember, just because your child struggles to pull off a sock does not mean anything’s wrong. But do let your baby’s doctor know if your child says fewer than eight words and isn’t gaining words (or is losing them).

Also tell the pediatrician if your 18-month-old doesn’t imitate others, walk, make eye contact, point to interesting things, or understand or respond to simple commands — or if you notice regression (losing skills).

18-month vaccines

Here’s a happy development: Odds are good that your toddler got all of this year’s necessary shots at one of the last checkups. If not, your doctor will offer one or more of the following vaccinations as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionRecommended Vaccines by AgeSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionRecommended Vaccines by AgeSee All Sources

If your visit overlaps with flu season, your doctor will also give your tot an influenza vaccine , which all little ones should get yearly.

The COVID-19 vaccine is also recommended for everyone 6 months and up, so if your child hasn't gotten it yet, ask the pediatrician about getting him immunized. It'll help protect him from serious illness. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCOVID-19 Vaccines for Children and TeensSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCOVID-19 Vaccines for Children and TeensSee All Sources

Questions to ask your doctor

Toddlers definitely play hard, and they usually sleep hard too. But that doesn’t mean you won’t face some sleep struggles, like mutiny at bedtime or a habit of rising before the sun.

No matter the sleep problem , your pediatrician likely has a solution — or at least a few suggestions. So speak up. Here’s a list of additional questions you may be wanting answers for at this visit:

When should I drop the morning nap ? What if my toddler doesn’t want to nap at all?

My toddler seems shy around other kids. How do I get him to jump in and play?

Why is my child so afraid of dogs (or the vacuum cleaner ... or the bathtub … or the doctor)?

How do I help my toddler make transitions better? He has a hard time at day care drop-off .

How can I stop my child from being so negative ? It’s always: "No!"

One day he eats everything in sight, and the next day he eats next to nothing. Should I worry?

How much TV should I let him watch?

What about educational games on the tablet?

Is your toddler afraid of going to the doctor?

From his side of the exam table, it’s where he’s poked and prodded and asked to sit still. It’s no wonder, especially with his newly improved memory, that a toddler can begin to dread a visit to the doctor’s office around this age.

Be patient with your little patient, and try these steps to help him overcome any anxiety:

Tell it like it is

It may be tempting to put off telling your toddler that he has an appointment to visit the doctor. But honesty’s a much better policy. Share just enough information about the visit so that he can be prepared, but not so much that it increases his worry.

Read up

With your comforting commentary as you turn the pages, read a picture book about visiting the doctor to your little one. The most important takeaway you want him to have? The doctor’s a nice person whose job is to keep children healthy.

Let him play doctor

Buy a toy doctor’s kit for your child and show him how the various instruments are used. Encourage him to practice playing doctor on himself, on you or on his stuffed animals.

Make it a treat

While the well-child visit itself may not be fun for your child, a trip to his favorite playground afterward will be. Have a plan in place no matter how he handles the visit and he’ll have something to look forward to — and a happy memory he’ll always think about when returning next time.

Check your own stress

Seeing that you’re calm and confident about the doctor’s visit will help him stay calm and confident, too.

Share the applause

Encourage his cooperation with the doctor by saying, “Great job!” On the other hand, don’t lose it if he kicks or screams. Try to stay cool and understanding, while being firm about getting the checkup completed.

Don't forget to schedule the next appointment, which will be the 2-year checkup. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAAP Schedule of Well-Child Care VisitSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAAP Schedule of Well-Child Care VisitSee All Sources