The Best Nipple Creams to Help You Find Relief While Breastfeeding

Best Nipple Creams

Quick Summary

The best nipple cream is the Lansinoh Lanolin Nipple Cream , according to parent testers in the What to Expect community. When choosing one, lactation consultants and dermatologists prioritize breastfeeding-safe formulas that contain moisturizing ingredients. Nursing moms also appreciate creams and balms that are easy to apply.

When I took a prenatal breastfeeding class, I learned about the benefits of golden milk, how to get the baby to latch , and the different positions to hold a nursing newborn. What nobody told me — and perhaps was one of the most challenging parts of breastfeeding — was experiencing raw, cracked, sore and bleeding nipples in the early weeks. As it turns out, finding the best nipple creams was part of that solution. (It’s also highly recommended by experts to work with an IBCLC lactation consultant to fix the baby’s latch as it could be contributing to your painful nipples, too.)

I breastfed each of my daughters for about a year, and relied on nipple creams to keep me going, because the skin on my areolas is super sensitive. As both a beauty and parenting editor, I have tested dozens of products during both postpartum periods and have found the best nipple creams that worked for me — and they’ve helped numerous breastfeeding parents in the What to Expect community, too.

How I Chose the Best Nipple Creams

When putting together this guide, I combined expert advice, my personal experience testing select products, and feedback from parent testers in the What to Expect community and editors on staff. I also learned which features and ingredients are most important when shopping for nipple creams by speaking with Dr. Amy Wechsler , M.D., a dermatologist in New York City; Rebecca Agi , M.S., IBCLC, owner of Best Milk LA ; and Paula Norcott , IBCLC and BabyBuddha Pumpologist . Their insights greatly shaped the following criteria every product featured on this list had to meet:

Safe for baby and you: According to Dr. Wechsler, the best nipple cream formula should be something you don’t have to remove before breastfeeding. “If not, you’ll be wiping your nipples and areolas all day long, on and off, and that’s irritating to your skin,” she explains.

Moisturizing formulas: I searched labels for emollients like cocoa butter, olive oil, beeswax, and shea butter. Medical-grade purified lanolin, a wax secreted by wool-bearing animals such as sheep, was also prioritized.

Tried-and-tested feedback from moms: I evaluated multiple nipple creams for texture, absorbency, scent, ease of application, and how my skin felt after use while nursing. I focused on formulas that soothed soreness and stayed put without feeling sticky.

This mix of expert-backed safety standards, firsthand testing experience (as someone who personally suffered from raw, sore, and bleeding nipples!), and feedback from fellow breastfeeding moms means every cream listed below is worth trying. Instead of searching for relief, scroll on for the best nipple creams proven to work, so you can spend more time focusing on feeding your little one.

Best Nipple Cream Overall

Lansinoh Lanolin Nipple Cream

Versatile

A little goes a long way

Used by hospitals

Can stain clothes

Size: 1.41 ounces

Moisturizing ingredients: Lanolin

Why We Love It

This clinically-tested, medical-grade lanolin is completely scent- and taste-free. Plus, its hero ingredient, lanolin, is supported by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) for its ability to soothe cracked, irritated nipples and is safe for breastfeeding. Made with a hypoallergenic formula comprised of ethically-sourced lanolin, many parents find that it has versatile uses outside of repairing their cracked nipples. For instance, many use it as cream on their little ones’ scratches or as a balm for dry lips.

This clinically-tested, medical-grade lanolin is completely scent- and taste-free. Plus, its hero ingredient, lanolin, is supported by the

(AAP) for its ability to soothe cracked, irritated nipples and is safe for breastfeeding. Made with a hypoallergenic formula comprised of ethically-sourced lanolin, many parents find that it has versatile uses outside of repairing their cracked nipples. For instance, many use it as cream on their little ones’ scratches or as a balm for dry lips.

Personally, I found this to be the most effective product during the first two weeks of breastfeeding, when I experienced cracked, bleeding nipples. It created the thickest barrier on my nipples, allowing the skin to heal underneath between feeds.

Pro tip: Apply it before you take a shower to keep the hot water from further irritating your sore nipples. It really helps!

Community Reviews

"Ladies... I have found the greatest product ever for nipple pain! Lansinoh lanolin ointment! ... I instantly felt better after using!"

“Lansinoh lanolin.....LOVE it. You don't need a whole lot, one tube lasted me until my nipples were good and sturdy on their own.”

“I loved Lansinoh lanolin, it's widely available, the tube lasts forever and can double as an ointment for baby's skin if needed. I've used it under my son's raw nose when he had a bad cold. This time around I bought little travel size tubes to stash in different places around the house. The only downside is it stains clothing, so breast pads are a must.”

Best Organic Nipple Cream

Earth Mama Organic Nipple Butter

Organic

Lasts for a long time

Versatile

Some found the texture kind of grainy and greasy

Size: 2 ounces

Moisturizing ingredients: Olive oil, beeswax, cocoa seed butter, shea butter, mango seed butter and calendula flower extract

Why We Love It

Earth Mama Organic Nipple Butter is rich in hydrating botanical ingredients, and every single one is USDA-Certified organic. In fact, it was the first non-GMO verified nipple cream to hit the market, and has been a favorite among moms for years. It contains just six ingredients, including numerous hydrating butters and other moisturizers like olive oil, beeswax, cocoa seed butter, shea butter, mango seed butter, and calendula. This is an especially great option for moms who are allergic or sensitive to lanolin.

I also used this when breastfeeding both babies, and found that the consistency of the balm really melts into your nipples. I also liked using it for pumping because it creates a nice slip against the flanges. It's a favorite of Norcott's , too, as it's cocoa-based and very nourishing.

Tested by Liz Buxton , mom of one and What to Expect's Shopping Director:

"I switched to Earth Mama after discovering an unfortunate allergy to Lanolin. It really helped soothe my irritated nips and get things back to normal. I also loved that I could use it elsewhere on my body, particularly my hands and lips, which were incredibly chapped postpartum."

Community Reviews

“Earth Mama was a miracle ointment for me.”

“I found I had the best result from using Earth Mama nipple butter, it is amazing!”

“Earth Mama's nipple butter!! Smells amazing and left my skin feeling soft and hydrated! I use it on my eczema and any dry patches I develop on [my] body, along with my lips.”

Best Lightweight Nipple Cream

Motherlove Nipple Cream

Organic

Can be used as a pump lubricant

Unscented

Some wish it was thicker

Size: 1 ounces

Moisturizing ingredients: Extra virgin olive oil, beeswax, shea butter, marshmallow root and calendula flower

Why We Love It

This Motherlove Nipple Cream has an organic, all-natural formula that's lanolin-free and creamy, yet surprisingly lightweight and not greasy. It contains just five ingredients, including extra virgin olive oil, beeswax, shea butter, marshmallow root and calendula flower, making it perfect for those with a lanolin allergy or who prefer to avoid it. Many reviewers rave about how quickly this cream works to soothe painful nipples, and appreciate that it’s unscented to avoid any further irritation to their already-tender nipples.

Community Reviews

"I use Motherlove Nipple Cream and love it! It smells good and my little one doesn't seem to mind it if it hasn't completely absorbed before our next nursing session!"

"I love Motherlove Nipple Cream, I used it for my first two months of nursing. My little one is 10 months old, and I use what I have left over on her chapped nose due to having a cold. It works great!"

“I’ve tried 4 or 5 and the winner by and far is Motherlove Nipple Cream!!”

“Motherlove nipple cream took care of my crack nipples in less then 24 hours.”

“I use the same stuff and it healed up the scabbed blister I got on the tip of my nipple! It was so painful!”

Best Nipple Balm

The Honest Company Calm Your Nip Balm

Not too sticky

Applies smoothly

Great lubricant for pumping

Contains canola oil

Coconut oil can be an allergen

Size: 1.75 ounces

Moisturizing ingredients: Coconut oil, shea butter, beeswax, jojoba seed extract and aloe leaf extract

Why We Love It

Coconut oil has long been celebrated for its healing abilities, and it’s the star ingredient in this smooth, non-greasy formula . Many moms claim that their babies actually seem to like the taste which means they aren’t fussy about it during feedings. While the texture has a nice slip to it (helpful for pumping), it’s also not too sticky. Norcott also recommends the Honest Company for its simple and gentle ingredients.

What makes this balm different from other creams is that it contains a higher amount of oils, which can improve healing times. Specifically, the use of coconut oil is great for hydration and retaining moisture. Just note that coconut could be an allergen for baby, so you may want to proceed with caution and monitor your child after using it for the first time.

Community Reviews

“I like the Honest Co balm. It has coconut oil and has the best texture. I had another balm and it seemed almost gritty.”

“I use the [Honest] one too and love it! Baby has zero issues with it either when he feeds! I like that it’s natural and safe!”

Best Lanolin-Free Nipple Cream

Bamboobies Boob Ease Nipple Balm

Lanolin-free

Easy to wipe off

No smell or added fragrance

USDA organic

One mom shared it was hard for baby to latch after applying

Size: 2 ounces

Moisturizing ingredients: Sunflower seed oil, olive oil, beeswax, shea butter and calendula oil extract

Why We Love It

For those with lanolin allergies, finding an effective and safe nipple cream is a must. Norcott loves this balm by Bamboobies as it is safe for both mom and baby. It's made with a combination of sunflower seed oil, olive oil, beeswax, shea butter, and calendula oil extract. Together, they create a hydrating, protective, lanolin-free barrier for nursing moms. Even better, a happy mom reported that a little goes a long way, and one jar can last you quite a while — or at least until you and baby have gotten the hang of breastfeeding!

Moms swear by it both before and after nursing sessions, but one mom flagged in the Community that her baby had a challenging time latching when a little was left on her breast.

Community Reviews

"I loved the Bamboobies nipple cream. It’s lanolin free and organic and to me worked better then any others. I used it with my first and plan on using it again with my next. Also one jar lasted a longggg time."

"I like the bamboobies nipple cream! You don’t have to wipe it off but it would be easy too if you wanted."

"I swear by bamboobies nipple cream! Apply before and after each session!"

A Doctor’s Note on Using Nipple Creams Properly

Nipple creams can be a wonderful breastfeeding ally, but don't expect them to work like magic. “If you’re dealing with big cracks, bleeding, or pain that lasts beyond the first 60 seconds of a latch or pumping session, or if things aren’t improving within 3 to 4 days, it’s time to reach out to an IBCLC or healthcare provider,” advises Norcott.

Here are her top tips for getting the most out of your nipple creams:

Look for food-grade formulas made with cocoa butter, olive oil, beeswax, or shea butter. “These are all safe to leave on between feeds or pumping without having to wash them off,” adds Norcott. “ When choosing nipple creams and butters to combat dryness, tenderness, and minor abrasions, choose something edible and emollient.”

Use your cream sparingly, and let your skin breathe. Norcott tells moms to a pply just a thin layer after nursing or pumping; the goal is to create a light, protective barrier. A heavy coating won’t speed healing — in fact, it can trap moisture and actually hinder recovery. “ Avoid layering creams with other tools like gel pads or silver nipple covers, as this can trap moisture and delay healing,” she adds.

Watch out for reactions : Redness, swelling, itching, or a rash after application may signal an allergy. If this happens, stop using the product and gently wash the area with warm water. “ Switching to a lanolin-free, food-grade cream often resolves the reaction,” Norcott points out.

Bottom line? Creams are great for moisturizing tender nipples and keeping you comfortable between feedings or pumping sessions. But the root cause of persistent pain, Norcott notes, is “often linked to latch issues, tongue ties, positioning challenges, or other feeding mechanics, not just surface-level irritation. No amount of nipple cream will heal significant damage caused by these underlying issues.”

FAQs Best Nipple Creams

Does nipple cream really work?

Nipple creams and balms work by acting as a barrier to help the area underneath heal. “If you put barrier cream on top of any area of skin that’s irritated or cracked, it lets it heal underneath — especially if the area is going to be continually exposed to something like saliva,” says Dr. Wechsler. “If you’re breastfeeding every one to four hours, it doesn’t give the skin enough time to heal. So that’s why you need a barrier on top.”

It might be best to use nipple cream right from the start, to avoid your nipples from getting really raw, cracked and sore.

“I find nipple balms and lanolin extremely helpful in the early days of breastfeeding,” says Agi. “These balms help soothe and heal nipple soreness, which is so helpful as moms adjust to the new sensations of breastfeeding.”

How do I use nipple cream?

Caring for your nipples is much like having a skincare routine. You can apply a product often — before or after breastfeeding — if it’s a formula deemed safe for the baby. Some advise and choose to wipe it off before nursing, while others keep it on. The pro to wiping it off is that the baby is less likely to ingest it. The con is that the act of rubbing your nipples is potentially another way to irritate them — and it’s just another thing to do when you’re exhausted.

I typically applied nipple products after breastfeeding and before pumping (to help with the slip). Be aware, if you choose a greasier formula (usually the more natural ones), it can stain your bra.

Applying a thick nipple balm before bed also helped me. If you’re lucky enough to get some long stretches of sleep in, it allows more time for your nipples to heal under the formulas.

Your Next Read

7 Best Nipple Shields to Help With Latching and Minimize Pain Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Best Bottles for Breastfed Babies, as Tested by Nursing Moms Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Treat Sore Nipples and Breastfeeding Pain Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

How to Use a Nipple Shield When Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Best Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

Most Common Breastfeeding Problems and Solutions Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

How to Treat Milk Blebs or Blisters on Your Nipple When Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

15 Moms Share What Breastfeeding Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The 10 Best Baby Lotions, Creams, and Ointments for Sensitive Skin Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

How to Get a Proper Breastfeeding Latch Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Benefits of Breastfeeding for Mom and Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How a Breast Massage Can Help With Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

25 Best Snacks for Breastfeeding That'll Keep Your Energy and Supply Up Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window