The Surprising Ways Pregnancy Can Change Your Nails

Light copy updates and updates to sources, fact-checked for accuracy.

nail changes during pregnancy

What causes nail changes during pregnancy, and how can you care for your nails safely while you're expecting? Here's everything moms-to-be need to know.

If you usually sport thin hair and stubby nails, the prospect of thicker, lustrous locks and suddenly longer nails may be two welcome side effects of pregnancy. In fact, thanks to an influx of hormones, your nails may be growing faster than ever, so you'll probably want to keep a nail file handy.

And yet, for some women there's a downside to unexpected nail growth during pregnancy. Pregnancy nail changes may also include brittleness, groove formation, or a separation of the nail from the nail bed called onycholysis. So much for glam nails over the next nine months!

For more about the surprising ways your nails can change when you're expecting, including how to care for them, which treatments to avoid, and when to call the doctor, read on.

Key Takeaways

Your nails may change during pregnancy due to hormonal shifts, which can make nails grow faster. But they may also become brittle, split, develop white spots, thicken, or lift from the nail bed.

To care for your nails during pregnancy, keep them clean, dry, and moisturized; file gently; avoid biting or cutting cuticles; wear gloves for chores; and bring your own tools to salons to reduce infection risk.

Avoid nail treatments with harsh chemicals (like toluene, acetone, formaldehyde, and phthalates) and ensure good ventilation around nail products. See a doctor if you notice painful ingrown nails, infection, or nail detachment.

What causes nail changes during pregnancy?

As with many changes to your body during pregnancy, faster growing nails are the result of a normal surge in hormones . These same hormones are also responsible for changes you might see in your hair, which may be thicker, dryer, or oilier; and your skin, such as stretch marks and hyperpigmentation or dark patches .

"[My nails] have been growing super fast during pregnancy. I end up with talons if I'm not careful enough!" says What to Expect Community mom sarahn2013.

Meanwhile, mom MarHar_0912 says, "my nails get stronger during pregnancy and weaker after."

You might feel like you need to reach for the clippers every other day during your pregnancy, but some expectant mamas experience other nail woes, including white lines or dots (leukonychia), splitting, brittleness, ingrown nails, detachment (onycholysis), and thickening. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthNail Alterations During Pregnancy: A Clinical StudySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthNail Alterations During Pregnancy: A Clinical StudySee All Sources

Are weak, brittle nails a sign of pregnancy?

Your nails may break, tear, and split more easily than before you were pregnant, but other factors besides pregnancy can cause weak, brittle nails.

One potential cause is a lack of biotin in your diet. Biotin is a B-complex vitamin that can improve nail firmness, hardness, and thickness. It also can keep your hair and skin healthy. Make sure you're getting enough biotin from foods including: nuts, eggs, oatmeal, spinach, broccoli, bananas, and whole grains.

And remember, if you're not currently pregnant — and you aren't planning to become pregnant — don't be tempted to take prenatal vitamins to encourage faster nail (or hair) growth. Taking prenatal supplements when you're not pregnant or breastfeeding may expose you to high levels of nutrients that can be harmful. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicIs It OK to Take Prenatal Vitamins if I'm Not Pregnant and I Don't Plan to Become Pregnant?See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicIs It OK to Take Prenatal Vitamins if I'm Not Pregnant and I Don't Plan to Become Pregnant?See All Sources

How to take care of your nails during pregnancy

It's a good idea to protect your hands if your nails are suffering while you're expecting. Try the following strategies to care for your nails during pregnancy:

Don't bite. Now's a great time to break habits like biting and picking at your cuticles.

Keep nails clean and dry. Water makes nails soft, and soft nails tend to break.

Use lots of lotion. Slather a good moisturizing cream onto your nails and cuticles at bedtime.

Don rubber gloves. Cover your hands when washing dishes, using household cleaners, and gardening.

Push back, rather than cut, your cuticles. Do so gently, and this way, your nails will stay stronger, and you'll be less likely to get an infection.

Don't dig out ingrown toenails. See a dermatologist if they get really gross or painful.

Pack your own tools. To minimize your chances of infection, bring your own grooming implements to the nail salon ; clean them well with alcohol before you use them again.

File carefully. Don't saw back and forth when filing your nails — go in one direction only — and avoid snags by keeping the tips rounded rather than pointed.

Watch for discoloration. If you have artificial nails, beware of any funky greenness — that's a sign of a bacterial infection. Better yet, keep your nails natural while expecting.

Nail treatments to avoid during pregnancy

Avoid solvent-based products, like those with toluene, which is found in some polishes, acrylic nails, and polish removers. This solvent can be drying and it tends to smell bad, leading to headache and nausea in some. Check labels and skip products with acetone or formaldehyde whenever possible. (Formaldehyde has been linked to miscarriage and cancer).

Stay away from phthalates in any type of nail or hand product, because they may harm the endocrine system.

Protect your hands. While the chemicals in gel and acrylic nail treatments have not been found to be harmful during pregnancy, it's a good idea to wear gloves to shield your hands from the UV light. Acrylic nail treatments can also emit an extremely strong smell and may increase risk of infection.

Always watch out for fumes. Whether you're at the salon or giving yourself a manicure, make sure the room is well ventilated. In nice weather, head outside for an alfresco paint job. Your nails will dry faster, and you don't have to risk dripping hot pink on your bathroom floor! And if you work in a salon, try to take regular breaks for fresh air and always wear gloves.

For more on navigating unexpected symptoms, open the What to Expect app , your guide to every week of pregnancy, plus tips from other moms-to-be going through the same changes, too.

When to call your doctor about nail changes during pregnancy

Some changes in the color, texture, or shape of your nails aren't serious in nature, but in other cases you may have an infection or a disease. If you have a painful or possibly infected ingrown nail or onycholysis, which is discoloration along with the nail lifting up and detaching from the finger, make an appointment with a dermatologist. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Dermatology12 Nail Changes a Dermatologist Should ExamineSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Dermatology12 Nail Changes a Dermatologist Should ExamineSee All Sources