The 10 Best Baby Lotions, Creams, and Ointments for Sensitive Skin

best baby lotion collage featuring Tubby Todd, Eucerin, Dove, CeraVe, Mustela and Aveeno

Quick Summary

When it comes to the best baby lotions, experts recommend fragrance-free formulas with simple, hydrating ingredients such as ceramides, colloidal oatmeal, and shea butter to help protect baby's skin barrier. For normal skin, pediatric dermatologists recommend CeraVe. For something a bit richer, I rely on TK.

Your baby may be soft and squishy now, but their skin is oh-so-delicate. Lotions can do a lot to keep them comfortable not only this winter, but year-round. “Consistent use of bland moisturizers can definitely maintain the skin barrier, minimize dryness and itching, and improve the symptoms associated with eczema,” says Patrick McMahon , M.D., pediatric dermatologist at HMGS Pediatric Dermatology in New Jersey.

Finding the best baby lotion, however, isn’t always simple. Like many parents, I’ve spent more late nights than I’d like to admit poring over ingredient labels, watching TikTok product reviews, and worrying about what might happen if my child ever had a bad reaction.

That anxiety-fueled research, along with caring for two young daughters with eczema-prone skin , has made me something of a lotion expert. I’ve tested dozens of formulas in search of that elusive “baby-soft” skin feel everyone is always talking about. Along the way, I've discovered which baby lotions work well for both of my kids, some that only worked for one, and a few I would never purchase again.

And while every baby is different, the lotions listed below have earned my repeat purchases for good reason. They’re moisturizing and gentle enough for even the most sensitive skin, leading to softer (never greasy) cuddle sessions.

How I Chose the Best Baby Lotions

Although I have years of personal testing as a parent and one too many American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) deep dives about dry winter skin under my belt, to ensure my picks are safe and effective, I also referenced previous What to Expect interviews with Dr. McMahon and Dr. Latanya Benjamin, M.D., a pediatric dermatologist in Florida, and Society for Pediatric Dermatology board member. Here's everything I considered:

Ingredient safety: Following Dr. Benjamin’s guidance, I avoided lotions with potential irritants like parabens, phthalates, sodium laureth sulfate, and triclosan. I also skipped undiluted essential oils, which are not deemed safe for babies under 6 months old — and some, like lavender oil, have even been flagged as potential hormone disruptors in young males.

Moisturizer type: As Dr. Benjamin notes, lotions are the most lightweight, containing the highest water content; creams are thicker and more nourishing; and ointments are the richest and best for sealing in moisture. According to the AAP , thick creams and ointments are the best choice for eczema flare-ups or severely dry skin.

Poor past experiences: With two kids who’ve both battled dryness and eczema, I’ve tried dozens of lotions firsthand. Personally, I wouldn't use Pipette, Babyganic, or Hello Bello. While my children never had a poor reaction to any of these products, I found that the lotions were never as thick, creamy, or hydrating as I wanted them to be.

Community and expert consensus: I read hundreds of reviews from parents in the What to Expect community to see what they loved and what they found less than impressive. While many were mentioned, I found that brands such as Aveeno, CeraVe, and Mustela were talked about the most.

Below, you’ll find the baby lotions that consistently received overwhelmingly positive reviews. Each product is gentle, effective, and approved by dermatologists who specialize in baby skin. Note that my choices range from the inexpensive and no-frills to options that appear more high-end, to accommodate various budgets.

Best Doctor-Approved Baby Lotion

CeraVe Baby Moisturizing Lotion

Affordable; widely available

Some moms say the formula is too lightweight

Size(s) : 8 or 16 fl oz

Scent : No

Notable ingredients : Ceramides, vitamin E

Why We Love It

For babies who have normal skin, Dr. Benjamin recommends this lightweight (read: not greasy!) formula , as it was developed with pediatric dermatologists to help prevent dry skin.

CeraVe's baby lotion is not only free of fragrance and parabens, but it also includes ceramides (which are found naturally in the skin and make up about half of the lipids in the skin’s natural protective barrier), hyaluronic acid, and niacinamide to lock in moisture and soothe dryness.

The National Eczema Association has also given CeraVe its official seal of approval, so you know it's a safe bet for babies with sensitive or eczema-prone skin — and that includes both of my daughters. I use this regularly and love how quickly it absorbs without leaving residue. During colder months, however, I switch to something richer.

has also given CeraVe its official seal of approval, so you know it's a safe bet for babies with sensitive or eczema-prone skin — and that includes both of my daughters.

Community Reviews

“we use cerave baby cream since our baby was 6 weeks for dry skin on face, helps so much. was recommended by family physician.”

“We use cerave baby moisturizing cream and it’s great for newborn and our 18 month old. My uncle is a dermatologist and his top brand recs are cerave and cetaphil.”

“CeraVe! Specifically the moisturizing cream or the healing ointment depending on the severity. I’ve had eczema, sensitive and dry skin my entire life and it’s the only thing that’s kept my skin hydrated outside of pure Vaseline. Definitely worth a try!”

Best Everyday Baby Lotion

Baby Dove Rich Moisture Lotion

Super rich and moisturizing

inexpensive and easy to find

There is a fragrance that some shoppers say is too strong

Size(s): 13 or 20 fl oz Scent: Yes Notable ingredients: Prebiotics

Why We Love It

This lotion from Dove (which has been safety-tested by ophthalmologists, dermatologists, and pediatricians) is a great everyday product that will keep baby's skin soft, says Dr. Benjamin. Because it’s free of parabens, phthalates, and sodium laureth sulfate (SLS), it’s gentle enough for newborn skin — plus, it’s hypoallergenic. Parents love that the rich, silky lotion glides on smoothly without being tacky.

(which has been safety-tested by ophthalmologists, dermatologists, and pediatricians) is a great everyday product that will keep baby's skin soft, says Dr. Benjamin. Because it’s free of parabens, phthalates, and sodium laureth sulfate (SLS), it’s gentle enough for newborn skin — plus, it’s hypoallergenic. Parents love that the rich, silky lotion glides on smoothly without being tacky.

I’ve used this product before, and I felt like a little really went a long way — the bottle seemed to last forever — making it a great value.

Community Reviews

“I’ve been using Baby Dove’s sensitive skin line on my 16 month old for a few months now and I haven’t had any issues. It’s actually one of my favorites to use on my baby. I only stick to the sensitive skin line though. I’m not sure how the others are.”

“I love dove! My baby was breaking out really bad and that is the only thing that calmed it.”

“The only thing that worked for us was dove hypoallergenic baby lotion. We lotion him up at every diaper change and especially after bath”

Best Natural Baby Lotion

Mustela Hydra Bebe Body Lotion

Plant-based ingredients

Absorbs quickly into the skin

Lightweight finish

Includes some fragrance

Size(s) : 10 or 25 fl oz

Scent : Yes

Notable ingredients : Avocado perseose , jojoba, sunflower oil

Why We Love It

Parents love Mustela lotion's plant-based formula — a blend of jojoba oil, sunflower oil, vitamins E and F, avocado oil — for its ability to naturally hydrate without the heaviness of an ointment. Dr. Benjamin is also a fan of Mustela for its gentle, water-soluble ingredients.

I used this for years on both of my girls because I loved how it immediately absorbed into their skin with a nice, lightweight feel. Parents also point out that it's hypoallergenic and ideal for babies with dry skin. While I personally enjoyed the subtle scent, which I found to smell fresh and clean, I would avoid it if your little one has ultra-sensitive skin, as a fragrance-free formula would likely be best.

Community Reviews

“We use Mustela! I got a sample once in the mail for some reason, and fell in love with it. All 3 of my babies never had any issues with it. We use the blue normal skin type one to start out and it’s great.”

“Yes! My daughter had very sensitive skin and mustela was great. Will be using again for this baby as well.”

“I LOVE Mustela! Highly recommend the lotion. The Micellar water also cleared up my little guy’s baby acne and cradle cap so fast.”

Best Lotion for Baby's Face

Babo Botanicals Sensitive Baby Miracle Face Cream

Gentle enough for the face and body

Organic ingredients

EWG-verified

Travel-friendly size

Pricey for the quantity

Size(s) : 2 fl oz

Scent : No

Notable ingredients : Shea butter, argan oil

Why We Love It

Baby's cheeks and lips are extra prone to roughness, flakiness, and ashiness. In this case, a facial lotion like Babo Botanicals is best. The EWG-verified, fragrance-free formula is made with safe, plant-based ingredients like shea butter, argan oil, calendula, and coconut oil, which hydrate and strengthen the skin’s barrier without clogging pores. That's what makes it ideal for baby's face, although it can be used all over their body, too.

I love Babo Botanicals products for their use of organic ingredients, and this cream is no different.

Community Reviews

“we use the Babo botanicals brand and love it!”

“I use Babo botanicals sensitive baby hydrating lotion on my toddler.”

“Babo botanicals! We used the fragrance free pipette lotion too but it was super thin and not as moisturizing.”

Best Baby Lotion for Eczema

Eucerin Baby Eczema Body Cream

Provides 24-hour hydration

Rich and velvety feel

Fragrance-free

Soothes flare-ups and itchy skin

Small tube runs out quickly

Size(s) : 5 fl oz

Scent : No

Notable ingredients : Colloidal oatmeal, ceramides

Why We Love It

Both of my daughters have had eczema flare-ups all winter since they were born, and this Eurcerin cream is one of the only products that made a significant difference. That’s probably because it’s made with super-hydrating and gentle ingredients like colloidal oatmeal and ceramides. There are no dyes, steroids, fragrances, or parabens listed on the back label, so you don’t have to worry about it irritating the skin further.

is one of the only products that made a significant difference. That’s probably because it’s made with super-hydrating and gentle ingredients like colloidal oatmeal and ceramides. There are no dyes, steroids, fragrances, or parabens listed on the back label, so you don’t have to worry about it irritating the skin further.

This is a cream rather than a lotion, so it's thick enough to soothe itchy skin and rashes. The only caveat? I wish it were sold in a larger tube! I always went through this one quickly, but repeatedly purchased it because it was so effective.

Community Reviews

“I am using the Eucerin eczema relief cream . My baby has really severe eczema for weeks ! Constant flares but I didnt want to use steroid cream since baby can have withdrawls (just my personal preference), but honestly think the eczema was from his formula .”

“Bought the eucerin eczema rapid relief cream and applied it every day, kept makeup off that spot and it went away within a week and a half”

“either honest eczema cream or eucerin baby eczema”

Best Versatile Baby Ointment

Aquaphor Baby Healing Ointment

Multipurpose (great for drool and diaper rashes)

a little goes a long way

Slightly greasy texture

Size(s) : 7 fl oz, 14 fl oz

Scent : No

Notable ingredients : Glycerin, petrolatum

Why We Love It

When skin is flaky and cracked, you'll want to turn to mega moisturizers, such as an ointment like Aquaphor , says Dr. Benjamin. This formula is made with 41% petrolatum to encourage skin barrier repair, as well as glycerin to soothe rough patches.

“Apply this right out of the bath to capture the moisturizing staying power overnight,” she says. Aquaphor’s product is also a standout because it can be used as a lotion, as a diaper rash cream, and even on chapped body parts (for you or baby!). And who can complain about having to buy fewer products? No wonder the brand recently won a 2025 Mom Must-Have Award .

When my daughter’s eczema is really bad, I’ll layer Aquaphor over an eczema cream for even better results.

Community Reviews

tmo456 “I’m using aquaphor ointments after doing a lot of research and so far I love them.”

DearestDolly “We swear by aquaphor. We use it for our newborn and other children too”

Best Baby Lotion Alternative

Vaseline Petroleum Jelly

inexpensive and readily available

Solid pick for healing chapped or overly dried-out skin

very versatile

Greasy feel

Size(s) : 7.5 fl oz

Scent : No

Notable ingredients : White petrolatum

Why We Love It

Vaseline has been around forever for a reason – it’s a tried and true option that parents and doctors alike recommend. Dr. McMahon recommends Vaseline because it ticks all the boxes: it’s plain, fragrance-free, petrolatum-based (this one is 100 percent white petrolatum) and has no preservatives.

Vaseline has been around forever for a reason – it’s a tried and true option that parents and doctors alike recommend. Dr. McMahon recommends

because it ticks all the boxes: it’s plain, fragrance-free, petrolatum-based (this one is 100 percent white petrolatum) and has no preservatives.

This is another option I always keep in my house, both for very dry skin and for diaper rashes, but I don’t love using it as body lotion unless absolutely necessary. It’s very greasy and I find that it also seems to sit on top of the skin more, so I feel like it rubs off and onto everything. Try applying it to baby’s skin before bed and let it do its softening magic while they sleep.

And if you don’t love a petroleum-based option, I also love Tubby Todd’s All Over Ointment – it works similarly to Vaseline (and Aquaphor) and is made of more natural ingredients.

– it works similarly to Vaseline (and Aquaphor) and is made of more natural ingredients.

Community Reviews

JacksMama319 “Vaseline and aquaphor are like gods gifts to baby skin we’ve been using both since he was born”

Carlylluu “But I've tried all sorts of lotions and Vaseline is the only thing that will keep her skin moisturized for more then 15 minutes.” -

Best Scented Baby Lotion

Noodle & Boo Super Soft Baby Lotion

Has a really nice fragrance

Lightweight feel that absorbs quickly

Gift-worthy packaging

Pricey

Size(s) : 8 fl oz, 16 fl oz

Scent : Yes

Notable ingredients : Almond oil, vitamins C and E

Why We Love It

If you love that “new baby” scent, Noodle & Boo nails it. The subtle crème douce smells cozy and nostalgic without overpowering. It’s dermatologist-tested, hypoallergenic, and made without parabens, dyes, sulfates, or phthalates.

The hydrating blend of sweet almond oil and vitamins C and E nourishes baby’s delicate skin and absorbs quickly, leaving behind a silky finish. I also love gifting this one — the pretty packaging makes it a go-to baby shower favorite. But if you really can’t past the fact that there’s a scent, there’s a fragrance-free option as well (it’s just a little harder to find!).

But if you really can’t past the fact that there’s a scent, there’s a fragrance-free option as well (it’s just a little harder to find!).

Community Reviews

“I love Noodle & Boo and used it for both of my children. I still use it for my 2 year old and will use it for this baby too.”

“Go with noodle and boo! It’s natural and the only fragrance is a natural extract lavender. That’s still natural and the ingredients are clean.”

“We love noodle and boo, can get it off Amazon”

Best Baby Cream for Dry Skin

Aveeno Baby Eczema Therapy Moisturizing Cream

Rich and moisturizing formula

Absorbs really well

Some parents say it made their child’s dry skin worse

Size(s) : 5, 7.3, 12 fl oz

Scent : No

Notable ingredients : Colloidal oatmeal, vitamin B5

Why We Love It

When my toddler itches at her dry skin non-stop, I reach for Aveeno Baby's moisturizing cream . After just a few days of application, I notice a significant improvement. That's largely thanks to the addition of colloidal oatmeal and vitamin B5 , which soothes irritation fast and locks in hydration. It's thick and creamy, but not at all greasy.

, which soothes irritation fast and locks in hydration. It's thick and creamy, but not at all greasy.

However, while I love it, I do want to point out that there are some reviews of parents saying it made their child’s condition worse, so just keep that in mind before giving it a try.

Community Reviews

Day-J “Aveeno eczema therapy in the jar works really well for my baby girl.”

Lizz87 “we use the aveeno eczema lotion regularly to keep it at bay my doctor has emphasized to be generous in applying the aveeno so once a day or trouble areas and usually after her bath to lock in moisture before she goes down for the night.”

Best Lightweight Baby Lotion

Tubby Todd Everyday Lotion

Scented or fragrance-free options available

Made with non-irritating ingredients

Cute packaging and great dispenser

Pricey

Can be hard to find in stores

Size(s) : 8.5 or 12 fl oz

Scent : Scented and fragrance-free options

Notable ingredients : Avocado, mango, and cucumber extracts

Why We Love It

Tubby Todd was by far one of the most mentioned baby lotion products in the What to Expect community. Parents rave over the non-greasy feel and naturally-derived ingredients like avocado and cucumber extract that leave the skin feeling soft and hydrated.

And after trying out the Everyday Lotion for myself, it's easy to see why the brand has amassed such a cult following. While it may not be rich enough for severe dryness, it’s an ideal everyday hydrator that layers well with thicker creams.

Community Reviews

“Love tubby Todd for newborns. I used it all the time with my first baby.”

“tubby Todd has worked wonders for us. We haven’t had to use steroid creams on LO since starting it over 3 weeks ago.”

“We use Tubby Todd on our girls drool rash and it works wonders.”

How to Apply Baby Lotion

Make lotion time part of bathtime. After rub-a-dub-dubbing in the tub, get your baby out, pat the skin dry and apply a lotion within two minutes to lock in moisture, recommends Dr. McMahon. Massaging the lotion into baby’s skin can promote more than bonding — it can help decrease the symptoms of atopic dermatitis, adds Dr. Benjamin.

Dr. Benjamin also emphasizes daily moisturizing — not just during flare-ups — is key to keeping your baby’s skin healthy, resilient, and itch-free.

Cassie Shortsleeve originally contributed to this article.

Baby Lotions FAQs

Can I use regular lotion on my baby?

If you’re going to use lotion on your little one, whether they have dry skin or not, you’ll want to stick with a baby lotion made specifically for their age range rather than lotion you might use on yourself. Baby lotions are generally made with more gentle ingredients for their super sensitive skin and usually don’t contain as many harsh irritants as adult lotions may contain.

Any ingredients I should try to avoid in baby lotions?

Even some baby lotions will contain ingredients that you may want to avoid. Dr. Benjamin recommended avoiding ingredients that are known to cause irritation, like parabens, phthalates, sodium laureth sulfate and triclosan, as well as essential oils for babies under 6 months of age.

How often should I apply baby lotion?

You can apply baby lotion to your child’s skin once a day, or even every other day if their skin is very soft and not dry or eczema-prone. Baby lotion can be applied to damp skin immediately after a bath. If they have eczema or very dry patches, you can apply lotion or ointment as needed, but check with your pediatrician to get their recommendation.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

How to Care for Newborn Skin Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Winter Skin Care for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

How to Give Your Baby an Oatmeal Bath Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Infant Eczema (Atopic Dermatitis and Contact Dermatitis) Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

How to Soothe a Sensitive Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Dry Skin in Babies Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Dry Skin in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Sunscreen and Sun Protection for Babies: What Parents Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

The Best Nipple Creams to Help You Find Relief While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Baby Medicine Cabinet Essentials Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 9 Best Cradle Cap Shampoos and Treatments to Keep Baby’s Scalp Soft and Healthy Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

6 Stretch Mark Creams Moms-to-Be Can’t Stop Buying (and Derms Approve, Too) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window