The Best Foods to Snack on When You're Pregnant

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Pregnancy Snacking

Feeling the urge to nibble all day? Snacking can help you load up on some important pregnancy nutrients — here’s how to make it count.

There's no shame in snacking during pregnancy! In fact, noshing on small bites throughout the day can be a healthy — and easy — way to get the nourishment you need while satisfying hunger and cravings. Opt for nutrient-dense snacks like trail mix, granola, fresh fruit and veggies, and hard-boiled eggs to keep your energy up.

Here's what you need to know to keep snacking healthy while you're pregnant.

Key Takeaways

Snacking can support your nutrition and energy needs. Small, frequent bites make it easier to get essential nutrients and meet rising calorie needs — especially when full meals are hard to stomach.

The best snacks are balanced and nutrient dense. Aim for options with protein, fiber, and healthy fats (like nuts, yogurt, eggs, or whole grains) to stay full longer while delivering key nutrients.

Planning makes healthy choices easier. Stock your kitchen with wholesome staples, prep grab-and-go options, and pair foods smartly to avoid reaching for low-nutrient, sugary snacks.

What are the benefits of snacking during pregnancy?

Here are some reasons snacking is beneficial during pregnancy:

Snacking helps you get your fill of essential nutrients. This is especially helpful later in pregnancy when you may get that stuffed, can't-eat-another-bite feeling after just a few bites of a meal.

Little nibbles are often easier to tolerate when you're combating stomach issues — like nausea and food aversions early in pregnancy.

Snacks can help keep your energy up while meeting your calorie needs , which ramp up during pregnancy (by about 500 extra calories per day by the third trimester).

"Right now I get nauseous when I think about food but seem to be able to manage snack food, like granola and fruit," says What to Expect Community mom Tschweiker12.

So what should you be munching on these days to keep your energy up in between meals and give your little one an extra dose of nutrition? The best pregnancy snacks are nutrient-dense options that keep you energized while delivering important vitamins and minerals — especially protein , folate , calcium , vitamin D , DHA (omega-3 fatty acid) , iodine , and iron.

Healthy pregnancy snacks can be delicious, filling, and easy to prepare. And there's no shortage of ideas. No matter what you're craving, here are some of the best options.

Get more expert advice, track your pregnancy, and connect with other pregnant moms with the same questions on our free What to Expect app .

What are some healthy dry snacks for pregnancy?

Sure, a cup of yogurt or a smoothie can be a nice pick-me-up. But sometimes you need a dry option that’s easy to transport and can sit in your bag for hours without refrigeration.

In addition to being convenient, dry snacks often contain whole grains, nuts, and dried fruit, so they’re a great way to boost fiber (which can help prevent constipation ), along with protein and B vitamins. Dry snacks also tend to be pretty easy to eat when you’re queasy.

Trail mix. This nut, seed, and dried fruit combo offers protein, healthy fats, and fiber to keep you full for hours. Add some fun mix-ins like cashews, pumpkin seeds, dried cherries, or dark chocolate chips.

Granola bars. Think of them as trail mix in bar form, with the addition of hearty, fiber-packed oats. Some granola bars can be as sugary as dessert, however, so look for low-sugar options made with real fruits and nuts.

Whole grain pretzels. To confirm that yours are truly made with whole grains, check the label. If the first ingredient listed contains the word "whole" (like "whole wheat" or "whole oats") you’re good to go.

Fresh fruit with a nut butter packet. Options like bananas and apples can sit at room temperature. A dollop of nut butter on top adds protein and healthy fats so you stay satisfied for longer. Look for single-serving nut butter packets that are easy to toss in your bag.

Air-popped popcorn. Popcorn is a fiber-rich whole grain. Choose air-popped varieties, and add your own seasonings, like a sprinkle of cinnamon or some savory nutritional yeast.

"A clementine or two travels well, and you can pair it with some nuts for protein," suggests Community member Ayemi.

What are some healthy protein snacks for pregnancy?

Protein is vital for your baby’s growth and development, and it helps keep your blood sugar stable — which can stave off energy crashes , headaches , and irritability .

Hummus and whole wheat crackers. You’ll get protein and healthy fats from the hummus, plus complex carbs from the crackers. For a bigger appetite, add some sliced raw veggies and a handful of olives. "Hummus with baby peppers!" suggests Community mom ninap38. "I also love Granny Smith apples with white cheddar and fruit with almond butter."

Edamame. These savory soybean pods are loaded with protein, fiber, iron, folate, and magnesium. To boost the flavor, warm the pods in the microwave and sprinkle with salt and sesame seeds.

A handful of nuts. High in protein, fiber, and healthy fats, nuts might just be nature’s perfect snack. Each type of nut has its own nutritional perks (almonds offer calcium, walnuts have omega-3s, and peanuts serve up vitamin E), so aim for a variety.

Roasted chickpeas. Crunchy and satisfying, they're loaded with protein, fiber, and iron. Buy them pre-made, or make your own by baking canned, drained, and rinsed chickpeas with olive oil and your favorite seasonings until crispy. Extra hungry? Make a snack plate with roasted chickpeas, cherry tomatoes, and a few cubes of feta cheese.

Hard-boiled eggs. Cook up a big batch on the weekend, and you’ll have a ready-made snack all week long. Eggs pack a protein punch, and they’re a good source of vitamin D, which helps build your baby’s bones and teeth.

"I've been making tiny charcuterie-style snack trays," says Community member NiaWard 24. "Rotisserie chicken, cheese stick, strawberries, cherries, honey-roasted cashews, and a couple potato chips. It gives me a good variety and keeps me full."

What are some healthy calcium-rich snacks for pregnancy?

Getting about 1,000 milligrams of calcium daily is essential for building strong bones and teeth — both for your baby and you. Snacks can help you meet that goal.

Plain yogurt with fruit. Yogurt offers protein and calcium, plus probiotics that could protect against constipation. Choosing plain over flavored options will save you loads of added sugar. Add sweetness with fresh fruit like berries, chopped mango, or diced apple. "Yogurt parfaits! " suggests Community mom courtb1998. "I use Greek yogurt and granola and then add whatever is in the pantry: peanut butter, chocolate chips, almond butter, Nutella, fruit, etc. We bought parfait snack containers, so I make them ahead to take for breakfast at work. Super filling!"

String cheese. These pre-wrapped bites are convenient and portable, and each stick serves up around 200 milligrams of calcium. For a more filling option, pair string cheese with whole grain crackers or wrap it in a whole wheat tortilla.

Cottage cheese. One cup delivers about 250 milligrams of calcium along with a whopping 24 grams of protein. Stir in chopped fruit, add a sprinkle of honey or cinnamon, or season with salt and lemon juice and use as a dip for veggies. "I eat cottage cheese with my lunch or on its own as a snack at least once a day," says Community mom HoefulNewMama."It really seems to keep me full since it's high in protein, and it's also high in calcium and vitamin D, so win-win."

Whole grain cereal with milk. You’ll get about 300 milligrams of calcium plus 8 grams of protein in a cup of milk. Choose cereal with less than 10 grams of added sugar and at least 3 grams of fiber per serving.

Fruit smoothie with milk. Simple combos like banana, almond butter, and milk are easy to sip when you’re queasy. When you’re up for more flavor, try frozen cherries with cocoa powder, mango, and pineapple, or berries and peanut butter. "I make a smoothie with oatmeal to keep me full longer and that's about all I can stomach in the mornings," says Community member knjz.

What are some healthy sweet pregnancy snacks?

It’s perfectly fine to treat yourself to the occasional cookie or brownie. But if your sweet tooth tends to rear its head on a regular basis, it’s worth having a handful of healthy (and still satisfying) options at the ready.

Medjool dates with almond butter. Naturally sweet and satisfying, dates are truly nature’s candy. Add an extra layer of deliciousness — and make them more filling — by dunking the dates into protein-packed almond butter. "I'm big on rice crackers with peanut butter and dates! " says Community member bbmama007.

Frozen banana "ice cream" with chopped nuts. Blend a chopped, frozen banana in the food processor until smooth to make a creamy, naturally sweet ice cream. Top with chopped walnuts and a cherry for a sundae-like treat.

Whole grain toast with nut butter and chocolate chips. For a balanced mix of carbs, protein, and a touch of sweetness, slather a tablespoon of peanut or almond butter on a slice of whole grain toast and top with a tablespoon of mini dark chocolate chips.

Dark chocolate and a clementine. Choose chocolate containing 70% to 85% cocoa. The higher cocoa content means your chocolate will have more nutrients (like iron and magnesium) and less added sugar. Portion-wise, a one-ounce square is perfect.

Frozen grapes. When you’re looking for a sweet nibble but aren’t actually all that hungry, this icy treat fits the bill. Frozen grapes are refreshing and vitamin-packed, but for staying power, pair them with protein or fat.

What are some healthy evening snacks for pregnancy?

Tummy rumbling before bed? Pick a light, easy-to-digest snack with nutrients that will help lull you to sleep.

Whole grain cereal with milk. The combo of complex carbs and protein may help you feel sleepy. Stick with cereal options containing fewer than 10 grams of sugar per serving. Not only are these more nutritious, but eating lots of sugar right before bed might keep you awake.

Cottage cheese with raspberries. Lean protein sources like cottage cheese contain tryptophan, an amino acid that can make you drowsy. In addition to lending sweetness, raspberries are a natural source of the sleep-promoting hormone melatonin.

Whole wheat peanut butter toast with a banana. The complex carb-protein combo might be sleep-inducing, especially when you add a few slices of banana, another fruit source of melatonin.

Warm milk with cinnamon. Warm milk isn’t just soothing — according to the National Sleep Foundation, there may be some link between the tryptophan and melatonin content of milk and improved sleep. Cinnamon adds a yummy, sweet note, but you could also try other warm spices, like ground nutmeg or cardamom.

A handful of walnuts. In addition to their protein, healthy fats, and omega-3s, eating walnuts may boost melatonin levels and help you sleep more soundly.

Which snacks should I avoid during pregnancy?

While there’s nothing wrong with the occasional treat, the following foods tend to be low in nutrients and high in added sugars or unhealthy fats:

Cookies, cakes, and sugary baked goods

Candy

Ice cream

Potato chips

Soda, sweetened tea, and sugary juices

Sugary coffee drinks

"I'm making conscious decisions to on average eat healthy, but I'm also not denying myself foods that meet my cravings," says Community member acorn1252. "It's all about balance and moderation."

Of course, you’ll also want to steer clear of the usual foods that are off-limits during pregnancy , including raw fish, undercooked meat, deli meat , undercooked eggs, unpasteurized cheeses or juices, and alcohol .

What are some tips for healthy snacking?

A few simple strategies can make smart snacking easy:

Go for a combo approach. A balanced snack containing protein, complex carbohydrates, and healthy fats will keep you fuller longer.

Keep your kitchen stocked. Have a variety of healthy options at the ready, like fresh fruit, nuts, plain yogurt, cheese, whole grain crackers, nut butter, and hummus. "I like to get a veggie tray and eat that throughout the week," says Community mom twiggy44.

Prep grab-and-go snacks ahead of time. Pick two or three snacks for the week, ready a big batch, and portion them into individual servings you can toss in your bag or grab when hunger strikes. Mix up a batch of trail mix, boil a dozen eggs, and season up a big bowl of popcorn, then divide into single-size containers. "I keep serving-size baggies of cheese cubes in the fridge so I can just grab one and go," says Community mom mamabearOC.

Keep your snack needs in perspective. Remember, you likely don't need any additional calories in the first trimester . In the second trimester you need between 300 and 350 additional calories, and in the third trimester you need about 500 additional calories. Don't worry about counting calories, though. Listening to your appetite and choosing nourishing foods can help keep you on track.

Snacks can be a godsend when you’re pregnant — both for keeping up your energy and sneaking extra nutrients into your diet. The key is sticking with wholesome options. Here’s to smart, healthy snacking!