The 9 Best Changing Pads for Your Baby’s Nursery, According to a Mom Who Owns 3

best changing pads

Quick Summary

The Keekaroo Peanut Changer is the best changing pad, according to parent testers from What to Expect staff and the community (including myself!). When choosing a changing pad, experts say it’s most important to consider the material and its cleanability. And as a mom to a one-year-old boy who’s tackled her fair share of diapers, I couldn’t agree more!

To prep for my son’s arrival roughly a year ago, I not only built up a hefty stash of diapers and wipes , but also purchased an equally important diaper-changing essential: a changing pad.

Knowing just how many diaper changes were in my future — the average newborn can poop four times a day ! — I wanted to provide my little one with a secure, hygienic, and yes, comfy , spot to lie. But picking just one proved harder than I thought. There are numerous options available, including those with built-in lights and distracting toys. And while the What to Expect community forums are filled with heated takes about why you should forgo one, I honestly don’t know what I would do without mine.

Sure, I’ll set up a de facto changing station on a hotel bed or the trunk of my car in a pinch, but having one as a permanent fixture in my baby’s nursery has taken the guesswork out of finding a safe and sanitary spot to change my son’s diaper — especially when there isn’t a moment to spare to do so. In fact, I’m so pro-changing pads that I actually own three! One for the nursery and two that I keep in my car or diaper bag (more on that below). I didn't just research the best changing pads, I've owned and tested many of them.

How I Tested and Chose the Best Changing Pads

When putting together this list of the best changing pads, I drew on my own experience as a mom and also consulted six staff members who also relied on changing pads as new and seasoned parents alike.

First and foremost, I relied heavily on my personal experience with changing pads in various scenarios. I've used changing pads at home and on the go, and my discerning eye made sure to zero in on features that made pads portable and durable. This includes:

This benchmark was further validated after speaking with six What to Expect staffers who also have (or had!) changing pads in their nurseries. Aside from the three I had direct experience with, they were able to share their testing results on other options to widen the list, while echoing that their top considerations included material, design, and ease of cleaning (especially when it came to being on diaper duty).

I also referenced guidelines from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) to ensure that all the changing pads include safety features , like a non-skid bottom and an attached safety strap to prevent roll-off falls. Additionally, all have a concave design , which, according to the AAP, helps keep baby in place. (That said, you should always keep one hand on baby while changing them.) Understandably, you're likely concerned about baby mobility risk — my son was also super wiggly! And when you're trying to change a diaper and grab a clean onesie at the same time, non-slip bases and a secure strap aren't just bonus features, they're absolutely essential.

Best Overall Changing Pad

Keekaroo Peanut Changer

Wipe clean surface

Water- mold- and bacteria-resistant

JPMA-certified

5 year warranty

Expensive

May be cold to the touch

Weight: 7 pounds

Dimensions: 17 x 32 x 4 inches

Material: Polypropylene

Why We Love It

This durable, peanut-shaped changer is made of a non-toxic, BPA-free material that parents say is super easy to wipe clean after diaper changes (yes, even the really messy ones!). Additionally, this pad is water-resistant, so fluid won’t seep in and lead to mold or bacteria growth.

Although it has a firm surface, parents find it surprisingly soft for baby’s comfort. (That said, some say it can be cold for baby during cooler months.) This changing pad is sturdy and has substantial weight to it, which helps keep it firmly in place during diaper changes, in addition to its slip-resistant bottom. It's a great dresser changing pad because you won't have to buy any additional materials to make it stay.

Despite the price, many reviewers say it’s held up during multiple years of use, while others say they’ve purchased a second one to keep elsewhere in their house or at a grandparent’s house. Many parents also comment on the Keekaroo’s longevity.

Because of its unusual shape, make sure to measure the area you’re planning to use the pad before purchasing. Some parents found it to be a tight fit for a changing table with guardrails.

Tested by Tika Fender , mom of one and What to Expect's Senior Art Director:

“We love that it's so soft and my baby can kick around without hurting his feet."

Community Reviews

“We have it and highly recommend! It is so easy to keep clean!”

“Love it! It’s really easy to clean and sturdy. A bit heavy actually, which is nice if you plan on using on top of a dresser or something.”

“I LOVE this product. I have two because I needed one in my parents house as well. It’s the best, is comfortable for the baby/toddler, easy to clean. I still change my toddler on it!”

“I love the Keekaroo. My babe peed sooooo many times during diaper changes and the poop sitch can be so messy. I would never want to deal with the extra hassle and laundry. Or any extra layers etc. It’s so easy to wipe clean and done. She has never cared about being directly on the pad.”

“The keekaroo peanut is the absolute best. My friend made us put it on our registry with my first and it was one of our best baby items.”

Best Portable Changing Pad

Skip Hop Pronto Baby Changing Pad

Includes mesh and zippered pockets

Has handle and stroller strap

Includes case for wipes

Not for use on elevated surface

Weight: 12 ounces

Dimensions : 21.5 x 36 x 0.25 inches

Material: Polyvinyl chloride

Why We Love It

The Skip Hop Pronto has been a game-changer for my family: It doubles as an easy-to-clean portable changing pad and an on-the-go storage solution for all your diapering needs. I take full advantage of the two zippered compartments, where I stuff wipes and rash creams, and keep my diapers in the additional mesh pocket. It’s at the top of my packing list whenever we travel, and I don’t leave home without it. It’s accompanied us on more than a dozen flights and several trips to Disneyland, though it’s just as handy for an extra layer at a restaurant restroom. I love that it carries a lot, but folds into a compact clutch that slips easily into diaper bags. Additionally, other reviews note the smoothness of the surface, making it surprisingly easy to wipe clean. Plus, it even has a clip to attach directly to your stroller.

Community Reviews

cc3491 “I have the skip hop one and love it. It has a little pad for their head. Easily wipeable for the baby poops that seem to get everywhere!”

squirrel4 “I did like the Skip Hop Pronto change kit, and would carry that in either my diaper bag or an old backpack. It made changes easy no matter where we were when babe was NB. Now it lives in the bottom of the Chariot for emergencies so still a handy piece to have.”

Best Affordable Changing Pad

Summer Infant Contoured Changing Pad With Liner

Soft

Waterproof

Includes machine-washable liner

Some reviewers claim this is not as easy to clean as other pads

Weight: 0.032 ounces

Dimensions: ‎32 x 16 x 3.5 inches

Material: PEVA vinyl

Why We Love It

This affordable pick checks the most important box: It’s a safe, secure space to place your baby down during diaper changes, complete with high sides and a strap. Parents love how soft this pad is, especially when compared to the hard surfaces of other options. In fact, Lisafe Carreon, Senior Product Manager at What to Expect, found the Summer Infant was a huge success with her daughter when it came to comfort — she thought the Keekaroo was too cold and hard.

Leah Rocketto, What to Expect’s Associate Commerce Director, also appreciated the Summer Infant pad’s softness, as well as the slight concave design.

Both Leah and Lisa say the pad’s surface easily wipes clean, though it also comes with a machine-washable liner. You can also do as Leah did, and choose from a selection of changing pad covers in a range of adorable designs and patterns to add a design element to your nursery. Some reviewers say messes can soak through the surface of this pad, but most say using the liner should prevent messes from getting through to the interior foam.

Both Leah and Lisa say the pad’s surface easily wipes clean, though it also comes with a machine-washable liner. You can also do as Leah did, and choose from a

in a range of adorable designs and patterns to add a design element to your nursery. Some reviewers say messes can soak through the surface of this pad, but most say using the liner should prevent messes from getting through to the interior foam.

Tested by Leah Rocketto , soon-to-be mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Commerce Director:

“Even though our changing table had guardrails, I felt a little extra sense of security knowing the pad itself had ‘walls’ so to speak.”

Tested by Lisafe Carreon, mom of one and What to Expect's Senior Product Manager:

“We used the Keekaroo but had to change it as she would cry when she would be on it. We changed to the Summer Infant and she loved it.”

Community Reviews

starbaby90 “for the changer table I get this one from Walmart. its cheap. last the [whole] time I need it. I just leave a receiving blanket on it and change it once a day or sooner if there's a mess (which isn't as common as some people say).”

Best Organic Changing Pad

Naturepedic Organic Cotton Changing Pad

Waterproof

Hypoallergenic

Global Organic Textile Standard- and Greenguard Gold-certified

Expensive

Weight: 2 pounds

Dimensions: 16.5 x 31.5 x 4 inches

Material: Cotton

Why We Love It

Parent testers in the What to Expect community rave about the Naturepedic changing pad , specifically the thick, organically-sourced cotton padding that’s comfortable for baby. Although the Naturepedic is expensive, it’s made of extremely high-quality materials. The organic cotton is Global Organic Textile Standard (GOTS)-certified , which means it meets strict environmental guidelines for how it is produced. It's also Greenguard Gold-certified , so you can rest easy knowing it's been rigorously tested for chemicals that are potentially harmful to air quality. What’s more is that the waterproof surface is naturally derived from sugarcane, and parents add it’s smooth and easy to wipe clean.

Parent testers in the What to Expect community rave about the Naturepedic changing pad , specifically the thick, organically-sourced cotton padding that’s comfortable for baby. Although the Naturepedic is expensive, it’s made of extremely high-quality materials. The organic cotton is

, which means it meets strict environmental guidelines for how it is produced. It's also

tested for chemicals that are potentially harmful to air quality. What’s more is that the waterproof surface is naturally derived from sugarcane, and parents add it’s smooth and easy to wipe clean.

Community Reviews

sbr0710 “I also highly recommend the Naturepedic changing pad. Soft enough to use without a cover, and easy to wipe clean. Doesn't have that nasty plastic feel to it.”

Best Disposable Changing Pad

NorthShore Premium Disposable Baby Changing Pads

Easy to pack

Absorbent

Waterproof backing

Latex-free

Not an environmentally friendly option

Weight: NA

Count: 25 per pack

Dimensions: 17 x 24 inches

Material: Cotton

Why We Love It

Confession: I am a bit of a germaphobe. And while motherhood has certainly made me more easygoing in this department, it hasn’t stopped me from taking every precaution in making sure an impromptu diapering station is hygienic. And these disposable changing pads are my secret weapon for doing so.

Whether my family is traveling near or far, I typically lay one of these down first over a flat surface, such as a public restroom station, before topping it with the Skip Hop Pronto . It’s slightly excessive, I admit, but worth the ease of mind (hence why I always have two changing pads on hand!). Each features an absorbent lining and a waterproof backing to contain messes and prevent leakage. Many reviewers attest to the absorbency, claiming that it even holds up to blowouts (hear, hear!).

Community Reviews

momandtot “[G]et the disposable pee pads. I found this out quick with my son. best and easiest thing to use. if it gets dirty, throw it away, if not, reuse it. makes your life easy.”

a90 “I had a washable liner on the changing pad itself, but didn’t want something else to wash every single day. So I covered the washable liner with disposable ones. I had to have an emergency C-Section so I tried to make things as easy as possible while I was recovering from surgery.”

Best Changing Pad with Entertainment

Skip Hop Nursery Style Wipe-Clean Changing Pad

Wipe-clean design

Contoured format

Mobile detachable (but it’s a great distraction)

Comfy for baby

Seatbelt-like buckle strap

Pricey

Weight: 5 pounds

Dimensions: 31.5 x 18.25 x 2.5 inches

Material: 90% SAR foam, 10% PA

Why We Love It

For those who want more than a wipe-clean design in their changing pad, I’d like to direct you to the Skip Hop Nursery Style Wipe-Clean Changing Pad . Not only is the non-skid contoured foam resistant to staining and holding odors, but it also features an entertaining mobile. The latter is especially helpful when it comes to distracting fussy or squirmy babes; parents share the cloud-shaped mirror and sun has successfully held their little one’s attention even during the worst blowouts (although some taller users noted they’ve bumped their heads on it when tackling the chore — thankfully, it’s removable). Parents also have their choice between two neutral colorways: gray and oat.

Most also shared that it was comfortable and didn’t feel too cold for their babies (a common complaint of other foam pads!), but the one recurring “con” was that it’s quite pricey compared to other options, despite being cheaper than my overall pick.

Community Reviews

I have used the Skip Hop rubber changing pad with my first kid and love it. We have always had it on her dresser.

We have the Skip Hop one and love it. We put a down cotton baby blanket if it’s cold.

I got the skip hop one! It’s a little cheaper than the keekaroo but works just the same and comes with a cute mobile!

Best Fancy Changing Pad Dupe

Jool Baby Waterproof Changing Pad

Popular design at a lower price point

Easy to clean

Multiple colorways

Too slippery for some

May stain

Weight: 3.3 pounds

Dimensions: 15.75 x 30.8 x 3.5 inches

Material: Polyurethane

Why We Love It

At half the cost of the Keekaroo, many parents have hailed Jool’s new changing pad as the ultimate “dupe.” Made with a similar, easy-to-wipe polyurethane foam, it offers a lot of the same benefits — but at a price tag for less than $100. Parents were pleased to report that it’s a handy item for baby’s nursery and didn’t slide around on a dresser or other flat surfaces. As a bonus, there are also five colorways to match any nursery theme, including a match for Keekaroo’s best-selling Oatmeal (though some testers mention slight staining can occur). Parents also rave that the squishy pad is somehow both soft and firm — hello, Goldilocks! The durability is also a big selling point, as it’s a breeze to keep clean.

Just keep in mind that some did note that it was slippery for their babies, and that it was sometimes difficult to change extra-squirmy little ones.

Community Reviews

I have this one. I used it for the twins I fostered and I really liked it. THEY really liked it and we’re comfortable on it. But I’d buy some extra covers and/or put a blanket or something over top for when it gets messy. I had it on the counter in my bathroom which was nice for nighttime changes. I’m planning on buying another one to put on the dresser in his room.

"This is what I got, kept it cheap and simple"

If you are thinking keekaroo simply because you can wipe it down rather than wash covers then check these out. Same type of foam material but far cheaper since they don’t have the fancy name

Best Changing Pad With Removable Covers

Munchkin Secure Grip Baby Diaper Changing Pad with Cover

Affordable

Waterproof plastic liner over contoured foam

Multiple safety measures (straps and grippy strips on bottom)

Option to ship with machine-washable covers

Have to wash cover

Weight: 2.1 pounds

Dimensions: 16.5 x 31.5 x 4.5 inches

Material: ‎Foam, plastic and polyester

Why We Love It

While I can see why parents love wipeable changing pads, there is an indisputable benefit of going the washable cover route, especially if you’re concerned about baby feeling warm. And Munchkin’s Secure Grip Changing Pad provides the best of both worlds. Alone, the waterproof, plastic pad is still easy enough to disinfect and keep clean. There are also four, grippy strips that lock it into place, preventing the pad from slipping around like a rug on a kitchen floor. And thanks to the rectangular size, it’s not only compatible with most dressers and changing tables but covers and liners. You can go with Munchkin’s neutral, white offering, or have fun switching up colors and patterns.

Community Reviews

I got this munchkin one (link below). And a graco one that’s exactly the same. One is upstairs and one is in the living room. And I got some covers for them. They’ve been perfect. My daughter is 2 and we still use them for her. They are never cold with the cover on them and super easy to disinfect with a wipe down. They’re light and can be put anywhere which I love about them and attach to the dresser so it doesn’t slip off. You really don’t need an expensive changing mat!

The munchkin secure grip waterproof changing pad from target has served us well! Still going strong almost 2 years later that we got with our first!

"We used the Munchkin waterproof changing pad with a washable cover. Even at $30 I feel it is overpriced for a changing pad…"

yes I have one like this too! I just threw a cover on it then grabbed some little waterproof liners from target! Then it’s easy clean up if it gets messy & you just wash the liner with the laundry and toss a new liner on in the meantime. Barely had to wash the actual cover because the liner caught any mess

Best Changing Station Set

Pottery Barn Kids Quinn Changing Station

Aesthetically pleasing set

Easy to wipe clean

Made for PBK dressers

Pricey

Need to purchase pad separately

Weight: N/A

Dimensions: 16 x 32 x 4.5 inches

Material: Vinyl

Why We Love It

So many of my friends invested in the Keekaroo and fastened it on top of their dressers, but I wanted a piece that could create a full “station.” When I was designing my son’s coastal-themed nursery, I was immediately drawn to the Quinn collection at Pottery Barn Kids. The woven rattan and metal frame, which I paired with the company’s vinyl changing pad insert ($59), was more than just aesthetically pleasing — the two compartments on the right are the perfect storage spot for wipes and extra diapers. You’ll need to purchase the pad and optional covers separately, and while it’s certainly on the pricier side, I’ve loved this investment so much that I couldn’t resist scooping up the matching hamper !

Our Research

I referenced changing pad safety guidelines from the AAP.

Additionally, several What to Expect staff members shared their insights, including:

Jeanne Beacom, Campaign Performance Manager, parent of a 2-year-old

Lisafe Carreon, Senior Product Manager, parent of 8-month-old

Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor, parent of 2-year-old

Tika Fender, Senior Art Director, parent of 5-month-old

Stephen Klop, Director of Product Management, parent of 6- and 3-year-olds

Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director, parent of a 1-year-old

Finally, I canvassed What to Expect’s community boards to learn which changing pads parents liked best and what features they most appreciated.

FAQs

Are changing pads necessary?

Although you can (and almost certainly will from time to time) change your baby’s diaper on the floor, a designated space for diaper changes can help simplify your life (and save your back!) during your baby’s diaper-wearing years. You may want to invest in a tabletop changing pad for your nursery as well as a portable pad for your diaper bag. That said, you can also always use a blanket, disposable pad or other item to change your baby on the floor of your home, in the car or while out and about.

How long do babies use a changing pad?

A changing pad will most likely be a major player in your new parent arsenal until your child is potty trained . You might also start changing diapers on the floor once you have a squirmy toddler on your hands because it’s often easier — and safer — to change them this way, which you could do without a designated changing pad.

Are changing pads a universal size?

The dimensions and shape can vary, but changing pads are typically pretty similar in size. You can expect most to be roughly 32 inches long and 16 inches wide, but you’ll want to measure your dresser or changing table first before purchasing a pad to make sure it’ll fit. Remember: Absolutely no overhang, please!

Do you need a cover for a changing pad?

If you’re using a mattress-style changing pad, you’ll want to put a washable or disposable cover on it. Many changing pads, however, are made with materials that wipe clean easily. These types of changing pads don’t require a cover, but you can add a liner to soften the surface a bit or catch big messes. In fact, most WTE parents swear by BlueSnail. One mom writes that the brand’s waterproof, quilted liners were “lifesavers because our son did pee on us almost every day for the first couple of months, haha,” and adds that she knows of those who purchased the Keekaroo and still used these liners, as the foam was too cold on their backs.

Looking for more exciting designs? No sweat — Mushie’s 100% cotton liners also come highly recommended by WTE community members. Sold in packs of three, choose between checkerboard and floral color combos, though all feature an invisible water-repellent layer to combat messy babies.

Can I use a changing pad on the floor?

Of course! Many changing pads — especially those made of foam or other wipe-clean surfaces — are perfect for floor changes when you're on the move. However, for more on-the-go scenarios, a travel changing pad or disposable liners might come in handy more.

No matter where you find yourself needing a changing pad, never leave baby unattended.

When do you need a portable pad versus a dresser pad?

Dresser changing pads are semi-permanent and best for nursery setups where you anticipate doing the most changes in a single spot, as they're designed to stay put.

Portable changing pads are typically compact, foldable, and made for on-the-go changes — think: car trunks or park benches (guilty!). Many diaper bags include one, but you can also upgrade to a more supportive option if you're a frequent flyer like me.

How do I clean and maintain my changing pad?

For fabric covers : Wash in warm water with gentle detergent (like one of our favorite baby laundry detergents !) and dry thoroughly to prevent mold or bacteria buildup.

For wipeable pads : Use a disinfectant wipe (whatever you prefer — but if using Lysol or Clorox, just let it air out for a bit before using again) or soap and water. Don’t forget the safety strap!

Also be sure to regularly check for tears or damage , especially if your pad is made of foam or vinyl. A cracked surface can invite germs to grow.

As far as maintenance goes, we recommend a quick daily wipe-down (a baby wipe works wonders!) and doing a deeper clean each week, or after especially big messes. This helps keep your baby's changing station safe and sanitary.

American Academy of Pediatrics, Make Baby's Room Safe: Parent Checklist , August 2020.

Your Next Read

When It Comes to Diapers, What's on The Inside Matters By Elizabeth Buxton, Director of Commerce Content Strategy

9 Best Swim Diapers to Keep Your Baby’s Poop Out of the Pool Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

How to Change a Baby’s Diaper Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

The 9 Best Baby Floor Seats, According to Parents and Experts Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

9 Best Baby Eczema Creams Trusted by Parents to Soothe Flare-Ups Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Cloth Diapers vs. Disposable Diapers: Which Should I Use? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Diaper Size Chart: Your Weight-Based Diapering Guide Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Manage a Squirmy Baby During Diaper Changes Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Safe vs. Unsafe Baby Sleep Environments: The Ultimate Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window