The 16 Best Baby Stocking Stuffers for Their First Christmas and Beyond

A collage of the best baby stocking stuffers, from left to right: stacking cups, Welly bandages, Bombas baby socks, LesserEvil Lil' Puffs snacks, and an Eric Carle-themed stocking

Quick Summary

The best baby stocking stuffers are age-appropriate and fun for little ones. Useful products like onesies, binkies and developmental toys are a surefire hit.

Growing up, my parents went out of their way to stuff my Christmas stocking with fun surprises. Needless to say, I’ve carried on that tradition in my own household as a mom to four young kids. Over the years, I’ve filled my fair share of the holiday staple with dozens upon dozens of trinkets, toys and treats, and have learned that the best baby stocking stuffers keep the fun going long after each gift has been unwrapped.

Whether you’re celebrating your child’s first Christmas or they’re pushing 2 years old, my recommendations for baby stocking stuffers include proven crowd-pleasers that my own crew loved (think: bubbles, teethers and books), along with recommendations by fellow parents in the What to Expect community.

How I Chose the Best Stocking Stuffers

Stocking stuffers for babies nail that sweet spot of being fun and useful, while still being small enough to squeeze into an oversized sock. To choose the best baby stocking stuffers, I relied on my personal experience as a mom of four. But because every family is different, I also pored over the What to Expect community message boards to see what other parents loved gifting.

Since babies generally fall into the newborn and 2-year-old age range, it’s important to consider where your child lies within that window. For very young children, I’ve found it’s better to choose something entertaining, like a rattle, or to opt for something useful that you as a parent will appreciate, such as binkies and onesies. You can get a bit more creative as your little one — and their development — grows.

I also ensured every item is either tiny to begin with or can be rolled into a smaller size to fit into a stocking. Finally, I kept most of the products to $10 or less. After all, this isn’t the gift category where you want to spend a ton of money.

Best Sensory Toy Stocking Stuffer

Baby Paper

Age Range: Newborn+

Why We Love It

All of my kids loved crinkly features on toys, but I didn’t discover Baby Paper until my youngest’s first Christmas. This was by far her favorite, even when it came to the larger gifts, despite being small enough to slip into a stocking. Baby Paper is a fabric-covered square that makes a crinkling sound wherever baby touches, chews or grabs.

This toy can be used as a teether or form of entertainment during tummy time. It comes in black and white patterns, including a sweet pet print. A nice perk: It can be tossed in the wash with the rest of your laundry.

Best Art Stocking Stuffer

JoyCat’s Jump Crayons

Age Range: 12 months+

Why We Love It

Not only are these crayons adorable, but they’re easy to grip thanks to their size and strategically placed indentations. JoyCat’s Jumbo Crayons come in a set of eight and 16, so you can divide them among several stocking if you have multiple kids.

All of my kids started coloring with these crayons, which are incredibly easy for them to use. They’re also non-toxic and washable, a feature that comes in handy if your little one likes to venture off the paper.

Best Clothing Stocking Stuffer

Kyte Baby Unisex Zipper Closure Footies

Age Range: Preemie-18-24 months (baby), 2T-7T (toddler)

Why We Love It

These footed PJs from Kyte Baby have a simple design and high-quality construction. Known for its bamboo rayon fabric, this style is stretchy enough to grow with your child and soft enough to avoid irritating delicate skin.

Choose from a range of colors and prints, including a Christmas-y emerald shade. Kyte Baby is admittedly a little pricier than many baby pajama brands, but plenty of What to Expect community members swear it’s worth the splurge.

Best Bubbles Stocking Stuffer

Fubbles Bubbles

Age Range: 18 months+

Why We Love It

Bubbles create joy for kids of all ages, so it’s an easy item to slip in their stocking. Fubbles Bubbles’ unique no-spill design is not only a great option for older babies who want to help but also helps keep messes to a minimum when you’re the head blower.

Fubbles Bubbles features a non-toxic solution, and you can buy refills to reduce waste. I’m partial to this brand given that its containers can stand up to the beatings my young kids dish out — and that’s saying something.

Best Stocking Stuffer Pacifiers

Philips Avent Soothie Pacifiers

Age Range: 0-3 months

Why We Love It

Philips Avent Soothie Pacifiers are a beloved binkie for a reason. This top-rated pacifier is made from medical-grade silicone with an orthodontic-friendly nipple to support the natural development of baby’s teeth and gums.

Philips Avent Soothie Pacifiers are a beloved binkie for a reason. This

is made from medical-grade silicone with an orthodontic-friendly nipple to support the natural development of baby’s teeth and gums.

These pacifiers come in a range of colors, including blue, festive green and pink/purple, allowing you to match your child’s binkie to their outfit. You also can’t beat the low price tag, which comes down to about $2 a pacifier.

Best Teething Stocking Stuffer

Comotomo Silicone Baby Teether

Age Range: 3 months+

Why We Love It

Deemed the Best Teething Toy , the Comotomo Silicone Baby Teether has a soft construction and easy grip that makes it ideal for babies. This teether has several spots for baby to gnaw on and is conveniently small enough to fit in a stocking. It’s also made from 100 percent food-grade silicone, so it can be tossed in the dishwasher for easy cleaning.

, the Comotomo Silicone Baby Teether has a soft construction and easy grip that makes it ideal for babies. This teether has several spots for baby to gnaw on and is conveniently small enough to fit in a stocking. It’s also made from 100 percent food-grade silicone, so it can be tossed in the dishwasher for easy cleaning.

Best Stocking Stuffer Bandages

Welly Bravery Bandages

Age Range: Newborn+

Why We Love It

You can never have too many adhesive bandages at home. But Welly makes fixing up boo-boos fun with adorable prints little kids love. These bandages come in a sturdy reusable tin you can toss in your diaper bag or car. The bandages are also different sizes to accommodate a variety of scrapes. My 2-year-old loves these so much that she uses them as stickers, too.

Best Baby Socks Stocking Stuffer

Bombas Baby Gripper Socks Gift Set

Age Range: 0-6 months, 6-12 months

Why We Love It

Babies are impressively skilled at losing socks, making it crucial to have more pairs than you think you’ll need on hand. I love that this set from Bombas includes a limited-edition, holiday-themed design with Fair Isle-inspired trees, penguins and polar bears.

The eight-pack comes in a gift box that you can fit inside a larger stocking. But if you’re tight on space, you can pull them out and pair them together before stuffing them in. These socks feature a blend of long-staple cotton, polyester and elastane for a cozy yet stretchy fit complete with grippy bottoms.

Best Sculpting Toy Stocking Stuffer

Play-Doh Holiday Pack Model Kit

Age Range: 2 years+

Why We Love It

Great for older babies, Play-Doh helps work on fine motor skills for kids pushing toddlerhood. This adorable set comes in the shape of a candy cane with multiple shades of red and green for a festive feel.

My kids always end up smushing Play-Doh colors together to create a mess, making new containers an exciting treat. If you’re tight on space, you can also break this pack apart and stuff the containers around other items.

Best Baby Care Stocking Stuffer

FridaBaby SmileFrida The Finger Toothbrush

Age Range: 3 months+

%MCEPASTEBIN%

Why We Love It

This may not be the most exciting thing baby will be gifted this holiday season, but it’s highly practical for parents and still provides the excitement of unveiling. The FridaBaby finger toothbrush is a double-sided finger brush that cleans baby’s top and bottom gums at once with soft, silicone bristles, speeding up the brushing process without irritating tender gums. If you plan to keep it out on your bathroom counter, I recommend storing it in the complimentary case to keep it clean between uses.

Best Bath Toy Stocking Stuffer

Skip Hop Baby Bath Toy Zoo Stack & Pour Buckets

Age Range: 9 months+

Why We Love It

Skip Hop Zoo’s adorable animal characters are always a win with kids and parents alike. The cut-out bottoms of this $10 set can be used to create different water patterns during bath time or in the sand once the weather warms up. Each includes a handle that’s just the right size for little hands to hold. I love that the buckets are stackable, making them easy to stash in a stocking or store away when they’re not in use.

Best Stocking Stuffer Board Book

Indestructibles: Jingle Baby Book

Age Range: Newborn+

Why We Love It

If you’ve never used Indestructibles books, you’re in for a treat. While kid’s books tend to get torn and beaten up over time, these are impressively durable. (They’re even advertised as “chew proof”!) This sweet story tells the tale of baby’s first Christmas, highlighting all the fun you’ll have together. The book is washable, nontoxic and rip-proof—and it doubles as a chew toy if baby needs to sink gums into something on a whim.

Best Stocking Stuffer Treat

LesserEvil Lil' Puffs Organic Baby Snacks

Age Range: 10+ months

Why We Love It

Stocking stuffers are synonymous with sweet treats, which babies can’t eat. So skip the candy and go for LesserEvil Lil’ Puffs. These are grain-free, rice-free and vegan puff snacks that are a big hit with the What to Expect community members whose little ones have hit the 10-month mark. Available in a few fun flavors (like Sweet Potato Apple), the 2.5-ounce bag is tiny enough to slip into a stocking, along with other goodies.

Worth noting: Although the Star-Berry Beet puffs contain beets, they won’t stain your house.

Best Ball Toy Stocking Stuffer

Mushie Silicone Nesting Spheres Sensory Toy

Age Range: 10+ months

Why We Love It

Never underestimate the fun factor of a simple ball. This set by Mushie features three that nest into each other for an additional layer of activity — and to fit more easily into a stocking.

Made from a slightly squishy silicone, each ball has a textured exterior that’s easier to grip, while the smallest doubles as a rattle. They’re also safe enough to gnaw on for teething tots. Choose between blue and blush shades.

Best Stacking Toy Stocking Stuffer

The First Years Stack Up Cup Toys

Age Range: 9 months+

Why We Love It

These stackable cups look simple, but are capable of creating so much fun. Rated our overall Best Bath Toy , these cups can be used in water or on dry land. This set features eight stackers with holes and big numbers on the bottom to practice counting. The cups are BPA-free — a nice feature in case baby decides to use them as a teether. They’re even dishwasher-safe for easy cleaning.

Best Baby Stocking Stuffer Set

Eric Carle The Very Hungry Caterpillar Stocking & Plush Set

Age Range: Newborn+

Why We Love It

The Very Hungry Caterpillar has been a beloved book for decades. It might be a stocking stuffer exactly, but this plush caterpillar and sock set is a two-for-one deal. Inspired by the sweet story, it gives kids another way to enjoy the tale. Both the stocking and caterpillar toy have a hanging loop, so you can hook them on a doorknob or baby’s stroller toys. They’re also small enough to fit inside your little one’s regular stocking or to simply serve as the main event.

has been a beloved book for decades. It might be a stocking stuffer exactly, but this plush caterpillar and sock set is a two-for-one deal. Inspired by the sweet story, it gives kids another way to enjoy the tale. Both the stocking and caterpillar toy have a hanging loop, so you can hook them on a doorknob or baby’s stroller toys. They’re also small enough to fit inside your little one’s regular stocking or to simply serve as the main event.

Baby Stocking Stuffers FAQs

About how much should I anticipate spending on stocking stuffers?

This ultimately depends on your budget, but speaking from experience, you can get a lot of cute stuff for under $10. I included a few items that cost a little more, but only for products that you’ll get a lot of mileage out of. Also, keep this in mind: Your child will have no idea what their stocking stuffers cost. What matters is that they’re a good fit for them.

Where can I buy cute, unique stockings for kids?

You can find adorable stocking options nearly everywhere. However, if you want a few options to start, check out Target, West Elm Kids, Pottery Barn Kids and Maisonette. Amazon is also an excellent spot to score cute, unique stockings at a low price (What to Expect editors recommend Creative Co-Op’s rustic designs.)

Your Next Read

20 Advent Calendars for Preschoolers That Are Bound to Sell Out Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Best Bath Toys for Babies and Toddlers Fact Checked by Jessie Van Amburg, Contributing Writer

I've Been Buying Christmas Books for 12 Years, and These are My 25 Favorites Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

10 DIY Baby Shower Gifts Moms-to-Be Will Actually Use Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Great Goodie Bag Ideas for Toddlers and Preschoolers That Aren't Junk Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Baby Registry Checklist: Exactly What to Put on a Baby Registry Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

26 Toys for 18-Month-Olds, According to Child Play Experts and Parents Alike Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Creating a Nursery on a Budget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Overwhelmed by Baby Gear? Here's What You Really Need (and What You Don't) Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Baby First-Aid Essentials Every Parent Should Have on Hand Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window