The 5 Biggest Baby-Naming Conflicts (and How to Solve Them Together)

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Common baby-naming conflicts and how to solve them

Susannah or Simon? Sage or Sawyer? Here's how to nail down the perfect name for your little one.

In the nine-month lead-up to welcoming your little one, chances are your to-do list feels endless at times. From nesting and getting the nursery ready to finding all the right baby gear, nailing down the perfect name for your little one might feel like a creative or daunting task — maybe even both at once!

The truth of the matter is that baby naming is the kind of personal, sensitive process that often leads to head-butting between partners, within families, and even between friends.

Thankfully, there are simple ways to tackle even the hairiest baby-naming conflicts. Here, five issues that parents often face and how to solve them.

Key Takeaways

Talk through your differences. Honest conversations (and vetoes) can help you land on a name you both love.

Set limits on outside opinions. Too much input from family or friends can add stress, so protect your space to choose a name as a couple.

Focus on what matters most to you. Whether it's honoring family, reflecting your backgrounds, or simply going with a name you both adore, the best choice is the one that feels right for your family.

1. The conflict: You and your partner aren't in sync

Maybe one of you prefers family names, and the other wants something more unique. One really wants to go with a certain initial, the other is open to others. Or one likes throwback names, and the other can't stand them.

What to Expect Community member Doublerainbowbaby2 and her partner ran into this stumbling block. "I am adamant that I don't want a name that was common among my peers while in school, and of course those are the only types of names my husband likes (i.e., Emily, Elizabeth, Catherine)," she shares. "I'd prefer a more old-fashioned name, like Rosalyn or Evelyn, but he doesn't like anything I propose."

When you loathe the name your partner loves (or vice versa), it may seem impossible to imagine that you'll ever find common ground.

The fix: Talk it out — and when you do, dig below the surface. Your name likes and preferences may have a lot to do with feelings about your family, your friends, and your own name.

For instance, your partner may have disliked being one of five Jasons in his class, while you didn't love having to spell your name for every teacher. Or perhaps your partner feels strongly about continuing family traditions with the name, while you want to set your own traditions with a more contemporary name.

It can also help for both of you to be allowed a "veto list," to assert a strong opinion about certain names, as long as each veto has a valid reason.

After all, no one wants to name their baby after grade school bullies, ex-boyfriends, or other people with whom they have a bad association.

2. The conflict: You're overwhelmed with options

Finding that you like too many names is a possible cause for confusion and tension too.

The fix: Start with a wide-ranging exploration of baby names to get a sense of what's popular, what's trending, and what names you're drawn to. From there, ask yourself questions like:

Do you want a name that's more familiar or more rare?

Do you want a conventional first name, or are you drawn to names that come from nontraditional sources?

Do you prefer a name with a clear gender identity or one that works for both sexes?

Does meaning matter to you — and if so, what kind is most important?

What names are you emotionally drawn to, and what do you love about them?

Considering these factors can help you zero in on a shorter list and, at some point, your final choice.

3. The conflict: You're feeling pressured by family members

Whether it's an aggressive in-law inserting themself into the process or one whole side of the family assuming that your baby will be given a specific name, couples often clash with opinionated loved ones.

But giving in to family pressure to name your baby something you don't personally love could lead to feelings of regret.

The fix: Setting boundaries is key. You and your partner should present a united front, so start by discussing with each other how you would like to respond to both sets of parents.

Setting boundaries on how far you let your parents and in-laws into your family life is much easier when you both are on the same page and prepared to stand together against name pressure.

For example, you might offer a simple, straightforward statement like, "We understand your point of view and appreciate your concern, but we are still planning to go with the name we've chosen."

4. The conflict: You're struggling to name baby number two or three because you want it to go with siblings' names

If this sounds like you, you're not alone. Many parents say they found it easier to name a first baby than younger siblings, as the first name can set a style or tone that you may feel bound to follow, and that narrows the list of possibilities.

The fix: First, know that it's okay for your children to have very different kinds of names. But if complementary names are important to you, think about what factors you want to match.

For example, if your first child has a two-syllable Irish name that ends in 'y' and has family meaning, maybe you just want to look for another Irish name, or another name drawn from the family tree, rather than aligning every factor too closely.

Searching for a name you both love? Check the What to Expect app for a whole host of baby name ideas.

5. The conflict: You're drowning in input

It's all too common for parents to find themselves overwhelmed with confusing feedback from family members, friends, colleagues, and even casual acquaintances.

The fix: If you're getting too much input, it might be confusing. Though it may be easier said than done, making a concerted effort not to share your top choice can save you the headache.

Keeping your baby name a secret gives you and your partner time and space to make this big decision for yourselves without unnecessary input. And once your adorable baby is born, your loved ones will embrace whatever name you choose, along with the beautiful new addition to your family!

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Baby Names , 2025. WhatToExpect.com, 8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name , September 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Should You Keep Your Baby’s Name a Secret? Why Some Parents Wait — and Others Don’t September 2025. Pamela Redmond Satran, co-founder of Nameberry. Raffi Bilek, L.C.S.W.-C., a family therapist and director of the Baltimore Therapy Center. Jennifer Moss, founder and CEO of BabyNames.com.

Updates history

October 1, 2025

Editors: Lisa Lombardi/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

What is your first impression of this boy name?

Share your favourite feminine names starting with “L” ?

Tell me an uncommon name

There are 53,892 active discussions happening now in our Baby Names community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Should You Keep Your Baby’s Name a Secret? Why Some Parents Wait — and Others Don’t Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

25 Unisex Baby Names You'll Love Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Top 1,000 Baby Girl Names in the U.S. Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

5 Easy Ways to Tell Your Newborn Twin Babies Apart Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 10 Questions Experts Say Matter Most Before Deciding to Have Another Baby Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

Traditional Baby Naming Ceremonies Are Getting a Modern Twist — Here's How to Plan Your Own Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Manage Overeager In-Laws When Raising a Baby Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

From One Child to Two: 23 Secrets of Second-Time Parents Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Cope With Baby Shower Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Shari Lusskin, M.D.

11 Reasons Your Baby Won't Sleep and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How to Get Your Baby to Stop Fighting Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do When Your Twin Babies Cry at the Same Time Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Not Sure If You’re Ready For a Baby? The Big Questions to Ask Before You Start Trying Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Two Under 2: Your Guide to Close-in-Age Siblings Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window