The 6-Month Well-Baby Visit

mom with baby, six month well baby visit

Here's what will happen at the 6-month well-baby visit, including the physical checkup, developmental milestones and shots.

Just like that — wasn’t it just yesterday he was born? — your little one has clocked in 6 months. And so have you!

While there will be so much more to come, give yourself a pat on the back for the amazing progress you’ve both made. With this momentous half-year milestone comes another well-baby visit , and there will be lots to check on and check in about.

What’s in store at your baby’s 6-month checkup? There will be another round of immunizations — so be sure to bring along a soothing toy and your best distraction and comfort skills — and a chance to get all your questions answered on another truly exciting milestone: starting solids.

The physical checkup

Are those pearly whites beginning to push through — or is baby gumming on anything he can fit into his mouth? In addition to all the routine checks, at this visit your baby’s doctor will be looking at your little one’s gums for signs of teeth. While most babies get their first tooth at about 6 months old, some babies pop their first one as early as 4 months old and others celebrate their first birthday without a single tooth.

The pediatrician will show you how to brush new baby teeth and offer tips on managing teething symptoms, including drooling, fussiness and night waking.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that pediatricians screen moms for postpartum depression at the 6-month well-baby visit; symptoms often don’t appear until late in the first half of the first year or even beyond. Be sure to ask if you have any concerns about PPD or other mood disorders in you or your partner.

Developmental milestones

Your baby is full of personality these days, a personality all his own — and he’s busy socializing with you and just about anyone whose eye he catches. The doctor will be checking for or asking about all of your little one’s latest skills, including:

Playing with toes

Bringing things to his mouth (maybe everything!)

Passing objects from one hand to another

Rolling over in both directions

Sitting up assisted with good head control (or even sitting on his own!)

Laughing

Interacting with the baby in the mirror (himself!)

Babbling (stringing together vowel sounds at first, then adding some consonants)

Holding a bottle — or, more likely, trying to help hold it — during feedings

Don’t forget, every baby is one-of-a-kind — and there’s a wide range of normal when it comes to development. Still, if you have any concerns about your little one’s milestones, make sure you check with your baby’s doctor.

Talk to the doctor too, if your baby isn’t laughing or squealing, isn’t smiling socially or otherwise expressing happiness or affection, doesn’t make vowel sounds, doesn’t respond to sounds around him or try to reach for things, and doesn’t roll over in either direction.

6-month shots

At 6 months, your baby’s due for additional doses of several immunizations. Remember, your little one needs all the recommended doses to be fully protected. These vaccines recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will include:

DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis)

Hib (haemophilus influenzae type b) , depending on the vaccine given

IPV (polio)

PCV13 (pneumococcal disease)

HepB (hepatitis B)

RV (rotavirus) , depending on the vaccine given

It might also be time for your baby's first flu shot . For protection during baby’s first flu season, he’ll need a second flu shot four weeks after his first one. The first dose "primes" the immune system, and the second one provides immune protection.

After that, the CDC recommends one shot at the start of each flu season to stay protected. If flu season hasn’t yet started, your baby should get immunized as soon as the year’s current vaccine becomes available.

Questions to ask your doctor

It’s time to take your baby’s taste buds to the next level. If your baby hasn’t started solid foods already, the doctor can offer tips for transitioning to solids . Here are some questions that would be helpful to ask:

What kinds of food should I offer my baby when I introduce solids? How do I introduce new foods?

What if he spits the food out?

Do you recommend baby-led weaning (starting babies on table foods)?

How much breast milk or formula versus solid foods should I be feeding my baby?

How can I make sure he’s getting the nutrients he needs?

Do I have to worry about food allergies if they run in the family?

Are there any vitamin supplements I should be giving him?

Your baby’s next visit will be at 9 months — don’t forget to get an appointment on the books now!