The 11 Best Pregnancy Pillows, Tested by 6 Tired Moms-to-Be

Best Pregnancy Body Pillows

QUICK SUMMARY

The best pregnancy pillow overall is the Momcozy U-Shaped Pregnancy Pillow . Moms-to-be praise its versatility, support and relatively compact size.

Once I hit my second trimester and my OB/GYN told me to start sleeping on my side, I knew my bedtime routine was about to change. As a lifelong back sleeper, I worried that this new position would keep me up all night. My OB/GYN, physical therapist, and a few wise mom friends suggested I get a pregnancy pillow. Not only would it encourage a pregnancy-safe sleep position , but it could also ease some of those oh-so-common pregnancy aches and pains by cushioning everything from my neck to my bump to my knees.

And let me tell you: They were right. My pregnancy pillow became one of my most-used sleep sidekicks.

How We Chose and Tested the Best Pregnancy Pillows

Finding the best pregnancy pillow isn’t a one-size-fits-all task — because no two pregnancies (or sleep needs) are exactly the same. To put together this guide, I combined hands-on testing with expert input and tons of feedback from real moms. Here’s how we narrowed it down to the 11 best:

I tested six different pregnancy pillows between my two pregnancies, sleeping with each one for at least two weeks. I evaluated their size, shape, firmness, and how well they relieved common pregnancy symptoms like hip pain, backaches, and round ligament pain . Because one pregnancy was in winter and the other in summer, I also paid attention to heat retention (hello, sweaty sleep).

I pulled insights from the What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards , where more than 1,200 community members voted for their favorite pregnancy pillows. I looked at the top vote-getters, as well as voter feedback to identify standout picks for specific needs (like extra back support or cooling comfort).

I spoke to five What to Expect staffers and contributors who’ve tested many of these pillows across eight pregnancies. They shared what mattered most to them — from fill type and pillow shape to how easy it was to repurpose the pillow for postpartum support.

I scoured What to Expect’s community forums and message boards to which pillows moms truly loved — especially those that helped them sleep better through hip pain, growing bumps, or the dreaded third-trimester insomnia.

I consulted Amy Wetter, M.D. , a board-certified OB-GYN at Pediatrix Medical Group, and reviewed guidelines from the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists (ACOG) to better understand what makes a pregnancy pillow not just cozy — but supportive and safe, especially for specific symptoms like sciatica or pelvic pain.

Based on parent input, expert guidance, and research, every pillow we recommend:

Supports side sleeping — the safest position for pregnancy

Eases pressure on your back, hips, knees, and belly

Helps you fall asleep faster and stay asleep longer (at least as much as possible with a baby-on-board bladder!)

Ashley Jones contributed to this article.

Best Pregnancy Pillow

Momcozy U-Shaped Pregnancy Pillow

Adjustable fill

Cooling cover option

Can't adjust shape

Material: Velvet or cooling cotton

Fill type: Polyester microfiber

Weight: 6 pounds

Dimensions: 56 inches long

Why We Love It

Voted Best Pregnancy Pillow in the 2024 Mom Must-Have Awards , the Momcozy U-Shaped Pillow earns rave reviews for actually making it possible to sleep through pregnancy pains. The key is the polyfill blend, which is firm but still soft enough that you’re comfortable at night.

"It’s more malleable, which makes it better, in my opinion, for sleeping in different positions," says Madelyn Casey , a mom of two. Plus, you can remove, add, or move around the filling to provide the right support. Although you can’t adjust the shape like you can with other pillows on this list, What to Expect moms say they don’t mind given the pillow’s comfort and support level.

"The between-the-legs part of the Momcozy U-Shaped Pillow actually aligned my knees and legs in a way that I expected, so I got the hip support I needed," says Christine Mattheis , What to Expect’s VP of Content, who relied on this award-winning pillow during her second pregnancy. "It did a really nice job of supporting my back until really late in the third trimester.”

Another pro? Its versatility. Madelyn says she uses it at night and during the day to help relieve lower back and sciatic nerve pain while reading, watching TV, or doing other activities.

“I got the U-shaped full-body Momcozy pillow, and it's literally the most comfortable pillow ever,” writes a community member . “I have a wedge that's good for a little extra support, but right now, I'm not even using it since I got this one!”

Tested by Madelyn Casey , mom of two and What to Expect Contributor:

"All in all, this is an awesome pillow, especially if you prefer that softer stuffing. Plus it can be flipped and used in many different ways that offer me support during my pregnancy."

Video Reviews

Momcozy U-Shaped Pregnancy Pillow Review

Community Reviews

JuneToApril2024 “I've been using the U-shaped Momcozy for the past three weeks, and it's been such a game changer. I love the feeling of being snuggled all night, and it keeps me from waking up on my back. Cannot recommend enough.”

blueberryc22 "I love this one [Momcozy pregnancy pillow]! I got it with the cooling cover so i dont get hot with it and it feels nice. when I want to turn over, i just use the "back" side and it feels the same to me as the stomach side."

Best Affordable Pregnancy Pillow

Room Essentials Body Pillow

Affordable

can be used as regular body pillow later

Easy to move between rooms

Gives off little to no heat

Does not contour to body

Only provides mild pain relief

Material: Polyester

Fill type: Polyester

Weight: 2.58 pounds

Dimensions: 52 x 20 x 7 inches

Why We Love It

If you’re looking for a no-frills pregnancy pillow that offers maximum comfort and medium pain relief, this Target option is it. The basic body pillow that provides just enough comfort and extra support for a mom-to-be’s growing belly. I used this during the first trimester with Baby #2 when I was craving a little extra comfort. (I.e. before the aches and pains really set in.) I also used it further along in that pregnancy when I was resting on the couch or sitting on my chair; it's super light making it easy to take from room to room.

Another perk to the size: It didn't give off as much heat, which is clutch if you're pregnant in the summer.

It doesn’t have contours or curves like a body pillow marketed for pregnancy, but I found it easy to mold to the shape I needed. And it has a decent fill to help support your back, legs and bump, though not as much as pregnancy-specific pillows.

It doesn’t have contours or curves like a body pillow marketed for pregnancy, but I found it easy to mold to the shape I needed. And it has a decent fill to

Some moms in the What to Expect community suggest picking up two of these basic pillows — one for your front and one for your back — to serve as a makeshift U-shaped pillow for a fraction of the price. Just make sure you buy a few body pillow-sized pillowcases as well, as this one doesn't come with one included and is not machine washable.

Tested by Leah Rocketto , soon-to-be mom of two and What to Expect's Associate Commerce Director:

"Despite being light — perfect if you're dealing with pregnancy sweats — Target's no-frills body pillow had plenty of fill to support my knees and head at a time when pain was minimal. "

Video Reviews

Room Essentials Body Pillow Review

Community Reviews

"I don't use a pregnancy pillow but I do use a normal body pillow. Just wrap my leg and arm around it or put my back against it to keep me comfortable when sleeping. I was a stomach sleeper and couldn't get comfortable in my side. "

"I used a normal body pillow that typically costs around $10 at most stores and then regular pillows elsewhere. I preferred using multiple as different nights different positions felt better and I could adjust every night to make sure I was comfortable"

“I’ve honestly just been using my body pillow it’s works just as good I think! Plus it saves me $40-50 on a pregnancy pillow.”

Best Pregnancy Pillow for Full-Body Support

PharMeDoc Full Body U-Shaped Pillow

Multi-purpose

can be used on both sides

has a detachable extension

Some say it loses fluffiness after extended use

Material : Jersey

Fill type: Polyester

Weight: 7.05 pounds

Dimensions: 53 x 31 x 7 inches

Why We Love It

The PharMeDoc Full Body U-Shaped pregnancy pillow earns rave reviews for being comfortable and customizable. The dual-sided design makes it easy to flip around in the middle of the night with no readjusting. It also has a detachable “leg” that you can remove if you’d rather save yourself the space in bed. And if the U shape doesn’t seem right for you, PharMeDoc also makes a C-shaped pillow , as well as a wedge pillow for moms-to-be who are short on bed space.

Despite the full-body design, the PharMeDoc U-Shaped pillow isn’t as large or bulky as other U-shaped pregnancy pillows, which is a huge factor for many moms-to-be who use this particular pillow. However, those who sleep with a partner in a queen-sized bed might find it to be too large. Robin Hilmantel , Senior Director of Editorial Strategy and Growth at What to Expect, used the Pharmedoc U-shaped pillow and loved it, but found it to be most suitable for her and her husband’s bed once they got a king.

The memory foam filling is firm enough to provide support, but still has a bit of squish for comfort. Meanwhile, the jersey cotton cover is machine-washable so it’s easy to keep this pillow clean.

Tested by Robin Hilmantel , mom of three and What to Expect's Senior Director of Editorial Strategy and Growth:

"I just loved the feeling of being cocooned in the PharMeDoc U-Shaped pillow. It was so comfortable and helped me sleep on my side throughout my pregnancy. I enjoyed it so much that I kept it a few months into postpartum — much to my husband's chagrin. It was a sad day when I finally got rid of it!"

Community Reviews

“The cooling dark grey really is cooling and has been amazing. I’m an extremely hot sleeper & have only woken up in a puddle one time since buying this!!”

“I have this exact one too! Can confirm it is cooling and super comfy!!”

“I just got this one this weekend, so far so good! It fluffed back up nicely after unboxing and the cooling cover is a must for me. We have a king bed so I wasn't worried about it being too big, if we were in a queen it might be too big (my husband is a giant human and takes up more than his own half of the bed).”

“This is my second pregnancy using the same one! It’s a great pillow.”

Best Pregnancy Pillow for Round Ligament Pain

Leachco Snoogle Chic Supreme

Wraps around entire body

conforms to front and back

Ensures proper alignment

Firm but still soft

Large

Can give off a lot of heat

Material: Sateen cotton

Fill type: Polyester

Weight: 7.04 pounds

Dimensions: 55 x 33 x 8.5 inches

Why We Love It

During my second pregnancy, the Leachco Snoogle easily earned the MVP title. Both my OB/GYN and pelvic floor therapist recommended the C-shaped option, saying it would provide the ample, full-body support I needed to combat round ligament pain. And, to no surprise, they were right.

The secret is the extended C-shaped design: it wraps around your entire body, from back to belly, ensuring proper alignment to reduce strain on your achy back and hips. In the center, there’s a curved space that provides more room in the shoulder and hip areas to better cradle your belly.

And if you have a tiny bladder, like me, you’ll really appreciate the pillow’s C-shape. The lack of backing made it easy for me to roll out of bed and waddle my way to the bathroom. (If you need a laugh, ask a pregnant woman to climb over a U-shaped pillow to pee in time.)

The fill is on the firmer side, which isn’t right for everyone, but I found it had just the right amount of squish — so I was sleeping on a cloud rather than a brick. Several other What to Expect moms agree with me, believing the unique fill allows the pillow to stay firm longer. In fact, one What to Expect mom said she’s used the pillow for four pregnancies.

Another potential downside is the size. Although my pillow, dog, husband, and I were able to fit comfortably in our king-sized bed, it probably wouldn’t work if we had a smaller bed—or if my toddler insisted on sleeping with us, too.

"My pelvic floor therapist recommended the Leachco, saying the C-shape would properly align—and reduce the strain on—my back, hips, and legs. After a few nights of use, the sharp, nightlong pain became a dull, short-lived ache."

Video Reviews

Leachco Snoogle Chic Supreme Review

Community Reviews

“We call it my 'boyfriend' when I'm pregnant because I am in love with it. My husband doesn't understand the joy it brings me! Sweet relief!!!”

“My husband gave me a Snoogle pillow seven years ago, at the end of my first pregnancy, and I remember being irritated. It seemed like a silly waste. I am now expecting #4 and I LOVE, LOVE, LOVE my Snoogle! I've told my husband more than once that it's the very best gift he's ever given me — and he's a very good gift-giver. I'm a stomach sleeper, so I especially appreciate the Snoogle's back support. I tuck the pillow's 'tail' between my thighs and under my growing belly for additional support. It feels like I'm sleeping on a cloud! The pillow's basic slipcover is a nightmare (it felt like I was on the losing end of a wrestling match with a boa constrictor whenever I tried to put the slipcover back on after washing!), so this time I purchased a newly designed Snoogle cover with a zipper. Now the pillow is perfect!”

“I bought a Snoogle a couple of weeks ago, and it was the best money I've spent in a long time. I wasn't sleeping because I was using five pillows to get comfortable and they kept slipping. Since I got my Snoogle, I have slept so well. I think it is worth every penny.”

“My sister sent me a Snoogle! She swears by it from her pregnancies. I just got it out for the first time this week. At first I was unsure, but now I love it! I like that there’s a few different positions I can get comfortable in, and my husband even likes snuggling it from his side of the bed too. I do still put my normal pillow up by where my head goes because my pillowcase is softer than the Snoogle cover.”

“I loved my snoogle last pregnancy! This time I was gifted a different brand and I don't like it half as much.”

“I love my snoogle. It’s comfy and cushiony.”

Best Pregnancy Pillow for Sciatica Relief

Queen Rose Full Body Pregnancy Pillow

Extra soft

maintains plush shape well

offers extra-long options for tall people

Too large for some couples sleeping together

Material: Velvet

Fill type: Cotton

Weight: 7.2 pounds

Dimensions: 55 x 31 x 7 inches; 60 x 31 x 7 inches; 65 x 31 x 7 inches

Why We Love It

The Queen Rose stands out for best supporting hips and spine, to reduce pressure on the sciatic nerve (thus, reducing the pain!). Something Lisafe Carreon, Senior Product Manager at What to Expect, can attest to. “It helped alleviate my hip pain when lying on my side, by allowing me to put the pillow in between my legs," she says.

stands out for best supporting hips and spine, to reduce pressure on the sciatic nerve (thus, reducing the pain!). Something Lisafe Carreon, Senior Product Manager at What to Expect, can attest to.

Although designed for side sleeping, moms love that you can configure it any way you want so that it supports you when you’re lying back watching TV or are sitting upright nursing. The polyester fill is adjustable and easy to contort to a position that’s to your liking both during pregnancy and postpartum recovery , though some, including Lisafe, found it a little too firm. Expectant moms also love the comfort of the velvety material (although it might be warm for those who tend to sleep hot).

One other thing to note: the size. Longer than most pregnancy pillows, it comes in 55- 60- and 65-inch sizes, perfect for moms-to-be who are tall or who want plenty of leg support. But if you don't have the space, you may want to consider a different pillow.

One other thing to note: the size. L

Tested by Lisafe Carreon, mom of one and What to Expect's Senior Product Manager:

"It was comfortable and helped me feel supported when lying on my side."

Community Reviews

“I have a Queen Rose and it's such a life saver! My sciatica is no longer an issue and I sleep like a baby. I LOVE that pillow and will use it once baby arrives for breastfeeding, etc.”

“Definitely the U pillow. Just purchased one on Amazon and it’s the best thing ever. Great price, super comfy even my dogs love it. Great back support if you turn a lot at night. Check out the Queen Rose brand. I got the gray color and love it.”

“I finally slept well. After trying out the baby bub and being pretty unsatisfied, I caved and tried out a new pillow. It’s perfect for keeping my hips up when I swing my leg over to the side, which keeps my belly from full on smashing against the bed. I don’t know how this is related, but I also didn’t wake up with numb hands once.”

“I have a Queen Rose u-shape. I’m much more comfortable and my backaches have gone away. It could just be the space on my bed but it falls of the side so I’m constantly readjusting it. My biggest issue is that sometimes I wake up with my ear hurting so I have to switch sides. I’ve always been a side sleeper and have never had that problem with any other pillow before. I’m glad I have it though!”

Best Pregnancy Pillow for Bump Support

Momcozy J-Shaped Maternity Body Pillow

Space-saving

easy to mold

contoured for belly support

Some said cover began to pill after multiple washes

Material: Jersey

Fill type: Polyester

Weight: 4.4 pounds

Dimensions: 40 x 28 x 7 inches

Why We Love It

Almost every pregnancy pillow I tried supported my ever-growing belly, but the Momcozy J-shaped pregnancy pillow was a step above the rest. The secret? Its ability to contour to your belly, offering a bit of extra, customized comfort. The specialized support also helps relieve pressure throughout your entire body. Although it wasn't the most effective at reducing my intense round ligament pain, it did provide relief once that symptom became more mild.

Of course, the support isn't limited to your belly. Momcozy's J-shaped option provides cradling support from head to knees, and you can flip it in either direction depending on which side you prefer to sleep on and whether you need more knee or neck support. Plus, many moms-to-be love that the Momcozy pillow fill is soft and malleable, making it easy to squish into (and stay in) the desired shape. Although I wish it had been a little firmer, I didn’t find it lacking in support.

Unlike C- and U-shaped pillows, its slimmer, one-sided shape means it won’t take up the entire bed — great if you're short on space. That also means it’s significantly lighter, so it's easy to move in the middle of the night or bring to the couch for daytime use.

Worried about being too hot? The jersey cover is lightweight enough for hot sleepers and can be machine washed for easy cleaning.

"The pillow is squishy, but still provides enough support to relieve mild pregnancy pains in the hips and back."

Video Reviews

Momcozy J-Shaped Maternity Body Pillow

Community Reviews

ssickler1018 “I have the momcozy and it has been life changing. Very comfortable.”

julymama702 “I used the pillow for the first time last night and slept like a newborn baby. I usually wake around 8am due to discomfort and tossing and turning but I slept in until 9:15 today. I was so confused when my 15 month old came to wake me, I’m usually up before him. GAME CHANGER!!... Very fluffy, firm but also soft. I love a pillow between my legs when sleeping and it also provides that as well.”

Best Pregnancy Pillow for Lower Back Support

Hiccapop Pregnancy Pillow Wedge

Affordable

lightweight

adjustable firmness

portable

Does not contour around your entire body

Material: Velboa

Fill type: Memory foam

Weight: 11.7 ounces

Dimensions: 15 x 13.25 x 4.5 inches

Why We Love It

Back aching? Been there! The Hiccapop pregnancy wedge delivers a one-two punch. First, its wedge design elevates the upper body — just position it under your head, chest, or belly — to ease lower back strain and maximize comfort while sleeping on your side.

Then there's the memory foam fill, which conforms to your head and neck for better, more even weight distribution, helping to reduce pressure on your back. Moms say it’s not as dense as other memory foam pillows, but still offers solid support. Bonus: it’s well-ventilated, with a breathable foam layer that helps keep the pillow cool.

As an added perk, the pillow is dual-sided — one side features soft memory foam, the other firmer foam — so you can choose the support that suits you best. For instance, you might want to use the softer, body-contouring memory foam side under your bump, while the firm foam might be better suited between your legs or behind your back when sitting.

It weighs less than a pound, and moms-to-be say this pregnancy pillow is easy to travel with so you have comfort 24/7. At a lower price point than other memory foam options, some moms report purchasing two to support different areas of their body at the same time.

Community Reviews

“I got that same hiccapop wedge pillow and I like it! Right now I’m using it to keep myself from rolling over on my back, don’t necessarily need it for my stomach yet. I’m intrigued by the big pillows too but didn’t want to take up the entire bed.”

“That little pillow is the best even if you do one in front one in back and a standard btw legs bc you can still easily get up to go potty lol.”

“I put one under my stomach and one behind my back…it was heavenly!”

“Very pleased with this little wedge pillow! I currently sleep with a pregnancy pillow AND two king size pillows and this little wedge makes it that much more comfortable for me to sleep! If any of you are looking for something to help with sleeping comfortably I would 10/10 recommend this! I either put it under my belly or place it behind my butt to help with hip pain. I was already practically sleeping on all my pillows but I’m telling you this little wedge has been a game changer for me!”

Best Pregnancy Pillow for Side Sleeping Support

Boppy Side Sleeper Pregnancy Pillow

Compact

portable

lightweight

adjustable

Some say the band doesn't stretch as far as needed

Material: Cotton

Fill type: Polyester

Weight: 1.65 pound

Dimensions: ‎24 x 14 inches

Why We Love It

Christine also needed help managing middle back pain at night. And she found the Boppy Side Sleeper was the perfect solution, as the butterfly-shaped design simultaneously supported her belly and back to relieve pressure on the hips. (Also a game-change if you're dealing with round ligament pain during pregnancy .) Many moms also say this design helped them adapt to sleeping on their side after spending a lifetime as back or stomach sleepers.

It’ll keep you securely in place while you sleep without the potentially claustrophobic feeling of a large dual-sided body pillow. Plus, the band in the middle stretches, so you can lengthen the distance between the two sides depending on your body.

Some members of our What to Expect community say that this pillow works well when paired with a regular pillow between your knees, as opposed to the small “extra” pillow included but not attached to the main butterfly pillow.

The pillow’s removable cover is machine washable for super simple cleaning. Moms also add that this pregnancy pillow is an excellent option for postpartum recovery and while breast or bottle-feeding.

Tested by Christine Mattheis , mom of two and What to Expect’s VP of Content:

“I originally tried a wedge, which supported my belly, but my torso would still twist while I was lying on my side. I found that the Boppy Side Sleeper supported my back from both sides and prevented me from turning.”

Community Reviews

"I got the boppy and love it, I have a giant pregnancy pillow that I’ve been using but it wouldn’t keep me on my side or give me the support I needed around my hips and back. Now, it basically supports my belly while I’m on my side and has practically resolved the back pain I was getting during the day! Personally it worked for me so I say it’s worth it! But everyone is different!"

“I tried my U-shaped one in my last pregnancy at first but I always felt like I was suffocating. I bought the boppy one and I love that it gives just enough support under my belly and lower back.”

“I have been loving my Boppy side sleeper, and have been using it for weeks...I bought it when I was starting to get lower back pain, I think toward the end of 1st tri. Since then I haven't had much back pain! It provides support and allow you to sleep at an angle so that your weight won't be directly on your hip. The other thing I love is using a small elongated pillow for lumbar support when I'm sitting on the couch."

“I have been loving my Boppy side sleeper, and have been using it for weeks...

Best Pregnancy Pillow for Adjustable Support

Frida Mom Adjustable Keep-Cool Pregnancy Pillow

Shape can be adjusted

Microbead filling helps keep you cool

Lightweight

Not full body

Won't fit in a carry-on

Cover material : Nylon and polyester

Fill type : Polystyrene Foam Beads

Weight : 1 pound

Dimensions : ‎54 x 9 inches

Why We Love It

Frida is known for creating products that take care of moms, like their game-changing upside down peri bottle and a breastfeeding care kit with items you didn’t even know you needed. So it’s no surprise that their pregnancy pillow is a popular choice among moms. What makes the Frida Mom pillow stand out from the others is that it provides full-body support without taking up the entire bed. This is largely due to the filling: It consists of foam beads that make it easy for you to twist the pillow to suit your needs (and fit your space).

with items you didn’t even know you needed. So it’s no surprise that their pregnancy pillow is a popular choice among moms. What makes the Frida Mom pillow stand out from the others is that it provides full-body support without taking up the entire bed. This is largely due to the filling: It consists of foam beads that make it easy for you to twist the pillow to suit your needs (and fit your space).

The foam beads also aren’t as heavy as traditional memory foam or down fillings, which means they don’t generate as much heat — something Karla Martin, What to Expect's Sr. Photo Manager, deeply appreciated.

"It’s so cooling, which helped me a lot because I was very pregnant during the summer," she says. In fact, Karla shares that it was so comfortable her husband would often snag it when she wasn’t using it. I also found the filling, combined with the light cover, made sleeping in the summer more bearable.

Though moms say the pillow leans more on the squishy side, they add that it’s easy to adjust the fill to be more supportive where it’s needed. Simply “massage” the filling around until you reach your desired firmness. You may have some extra fabric, but that can easily be tied off.

easy to adjust the fill to be more supportive where it’s needed. Simply “massage” the filling around until you reach your desired firmness. You may have some extra fabric, but that can easily be tied off.

Tested by Karla Martin, mom of one and What to Expect’s Sr. Photo Manager:

"I loved that I could twist and turn it to provide whatever support my body needed."

Video Reviews

Frida Mom Adjustable Keep-Cool Pregnancy Pillow Review

Community Reviews

HGNunya1 "I have the mom frida pregnancy pillow and it’s awesome. Like a giant squishimellow."

Aras222 "I like the Frida mom pillow. it doesn't make me too hot and I can adjust the fill to be more or less supportive where I need it."

Best Pregnancy Pillow for Travel

Boppy Pregnancy Wedge

Compact

organic cotton cover

portable

Doesn’t conform to your body

Material: Organic cotton

Fill type: Polyurethane foam

Weight: 9.9 ounces

Dimensions: 14 x 4 x 12 inches

Why We Love It

As I mentioned, my first pregnancy was about finding a pillow that would make side-sleeping more comfortable. I appreciated that the Boppy Pregnancy Wedge Pillow took up little to no space while still making for a more comfortable sleep position. This is largely due to the fill: It’s stiff but still soft, so you get the support without feeling like you're resting on a brick.

Another perk: It can be used outside the bed. I'd put it beneath my lower back when sitting, between my knees when sleeping, and even behind my head if I was reading in bed. I even packed it in my hospital bag to make labor and delivery more comfortable.

Karla Martin, What to Expect's Senior Photo Editor, also found the wedge helpful later in her pregnancy, saying, "I slept mostly on my left side, and when the baby started to get really heavy, this wedge helped so much." She added that she also used the wedge for tummy time and side-lying play after her daughter was born.

Overall, if you don’t have a ton of pain or a ton of bed space, this Boppy wedge is a solid choice.

"[The Boppy Wedge] is stiffer than most pillows, which I personally like. That said, it's still soft so you don't feel like you're resting on a brick."

Video Reviews

Boppy Pregnancy Wedge Review

Community Reviews

"I just purchased the Boppy wedge. It's good for back and belly support while sleeping — and it's not expensive, too."

"The Boppy wedge does work great in the early uncomfortable days. Now I just mainly use the thinner side to go between my legs and find a softer pillow is more comfortable under my ginormous 34-week belly."

"I have the wedge pillow and love it! I use it at night and when I'm resting on the couch. I think it's helped me a ton!"

“If you are like me and want some support for your stomach if sleeping on your side but don’t want a huge pregnancy pillow in your bed, this Boppy wedge pillow is inexpensive and AMAZING!!! I was having trouble sleeping even with taking Unisom because I was so uncomfortable but ever since I got this, I’ve been sleeping so much better (still with help from Unisom) but I’m not waking up constantly due to being uncomfortable. I use it when I’m laying down and watching tv or reading too.”

“I HATED the large traditional pregnancy body pillow. This boppy wedge pillow is amazing. Also use one to put behind me under my hips. The only way I can actually sleep!”

Most Versatile Pregnancy Pillow

Boppy Multi-Use Total Body Pillow

Contoured shape

entire pillow is washable

versatile

Doesn’t hold its shape as well as some others

Material: Cover: Rayon, Pillow skin: 80 percent polyester, 20 percent cotton

Fill type: Polyester

Weight: 5 pounds

Dimensions: 8 x 25 x 8 inches

Why We Love It

If you’re looking for a pregnancy pillow that doesn’t invade too much of your partner’s personal space, but still provides full-body support, look no further than the Boppy Total Body Pillow . It has a uniquely contoured shape designed to be easily adjustable as your bump changes through pregnancy and the postpartum period. Specifically, it has an area that cradles your belly, a generous area for your head to rest, and another bump out to go between your legs to support your back and hips.

. It has a uniquely contoured shape designed to be easily adjustable as your bump changes through pregnancy and the postpartum period. Specifically, it has an area that cradles your belly, a generous area for your head to rest, and another bump out to go between your legs to support your back and hips.

Dr. Wetter recommends the Boppy Total Body, because it can be twisted and folded to use for back support while sitting or as a nursing pillow. Many of our What to Expect community members are in complete agreement about this pregnancy pillow’s versatility and support throughout pregnancy and beyond. One of its best qualities is that the entire thing can be thrown in the washing machine as needed — not just the cover.

Dr. Wetter recommends the Boppy Total Body, because it can be twisted and folded to use for back support while sitting or as a nursing pillow. Many of our What to Expect community members are in complete agreement about this pregnancy pillow’s versatility and support throughout pregnancy and beyond.

One of its best qualities is that the entire thing can be thrown in the washing machine as needed — not just the cover.

Community Reviews

“I bought the Boppy one and it's amazing. It has three pieces that Velcro so you can change it up as your body changes. It's the best money I've spent so far this pregnancy after suffering through my first one!”

I love my Boppy pregnancy pillow! I even took it to the hospital when we had our daughter.

“My husband bought me the Boppy pregnancy pillow a few weeks ago as I was crying from lack of sleep. We call it my seahorse, and I have slept wonderfully since I had it. It is pricey, but my peaceful sleep is worth every penny.”

“I have the boppy body pillow and I love it. I'm 5'2" and it fits me well. my BF uses it too when I'm not and he's 5'10". however, I notice that it looks like it's not quite long enough for him so I wouldn't recommend this pillow if you're tall! I have no complaints though, it does the job and it's extremely comfortable, particularly the part that goes in between the legs.”

“I have the boppy pillow and I absolutely looooove it and can't fall asleep without it. DH uses it when I'm not and he's 6'6. It's not as long on him as I'm 5'5. I looove it.”

How to Pick a Pregnancy Pillow

For many What to Expect staff and community members, the best pregnancy pillow is the Momcozy U-Shaped Pregnancy Pillow . But depending on your needs and bed size, you might need a different pregnancy pillow. Some things to consider when looking for the best pregnancy pillow include:

Fill Material: Most pregnancy pillow fillings are made from polyester and designed to hold their shape. However, just like a regular pillow, you may prefer a fill type that is more or less firm. Memory foam is firmer and may offer increased support, while down can be snuggled and squished against the body more easily.

Shape: There are three common pregnancy pillow shapes: J-shaped, C-shaped or U-shaped, and the one you choose “may depend on how much support you need,” says Dr. Wetter. C-shaped pillows curve to tuck under your head and between your knees, while J-shaped pillows run parallel to your body with one curve that can either go under your head or between your knees. Or, if you often switch the side that you sleep on during the night (and expect to continue doing so, even as your bump makes it difficult), you might opt for a U-shaped pillow that you won’t have to readjust every time you move.

Size: A pregnancy pillow won’t do you any good if it takes up too much room in bed. Fortunately, there are some pregnancy pillows with detachable extensions that allow you to customize the fit, as well as wedge pillows to use under your back for added support without taking up a ton of space.

FAQ

What type of pregnancy pillow is best?

There are three common types of pregnancy pillows: J-shaped, C-shaped or U-shaped, and the best type of pregnancy pillow “may depend on how much support you need,” says Dr. Wetter. For many moms-to-be, U-shaped pregnancy pillows are the best because they provides full-body support. With support on both sides and an opening at the bottom, it cradles your head, neck, back and belly.

On the other hand, C-shaped pillows curve to tuck under your head and between your knees, while J-shaped pillows run parallel to your body with one curve that can either go under your head or between your knees.

At what week should you start using a pregnancy pillow?

There's no set time that you should start using a pregnancy pillow. Some moms-to-be begin using one during the first trimester, while others are much further along. That said, most moms begin using a pregnancy pillow around halfway through pregnancy, when their expanding bellies begin making it more difficult to shift positions during the night.

What is the best pregnancy sleeping position?

Doctors typically recommend that a moms-to-be sleep on her side during pregnancy, and a pregnancy pillow can make that more comfortable. That said, if you find yourself waking up on your back, don't sweat it.

What are the different types of pregnancy pillows?

C-shaped: These pillows tuck under your head and between your knees.

J-shaped: Similar to C-shaped, but a little more streamlined.

U-shaped: U-shaped pillows have two panels that run parallel to your body, with one curve that can either go under your head or between your knees.

Wedge: A smaller pregnancy pillow that nestles under your belly to offer extra support.

Butterfly-shaped: A smaller pregnancy pillow that supports your back and belly at the same time.

WhatToExpect.com, Sleeping Positions During Pregnancy , December 2022. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Can I sleep on my back when I'm pregnant? , January 2021. Amy Wetter, M.D. , board-certified OB-GYN, Pediatrix Medical Group, Atlanta, Georgia. KidsHealth from Nemours, Sleeping During Pregnancy , May 2022.

Your Next Read

How to Find a Comfy Sleep Position During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Products to Make Pregnancy Sex More Comfortable Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Pregnancy Sex Positions Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Best Postpartum Recovery Products By Dylan Campbell, Contributing Writer

12 Best Maternity Coats When You Can No Longer Zip Your Jacket, According to a Mom of 2 Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

8 Common Pregnancy Sleep Problems & Solutions Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Your Guide to a Calmer, Cozier Holiday Season During Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Wide Awake While Pregnant? How to Cope With Pregnancy Insomnia Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises That Keep You (and Baby!) Feeling Great Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Labor Positions That May Make Childbirth Easier Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Butt, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Stretching During Pregnancy: 9 Feel-Good Moves Medically Reviewed by Katie Ruebush, P.T., D.P.T.

Safe vs. Unsafe Baby Sleep Environments: The Ultimate Guide Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window