The 15-Month Well-Baby Visit

15 Month Well Baby

Here's what will happen at your child's 15-month well-baby visit, including the physical checkup, developmental milestones and shots.

Walking, rolling a ball, saying more words, understanding (if not always following) some directions: Your little one’s hitting lots of impressive milestones lately, and it’s exciting to see your toddler taking steps — or even a running start — toward becoming a big kid.

At this month’s checkup, your doctor will take a close look at your child’s development and administer a round of essential shots.

The physical checkup

The doctor will once again complete a full physical examination of your child, including a dental check. If those first molars haven’t cut through yet — ouch! — they may soon be on their way.

Developmental milestones

Has your little one tried taking those first wobbly solo steps? Or is she off and running? Or still at a standstill?

Every child follows her own developmental timetable. Some zoom ahead socially, others physically, and still others seem to understand everything (receptive language) but say nothing (expressive language). Here are some skills the doctor may check for this month: Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Baby By Fifteen MonthsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Baby By Fifteen MonthsSee All Sources

Understanding simple commands

Clapping when she's excited

Pointing to get what she wants and to show you something interesting

Stacking small objects , like blocks

Using her fingers to feed herself some food

Saying one or two words , not including "mama" or "dada"

Remember, every child is one-of-a-kind — and there’s a wide range of normal when it comes to development. If you’re concerned about something in your toddler’s development or if you just have a nagging feeling something’s not quite right, speak up.

Also check in if your child seems to have lost skills she already mastered (especially verbal or social skills), isn’t gaining skills (like adding new words), shows little affection or joyful emotions, or has picked up repetitive or unusual actions, like spinning or flapping her arms. Something else to ask about: if your toddler hasn’t spoken a word by the time she’s 16 months old.

15-month shots

This checkup is a big one when it comes to immunizations — that is, unless your toddler already had these shots at the 12-month visit . Remember some of these vaccines are given in a series and your little one needs all of the recommended doses.

To distract her from any pain, cuddle her (which research has shown results in less crying) while you sing a song or read from a favorite book. And don’t forget to heap on the praise (and maybe a sticker or two) when it’s over.

If your child didn’t get the following vaccinations recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) at the 12-month visit, now’s the time: Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionRecommended Vaccines by AgeSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionRecommended Vaccines by AgeSee All Sources

Hib (haemophilus influenzae type b), the last dose in this series

MMR (measles, mumps and rubella)

PCV 13 (pneumococcal disease) , the last dose in this series

Varicella (chicken pox)

Your toddler may also get the following shots now or at a later visit:

DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus and pertussis)

HepA (hepatitis A)

If it’s flu season, your doctor may recommend a flu shot , which all children aged 6 months and up should get once a year. (Two doses, four weeks apart, are needed if your toddler has never received the flu vaccine.)

The COVID-19 vaccine is also recommended for everyone 6 months and up, so if your child hasn't gotten it yet, ask the pediatrician about getting her immunized. It'll help protect her from serious illness. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCOVID-19 Vaccines for Children and TeensSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCOVID-19 Vaccines for Children and TeensSee All Sources

Questions to ask your doctor

As you serve a variety of new solid foods to entice your adventurous eater, diarrhea or constipation can sometimes happen, so let your doctor know if your toddler’s bowel habits have changed and ask if there are ways to help.

Here are other questions you may want to bring up at the 15-month well-child visit:

Should my toddler be drinking any juice ?

How can I get my toddler to drink milk ?

What do I do if my child won’t eat any vegetables ?

My child clings to me all the time. How can I get her to separate more easily?

My toddler is addicted to her pacifier . Will that hurt her teeth?

How do I discipline my toddler if she won’t take "no" for an answer?

What do I do about biting and hitting ?

As always, don't forget to make your next appointment before you leave the pediatrician's office, which is the 18-month checkup. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAAP Schedule of Well-Child Care VisitsSee All Sources [4]