The 9-Month Well-Baby Visit

NIne Month Well Baby

Here's what will happen at the 9-month well-baby visit, including the physical checkup, developmental milestones and shots.

By now, it might seem like your little genius is picking up a new skill every day. Is that adorable baby babble starting to sound more and more like words? Words you really love to hear, like "Dada" or "Mama"?

It’s hard to know whether she’s saying those wonderful words with meaning yet, but really, does it matter when they sound so heart-meltingly sweet?

Also music to your ears: At the 9-month visit, there will be no shots, unless your baby needs to catch up on a previously missed dose or get her annual flu shot. But there will be plenty to cover as the doctor tracks your child's growth and development!

The physical checkup

The doctor will once again complete a full physical examination and see how your little one is measuring up. There may also be a routine finger stick to test for anemia, though this may be done later at her 1-year visit instead.

Developmental milestones

You know all those skills your baby has been perfecting? Of course you do, but the doctor will want to see them, too — or if baby’s not in the mood to perform, to hear about them from you. Some 9-month milestones include:

• Getting into a sitting position and sitting unassisted

• Crawling

• Pulling up to stand or standing holding onto someone/something

• Working to get a toy that’s out of reach and objecting if you take a toy away

• Responding to her name

• Laughing, squealing with delight

• Copying sounds and gestures

• Pointing and using other gestures to communicate

• Following your gaze when you look away

• Saying "Dada" or "Mama" without meaning (or maybe even with!)

As always, there is a wide range of normal when it comes to baby development. Still, if you have any concerns, ask the doctor.

Ask too if your baby doesn’t respond to her own name or recognize familiar people , doesn’t babble or make back-and-forth sounds, gestures or eye contact, doesn’t look where you point, doesn’t sit with help, or doesn’t transfer toys from one hand to the other.

9-month shots

Unless your baby has some catching up to do, or flu season is starting and she hasn’t received her two doses of this year's influenza vaccine , there likely won’t be any shots this time.

Questions to ask your doctor

Have you noticed any changes in your little one’s sleep patterns? (And just when you thought you could count on a schedule!) Sleep regression is common in months 8 to 10. Several factors may be standing in your baby’s way of getting the solid sleep she needs, including that compulsion to stand, even in bed, and practice other exciting skills.

Have questions about sleep regression, feeding, milestones or anything else? Now’s the time to ask:

How do I know if my baby is getting enough sleep?

My baby is starting to get super clingy around strangers. Is that normal?

Is it time for finger foods ? Which finger foods are safe to start with?

How do I take care of my baby’s teeth ?

Should I teach my baby sign language ?

My baby isn’t pulling up yet. Should I be worried?

Are there any games, toys or activities I should introduce to help my baby learn?

Can I let my baby watch TV ?

Don't forget to schedule your next doctor's appointment before you leave, which will be the 12-month well-baby visit .