Can’t Stop Cleaning and Organizing? The Nesting Instinct Is Real — Here’s What It Means (and When It Starts)

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Labor and Delivery Preparation

Reorganizing the closets, alphabetizing the spice rack and thwarting dust-bunny breeding efforts under the bed? Welcome to a pre-labor ritual that helps get your home ready for the baby — and helps you pass the time.

Mother hamsters do it. Mama cats do it. Expectant birds do it. And if you're like many human moms-to-be — and some dads too! — you're doing it as well: preparing your "nest" for your soon-to-arrive baby.

The nesting instinct during pregnancy can be just as powerful in humans as it is for our animal friends. It's nature's way of getting you ready to nurture a child.

Key Takeaways:

Harness this mom-to-be power! The urge to clean, cook, and straighten up is common in late pregnancy — use this burst of energy while you can.

Not excited to lay in lasagna? While the nesting instinct usually kicks in late during the third trimester, it's perfectly fine if you don't feel so perky at this point.

Be safe when nesting. Now's the time to skip heavy lifting and climbing ladders; instead, focus on easy tasks like folding baby clothes and stocking the pantry.

What is nesting during pregnancy?

The definition of nesting, or the nesting instinct, is the burst of energy women often get in the last few weeks of pregnancy that inspires them to clean and organize the house in preparation for the baby's arrival.

It's productive too — driving many human moms-to-be to sweep out the garage, pair up all the stray socks that have wandered into the laundry room Bermuda Triangle, defrost the refrigerator, and brighten the bathroom grout lines with a toothbrush.

What to Expect Community parents have shared the wackiest things they've tackled lately, like cleaning sink p-traps, wiping down walls, and purging the pantry. One Community parent's urges even included her pet's stuff. "I just spent 20 minutes vacuuming my cats' scratching tower and pulling hair out of their favorite basket."

But don't be upset if the nesting urge doesn't strike you at all. That's perfectly normal too, and says nothing about the kind of mom or dad you'll be.

When does nesting start during pregnancy?

Nesting typically starts toward the end of the third trimester, around week 38 or 39 of pregnancy or a few weeks before your due date.

The increased adrenaline coursing through your system around this point in your pregnancy probably contributes to this final frenzy, but the emotional factors are just as strong.

If the nesting instinct hits your nest right as you're preparing for childbirth , make the most of it now — before life becomes too hectic and finding a moment to shower will be challenging enough.

Safe things to do during nesting

Stay sensible as the nesting instinct strikes. Don't climb, overreach, or lift anything too heavy. And avoid risky business such as standing on a ladder so you can scrub the bathroom ceiling. Skip harsh, toxic cleaners , open windows, and wear gloves when using mild ones.

Also be sure to take frequent breaks and snack often. You don't want to overdo it so close to labor and delivery — and let's face it, you'll need to save up some of that extra energy!

Looking for more support? Download the What to Expect app for real-life tips and expert advice as you prep your home for your baby’s arrival.

Here are a bunch of last-minute details that you can check off your list while you're in the throes of the nesting phase:

Restock your fridge

Out with the old, in with the new! As you prepare for birth, throw away any outdated items and shop for fresh ones.

Stock up on key essentials you'll want to have on hand once the baby has arrived — milk, yogurt, cheese, prewashed salad greens, fruit, and even a roasted chicken or two, which are perfect for meals, snacks, and salads. And if the baby doesn't come this week, you can always restock again next week.

Pad your pantry

Stock up on staples like there's no tomorrow. There will be a tomorrow, of course, but you won't be able to spend it at the grocery store once the baby's around.

Easy does it when you're a new mom, so line your shelves with every healthy convenience you can think of, from soups, which can stand in for lunch, to nuts, that perfect nutritious nibbler, particularly when teamed with dried fruit.

Other goods to get as you prepare for birth: whole grain crackers, cereal, canned beans, fruits, vegetables, pasta, brown rice, and sauces.

Cook in quantity

If your nesting instinct is accompanied by the joy of cooking, indulge while you can. Cooking will almost certainly take a back seat once baby's on board.

Make extra servings of your favorite frost-friendly foods — lasagna, mini-meatloaves, pancakes, bran muffins — and store in single-meal containers in the freezer. Mark them clearly so you won't defrost a turkey burger when you're in the market for banana bread.

You'll be especially grateful to come face-to-freezer with homemade meals and snacks after surviving on hospital food or birthing center meals — and when pushing a button on the microwave is about as much effort as you can put into food prep.

Load your laundry

Feel like throwing in the towel? Go ahead — and while you're at it, toss in the duvet cover, pillow shams, throw rugs, guest bedroom sheets, and anything else that doesn't get washed regularly.

Once the baby arrives, your washer and dryer will have to work hard enough just to keep up with the spit-up stains.

Deep clean

You know the spring cleaning that you're always putting off until next spring? Whatever the season, now's the time to tackle it while your nesting instinct is nice and strong.

Wipe down the windowsills and blinds (you may discover that they're not gray after all!). Vacuum behind the sofa and under the sofa cushions — chances are you'll make a quick buck or two while you're at it, plus find the remote control you misplaced three months ago. Finally, get around to dusting the picture frames before that baby photo explosion makes the dusting more daunting.

Be sensible, though, in your quest for cleanliness. Don't push yourself if you're pooped — push someone else instead — and stay away from ladders or other precarious perches.

Outfit your baby

Still have some holes in the layette that your baby shower didn't fill? Don't overbuy while you prepare for birth, but make sure you're well-stocked on those newborn essentials, including T-shirts, onesies, sweaters, and booties.

Outfit yourself

If you intend to breastfeed, buy nursing bras , nursing pads, and nursing (or easy-to-open) shirts. And stock up on soft, breathable, oversized underwear you don't like.

Why? You'll need them extra big and comfy the first few weeks after the birth, and they might become stained with blood and discharge that may not wash away. Just know you may have to throw them in the garbage about six weeks after your baby is born.

Be prepared

Babies need more than the clothes on their backs. They also need the diapers — and diaper rash ointment — on their backsides, along with a host of other crucial consumables.

Stock up also on baby soap, cotton pads, a rectal digital thermometer, rubbing alcohol, a nasal syringe, nail clippers, bottles, nipples, and more. And for you, pick up plenty of super-absorbent maxi pads, Tucks medicated pads, and ice packs, which are not the kinds of things you want to run out of in the middle of the night.

Get a jump start on birth announcements

This way, they'll be ready to go as soon as you know the final baby stats. If you're mailing cards, address the envelopes now so they're set to be stuffed. Or compile a list of people to email — you can use it later to digitally send your birth announcement to the whole crew.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, 38 Weeks Pregnant , July 2025. WhatToExpect.com, What to Write in a Baby Birth Announcement , June 2021. Mayo Clinic, Signs of Labor: Know What to Expect , July 2024. Evolution and Human Behavior , Evidence of a Nesting Psychology During Human Pregnancy , November 2013. Current Biology , Effects of Anxiety on Spontaneous Ritualized Behavior , July 2015. KidsHealth From Nemours, 10 Things That Might Surprise You About Being Pregnant , January 2024. Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Diet for Breastfeeding Mothers , 2025. American Academy of Pediatrics, Registering for Baby Clothes , March 2021.

Updates history

October 8, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Laughing, Crying, Cleaning the Window Sills? 11 Pregnancy Emotions You May Have When You're Expecting Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Your Guide to a Calmer, Cozier Holiday Season During Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

'I Had a Nesting Party Instead of a Baby Shower and I'm So Glad I Did' Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Fact vs. Fiction: 8 Pregnancy Myths You'll Hear — and What's Actually True Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Can’t Stand the Smell? Why Scents Can Be Super Intense During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

The 11-Step First Trimester Checklist That’ll Keep You Sane While Growing a Human Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

"Baby Brain" Isn't Just Forgetfulness — It’s Your Mind Rewiring Itself to Bond With Your Baby Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

One Week to Go? 10 Things to Do Before Your Due Date Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Your Vivid Pregnancy Dreams Are Totally Normal. Here's What They Mean Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

12 Smart Ways to Get Ready for Labor (Physically and Mentally) Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

10 Things I Wish Someone Had Told Me About the Third Trimester of Pregnancy Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The Best Home Cleaning Products to Use During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window