The $7 Nursery Hack That Actually Shortened My Baby's Night Wakes and Saved My Sleep

Red light bulb inlayed with a photo of a mom reading a book in a red room

You don’t need a fancy color-changing lamp to protect your baby’s melatonin.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

As a sleep-deprived first time mom, I was willing to try anything to get a few more hours of rest. Expensive sleep courses? Sign me up. Wake windows? You know I followed them. Monitoring sleepy cues like a spy? Just call me James Bond. But I still couldn’t figure out why my baby was wide awake for hours in the middle of the night.

Determined to fix this, I embarked on a mini research project. Nearly all of the recommendations for handling middle of the night wakings included keeping the room dark and quiet to avoid waking your baby up more. I did my best, but I needed some form of light to change his diaper or nurse him without crashing into furniture.

Much to my delight, the online sleep experts had a solution: Red light, which is apparently less jarring to your eyes and internal clock than white lights. I wasn’t fully sold on the science of this, but I figured it couldn’t hurt to try.

I didn’t want to spend $50-plus on an actual red or color-changing light before knowing it would work, so I swapped my actual nursery light bulb for a $7 red light bulb I found on Amazon. My personal science experiment had begun – would this cancel our unplanned and undesirable middle of the night parties?

Red light bulb in a nursery

The first time my baby woke up overnight, I headed in and turned on the red light, eager to see if it would work. There was an instant difference. Usually my baby would be blinking from the bright light, and I too would feel jolted out of my slumber. The red light was warm and comforting, and I could feel both of us staying more calm. After we settled in the rocking chair, my baby drifted back to sleep fairly quickly. Better yet, I was able to fall right back to sleep after putting him back in his crib.

From that night on, our red light bulb stayed and our overnights got so much better. Of course, there were still some times when my baby would decide to party at 2 a.m., but I do feel like the red light dramatically decreased the frequency of these long wakes. Perhaps most important was how this red light kept me in a calm and peaceful state while I comforted my baby.

A mom reading a book in a red light nursery

Now my kids are two and four, and we still utilize the red light. I never actually bought an official red light; rather I moved the bulb to my second child’s room when she was a baby. Even though they both sleep through the night (most nights), I turn on the red light to read books. The cozy glow has become a staple in our bedtime routine and I have no plans to ditch it anytime soon.

Amazon Basics Red LED Light Bulbs

Sleep-Saving Nursery Swap

Your Next Read

How to Teach Your Baby the Difference Between Day and Night So Everyone Gets More Sleep Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

From Fussiness to Full Nights: Understanding Baby Sleep Patterns Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Use the Bedtime Fading Sleep Training Method Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Babies and Toddlers Adjust to Daylight Saving Time (and Back Again!) Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's How to Establish a Bedtime Routine for Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Soothing Sleep Across Time Zones? Learn How to Ease Jet Lag in Babies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Reasons Your Baby May Be Waking Up in the Middle of the Night Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Smart Tips for Getting Your Baby to Sleep Anywhere (Yep, Even on Vacation) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Establish a 7-Month-Old Sleep Schedule That Works Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Can White Noise Help Your Baby Sleep Better? Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

When Will My Baby Sleep Through the Night? Here's the Scoop Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Is My Toddler Waking Up at Night? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Is My 7-Month Old Going Through a Sleep Regression? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Creating a Nursery on a Budget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Is a Night Nurse Right for You? Things to Consider About Hiring a Baby Nurse Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window