The Postpartum Period Is Absurdly Hard — A Postpartum Doula Could Help

Should you hire a postpartum doula?

A postpartum doula can offer the kind of support that makes healing, feeding and adjusting just a little gentler.

One WTE mom preparing for the "4th trimester” posed a question to her birth group: "Has anyone hired a nanny or postpartum doula? I’m a first timer and wondering if a little extra support would help my husband and me make the adjustment, or if we just roll with the punches and figure it out,” she writes.

Soon enough, her fellow moms-to-be were sharing why they loved having postpartum help after coming home from the hospital, saying how incredible the support was, for everything from middle-of-the-night feedings to redressing C-section bandages to helping monitor their blood pressure .

Doulas offer non-medical physical and emotional support, and they're growing in popularity in delivery rooms and birthing centers. But many doulas also do postpartum work, helping you navigate the stressful, bleary-eyed early days of parenthood – and watching for dangerous postpartum symptoms that could arise. Here's why you may want to consider hiring a postpartum doula to help you through those first few weeks or months.

Key Takeaways

Postpartum doulas can help with your recovery and newborn care; many moms say having an extra set of hands is one of the best things they invested in postpartum.

Most moms find their doulas through word-of-mouth, but providers, online community groups and organizations like DONA International can be good places to look, too.

Some doula services may be covered through your insurance or health coverage plan, but if not, you can use your HSA or FSA accounts to pay.

What is a postpartum doula?

Unlike the birth doula who may join you in the delivery room, a postpartum doula exclusively works with you after the baby arrives. There’s a steep learning curve to parenthood, and postpartum doulas specialize in helping new families through that sometimes-challenging period. They work with new parents to help integrate the baby into their life and routine. “While doulas do not provide medical care, they play an important role in helping the entire family adjust, making the transition to bringing home a new baby smoother for everyone,” says Ashley T. Anderson, M.P.H., a certified doula at Haven Postnatal Retreat in Atlanta.

What do postpartum doulas do?

If you’re still trying to understand what exactly postpartum doulas can do for you, the answer is a lot. “Basically we are the extra set of hands every new mom wishes she had,” explains Meaghan Grant , a certified birth and postpartum doula in Toronto.

They can help around the house and with newborn care

Once you’re home with your baby, they will help out around the house by preparing simple meals, installing car seats, helping with older children and even doing some light cleaning like laundry. They also help with newborn care: calming a cranky infant, troubleshooting feeding problems and watching your baby while you get some rest. Many will also do “on-call” work, pitching in when things feel particularly crazy.

When Lucy L. of Minneapolis, Minnesota, was pregnant, she hired a doula named Mary who would support her in birth and the first week postpartum. “She did dishes, she played with our older daughter, she made sure I had a water bottle and nipple cream handy at all times,she ran errands, she even helped me use the bathroom for the first time at home, which is a lot harder than it sounds,” Lucy says.

Mary dropped by once a week for the first few months to check up on the family and help out, often babysitting both kids for a few hours so Lucy and her husband Mike could get some time alone together.

They also watch you for warning signs during postpartum

A doula can keep an eye on you, listening when you need to vent and watching for signs of postpartum depression or other challenges related to getting in the newborn groove, Grant says. She can also help with your healing and physical comfort during your recovery from childbirth.

While doulas are not qualified to give medical advice, they are trained to look for signs you’re having a tough time and can help you find the appropriate resources to feel better, she says. That could include a therapist, a lactation consultant, a pelvic floor specialist, an acupuncturist or a number of other kinds of specialists who might come in handy as you navigate life with a new baby.

“We provide an outside perspective, and you can tell us anything,” says Grant. “Believe me, you can’t shock us; we’ve heard it all!”

Who should hire a postpartum doula?

Any parent who would like a little extra help after the baby is born could benefit from a postpartum doula. But their services are especially good if you're a first-time parent, parents expecting multiples, mom who had a complicated delivery, you have a colicky baby or any previously difficult birth or postpartum experience, Grant says. How much does a postpartum doula cost?

Fees vary by region, practice and the type of care needed, but you can expect to pay between $35 and $85 an hour. Sounds steep? Many doulas and doula practices offer package deals that give a discount for scheduling in advance or bundling services.

You can also check with your insurance provider to determine what’s covered under your plan — some policies include a postpartum doula. If this support isn’t covered, you may be able to use a pre-tax account like a Health Savings Account (HSA) or a Flexible Spending Account (FSA), but a letter of medical necessity is likely required. As an alternative, you can see if your employer offers fertility benefits from programs like Carrot , Maven or Progyny , since some plans will reimburse you for doula services.

How to find the right postpartum doula for you

Many families find their doulas through word-of-mouth, family, friends or online neighborhood groups, but there are also organizations that can help. DONA International has an international database of thousands of certified doulas. Be sure you select “postpartum” or “both” under doula type.

Because being a postpartum doula is a separate certification from other types of doulas, Grant recommends asking certain questions when interviewing a potential doula, including:

What are your postpartum qualifications? Currently, there is no universally recognized standard, but a good postpartum doula will be able to describe her training, certifications and/or experience in a way that aligns with your values and helps you feel safe.

What other certifications do you have? Many doulas are also lactation consultants, childbirth or early childhood educators, therapists/social workers or massage therapists.

Are you part of a practice? Doulas may work independently or in conjunction with a birthing center, medical facility or doula clinic. This will determine what types of services they’ll be able to offer you.

What is your per-hour fee? Many doulas require a minimum number of hours per visit, and package rates are often available, with a set number of hours or weeks of care at a discounted price. Make sure you have everything in writing.

What is your plan for medical emergencies? Doulas are not medical professionals, but they should be prepared to contact your doctor and know basic first aid in the event of an emergency.

What services do you include? Not all doulas do the same tasks. For instance, some will do light cleaning and babysit older children, while others prefer to focus specifically on the mother and new baby. Setting clear expectations up front will make everyone happier.

Do you work overnight or only during the day? Overnight care usually involves a longer shift, roughly eight to 10 hours, and doulas often charge a flat fee for any extended hours at a higher charge.

When should you hire a postpartum doula?

Ideally, securing a postpartum doula in the second or early trimester will give you enough time to interview a few candidates and find the best fit for you and your family, Anderson says. That said, it’s more than okay to hire this type of care after your baby has arrived.

“The early postpartum period can be unexpectedly overwhelming, and many parents do not realize they need additional support until they return home from the hospital,” Anderson says.

In fact, about half of Grant's clients call her for the first time after the baby is born.

“We get a lot of middle-of-the-night calls from moms up with a crying infant and Googling for ways to get help,” she says.

And those tough moments are exactly what they’re here for, she adds.

“Every mom deserves to enjoy parenthood!” she says.

What to Expect When You’re Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. What to Expect the First Year, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Postpartum Recovery Timeline, March 2021. WhatToExpect.com, What Is a Doula and Should You Hire One for Your Baby's Birth?, May 2021. Childbirth International, Postpartum Doula Training and Certification, 2021. DONA International, Hiring a Doula: A Guide for Parents. National Partnership for Women & Families, Overdue: Medicaid and Private Insurance Coverage of Doula Care to Strengthen Maternal and Infant Health, January 2016. Meaghan Grant, a certified birth and postpartum doula in Toronto. Ashley T. Anderson, M.P.H., a certified doula in Atlanta.

Updates history

7/9/25: Updates to copy, new med review

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

What Is a Doula and Should You Hire One for Your Baby's Birth? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

How to Ask for Help When You Think You Have Postpartum Depression Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

Postpartum Bipolar Disorder Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Postpartum Depression (PPD) Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Your Postpartum Checkups Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Why Your Postpartum Checkup Is More Important Than You May Think Fact Checked by Lauren LaCross, Senior Research Analyst

A Partner’s Support During Postpartum Can Literally Be Lifesaving Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

Postpartum Recovery Timeline Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Postpartum Symptoms You Might Experience After Giving Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Postpartum Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Are Doulas Covered by Insurance? Medically Reviewed by Lisa Greaves Taylor

Virtual Doulas Are Cheaper and More Accessible — But Can They Actually Give You a Better Birth Experience? Medically Reviewed by Lisa Greaves Taylor

What Is a Fertility Doula? How One Can Help You Get Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Lisa Greaves Taylor

17 Ways Dads and Partners Can Advocate for a Healthy Pregnancy, Birth and Postpartum Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window