The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Pregnancy-safe skincare guide, hand holding moisturizer jar on pink background

Which skin care ingredients should you avoid while pregnant, and which ingredients are considered safe? Here's everything you need to know to build a pregnancy-safe skin care routine.

Truth: Dewy fresh skin is possible during pregnancy — but safety always comes first. Before you try a new product or slather on that face cream, be sure you’ve read the label to check for ingredients that could harm your baby. And if you have any questions about whether your sunscreen or makeup is fine to use, ask your doctor.

Just as certain foods and drinks are off-limits during pregnancy , so are some beauty products. That’s because certain skin care ingredients have the potential to cause harmful side effects for pregnant women, while others might pose a possible risk to your baby, and should be avoided if possible.

The good news? The majority of beauty products are perfectly fine to continue using when you're expecting, and there are plenty of products out there that can help you look (and feel) your best.

Here are the skin care ingredients you should avoid or consult with your doctor about before using, along with some pregnancy-friendly alternatives.

Key Takeaways

Read labels carefully. Not every ingredient in your skin care routine is safe for your baby-to-be, so avoid salicylic acid, retinoids, and hydroquinone.

Lean on safe options. You can treat hyperpigmentation, acne, and dryness with gentler products such as Vitamin C, glycolic acid, and mineral sunscreen.

Not sure? Ask your doc. Some beauty products (fillers, chemical sunscreen, Botox) need further testing, so check with your physician before using them.

Why do I need to avoid certain skin care ingredients during pregnancy?

You're likely paying close attention to what you put in your body these days — but what you put on your body is important too. The ingredients in some beauty, skin, and personal care products can get absorbed into the bloodstream, and some of these ingredients could possibly be harmful to a developing baby.

While ingredients with known or suspected risks should be avoided during pregnancy, there are other skin care ingredients that have been linked to possible risks, though more research is needed to determine whether or not they're harmful.

Some moms-to-be prefer to avoid products that contain these ingredients, while others might decide to use them after talking to their practitioner, particularly if they have a severe skin problem or other medical condition that could benefit from using the product.

When in doubt, it's always a good idea to ask your doctor about any skin care products you're unsure about.

Pregnancy skin can come with plenty of questions: Is this breakout normal? Why is my skin suddenly so sensitive? Which products are actually safe? Download the What to Expect app to navigate the changes with expert-backed advice and support from a community of moms-to-be who are going through it too.

Which skin care ingredients should I avoid during pregnancy?

These ingredients are thought to pose risks to babies in the womb, so put them at the top of your do-not-use list.

1. Retinoids

Oral and topical retinoids Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Dermatology Retinoid or Retinol?See All Sources [1] — i.e., vitamin A-based products that help with cell turnover, including isotretinoin, tretinoin, adapalene, and tazarotene — are used to tackle acne and fine lines. Oral retinoids are known to cause serious birth defects, so they're completely off-limits until after you deliver and wean your baby from breastfeeding.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Dermatology Retinoid or Retinol?See All Sources

To be on the safe side, you should also steer clear of topical retinoids, including over-the-counter retinol products, prescription-strength serums, and other anti-aging remedies.

2. Hydroquinone

This skin-lightening agent can show up in products used to fight dark spots or hyperpigmentation , including melasma , as well as in hair color or bleaching products .

The research on using hydroquinone during pregnancy is very limited, but because the ingredient is absorbed through the skin at very high rates, many experts recommend avoiding it.

3. Salicylic acid (in high doses)

Avoid using oral medications or peels containing high doses of salicylic acid (a form of beta-hydroxy acid, or BHA). High doses of this anti-inflammatory agent could be dangerous for your baby.

That said, salicylic acid also shows up in lower doses in a wide range of over-the-counter skin care products, including cleansers, body washes, serums, lotions, and acne spot treatments. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of DermatologyIs Any Acne Treatment Safe to Use During Pregnancy?See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of DermatologyIs Any Acne Treatment Safe to Use During Pregnancy?See All Sources

OTC products with salicylic acid generally contain low doses that are considered safe for pregnant women, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). But it’s always a good idea to run a product by your doctor just to be sure.

Which skin care ingredients might not be safe during pregnancy?

Some ingredients in skin care products have been linked to possible risks, but more research is needed to determine whether or not they're definitely harmful. Talk to your doctor before deciding whether to use products containing the following ingredients:

1. Benzoyl peroxide

This ingredient is commonly found in many OTC acne-fighters. There's some debate about benzoyl peroxide during pregnancy, but many experts, including the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) and ACOG, say it's likely safe to use in limited amounts.

2. Botox and fillers

These wrinkle eradicators are also considered category C ingredients, which means not enough is known about their safety during pregnancy.

Botox is sometimes prescribed for medical conditions such as incontinence, overactive bladder, and chronic migraines — in which case you and your doctor may decide that the benefits outweigh the possible risks.

But many experts recommend avoiding Botox and other fillers for cosmetic use during pregnancy to play it safe.

3. Some chemical sunscreen ingredients

Some sunscreen formulas contain chemical ingredients (like oxybenzone, but also ensulizole, octisalate, homosalate, octocrylene, octinoxate, and avobenzone), which absorb UV rays and convert them into energy. There’s some research showing that oxybenzone — which is used in about 70% of sunscreens — contains endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) that may cross the placenta and cause problems for a developing baby.

However, a direct cause-and-effect link hasn't been established, and the findings are mixed. Plus, experts generally agree that only very high doses of oxybenzone might be problematic, and mainly only during the first trimester of pregnancy .

What do I need to know about parabens and phthalates during pregnancy?

Parabens are commonly used preservatives that prevent the growth of mold and bacteria in moisturizers, shampoos, soaps, deodorants, and makeup , while phthalates are a group of chemicals that appear in many personal care products, particularly those that contain fragrance.

There is some debate about frequent use of parabens and phthalates during pregnancy. Some animal studies have linked endocrine-disrupting chemicals like parabens and phthalates during pregnancy to possible risks such as reproductive issues.

However, experts say studies haven't definitively proven that parabens and phthalates are harmful, and more research is needed.

If you prefer to avoid parabens during pregnancy, look for paraben-free formulas (or check the ingredient list for some of the most commonly used parabens, including methylparaben, propylparaben, butylparaben, and ethylparaben).

Phthalates can be a little trickier to spot on a list of ingredients, since manufacturers don't have to report individual fragrance ingredients to the FDA. So if you want to avoid them, look for fragrance-free formulas.

What safer skin care alternatives can I use during pregnancy?

Even if some of your favorite products are off-limits for now, your skin doesn't have to suffer Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources [3]. These pregnancy-friendly options will get the job done while also being safe for your baby:

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources

1. Anti-aging skin care ingredients

Slough away dead, dull skin cells with an exfoliating scrub containing physical exfoliants like salt or sugar, or gentle chemical exfoliants like lactic or glycolic acid.

Products that contain vitamin C , an antioxidant that promotes the production of the skin-plumping protein collagen and can brighten hyperpigmentation, are also considered safe.

Want to treat yourself to a spa day? Most facials are perfectly safe during pregnancy, but avoid peels with retinoids or high doses of salicylic acid anywhere on your body. Other types of peels and microdermabrasion can be especially irritating to pregnant skin.

2. Acne-fighting skin care ingredients

It's fine to use topical over-the-counter acne fighters containing niacinamide, azelaic acid, or glycolic acid, according to ACOG.

For severe acne, your practitioner may recommend topical erythromycin or clindamycin with benzoyl peroxide, or oral erythromycin or cephalexin.

3. Moisturizing skin care ingredients

Dry skin getting you down these days? You can help your skin stay hydrated by sticking with a mild, soap-free cleanser. To lock in moisture, look to gentle lotions and creams that get their hydrating power from hyaluronic acid or coconut oil.

4. Mineral sunscreen ingredients

Unlike chemical sunscreens, mineral sunscreen formulas rely on physical ingredients (like titanium dioxide and zinc oxide), which physically deflect rays before they hit your skin.

Physical blockers are hypoallergenic and aren't absorbed by the skin the way chemical sunscreens are in small quantities, so some moms-to-be prefer to use physical sunscreens while they are expecting. What to Expect Community parent Lajohnson8847 got this same advice from her skin doc: “I was just at the dermatologist, and he recommended using mineral sunscreen to be on the safe side when pregnant.”

Most importantly, choose broad-spectrum sunscreens, which offer protection against UVA and UVB rays, and make sure they have sun protection factor (SPF) of 30 or higher.

While you may need to read ingredient lists a little more closely these days, the majority of skin care and beauty products you can find over the counter are thankfully perfectly safe to use during pregnancy.