The Pregnancy Perk No One Talks About: Less Shaving

shaving

While some women notice extra fuzz, others barely touch a razor.

When 38-year-old mom Amanda got pregnant with her second child , she noticed something totally unexpected: She didn’t need to shave her legs as often.

“I'm typically a shave-every-other-day-type of girl for my legs,” says the South Florida mom. “And now I can easily get away with shaving just once a week.”

Meanwhile, the rest of her body hair continued to grow normally, and her hair and eyebrows felt thicker than usual. “I have no idea why this is happening, but I'm counting it as a pregnancy blessing,” she says.

Not everyone has this experience, of course. In fact, many moms in the What to Expect Community report the opposite. They notice more hair sprouting in new places, like a darker happy trail or extra peach fuzz on the face. “Anyone else grow a lot of hair on their stomach?” asked What to Expect Community mom JM679 . “I want to shave it, but I feel like it will grow back darker. Does it go away?”

Turns out there’s a wide range of what’s “normal” when it comes to your hair when you’re carrying a baby.

“During pregnancy, changes in hair growth patterns, texture, and location may occur,” says OB/GYN Sherry Ross , M.D., who practices in Southern California. So if your leg hair seems to be hitting the snooze button, what gives? We turned to experts to figure out what’s going on — and how long you can expect it to last.

Key Takeaways

During pregnancy, your hair works in mysterious ways: Thanks to hormones, you may find that your leg hair stops growing as fast, and the hair on your head becomes thicker.

Not everyone will notice these changes, but if you do, know it's a pregnancy-only thing, and things will start to return to normal sometime postpartum.

In the meantime, if you do notice you're not having to shave your legs as much, enjoy!

Why does body hair growth slow down for some women during pregnancy?

It all comes down to hormones . During pregnancy, estrogen levels rise while a group of hormones called androgens (the most dominant of which is testosterone) dips.

High estrogen levels prolong your hair’s growth phase, explains dermatologist Hadley King , M.D., clinical instructor of dermatology at the Weill Medical College of Cornell University. That’s why so many women notice thicker, fuller hair on their heads when they’re expecting. You’re simply not shedding as much. That lush, thick ponytail is one of pregnancy’s best-known perks.

But elsewhere, the story can be different, says Dr. Ross. On your legs, estrogen slows the overall cycling of hair and can prevent new hairs from popping up. Meanwhile, your leg hair is also androgen-sensitive, and estrogen can suppress androgen-driven hair growth, says Dr. King. Together, this can mean shaving less often.

“Hair growth can slow during pregnancy for non-hormonal reasons, too,” says Dr. Ross. She points to factors like genetics, nutritional deficiencies, thyroid issues, or certain medications (like antidepressants or blood pressure medications), all of which could potentially trigger changes in the appearance of your hair. If you suspect any of these issues may be to blame, talk to your doctor about testing.

Does pregnancy impact your hair in other ways?

Yep. For some moms-to-be, those pregnancy hormones can make hair pop up (or stand out) in new places.

Fluctuating hormones may cause the hair on your abdomen, breasts, or face to look darker, thicker, and more noticeable. “Even though testosterone generally decreases during pregnancy, there are times it can fluctuate and even increase, which affects hair growth,” explains Dr. Ross.

That’s because the follicles in these areas are especially responsive to testosterone during pregnancy. When those levels surge, the hair can grow darker. And just like the hair on your head, high estrogen levels also keep strands in their growth phase longer, which can make them appear thicker before they eventually shed, says Dr. King.

How will your hair growth change after birth?

Once your baby arrives, your hormones gradually return to their pre-pregnancy levels. “The life cycle of hair follicles may need a reset during the postpartum period to restore normal hair growth patterns,” says Dr. Ross.

If you’re savoring the feeling of shaving less, unfortunately, it won’t last forever. “Your leg hair growth will normalize within six months,” says Dr. King. The same is true if you develop more or darker hair on your stomach, face, or breasts during pregnancy, she adds. So maybe hold off on that laser hair removal appointment for a bit.

Scalp hair, on the other hand, may go through a more dramatic shift. Many new moms experience postpartum shedding starting two to four months after delivery, and it can last up to a year. “This is a type of hair loss that is temporary,” says Dr. King. “I know it can be super dramatic and disturbing. But the good news is that it does grow back.”

Hadley King , M.D., clinical instructor of dermatology at the Weill Medical College of Cornell University. Sherry Ross , M.D., OB/GYN in Southern California. ACOG, 2025, Skin Conditions in Pregnancy .

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Here’s How to Remove Unwanted Hair Safely During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Kameelah Phillips, M.D.

From Frizz to Fabulous: The Real Deal on Pregnancy Hair Changes Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is It Normal Not to Experience Breast Growth in Early Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The Surprising Ways Pregnancy Can Change Your Nails Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Moms Are Sharing Their Craziest Pregnancy Symptoms, and Some of Them Are Truly Wild Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Pregnancy Acne: Why It Happens and Safe Ways to Treat It Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Skin Changes During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Can Leave Your Skin Feeling Parched Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

When Do Babies Grow and Lose Their Hair? Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

How Will Pregnancy Change Your Vagina and Labia? Medically Reviewed by Katie Propst, M.D.

Can Prenatal Vitamins Really Help Your Hair Grow? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why You Might Lose a Little Weight at the End of Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Strange Pregnancy Symptoms Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

When Do Babies Start Growing Hair, Skin, and Nails? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Postpartum Skin Care Guide Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window