The 12-Month Well-Baby Visit

1 year well visit, mom and baby

Here's what will happen at the 12-month well-baby visit, including the physical checkup, developmental milestones and shots.

Happy birthday, baby — and welcome to toddlerhood! Time sure flew, and now the teensy newborn you cradled in your arms just yesterday may be walking, talking or on the brink of either or both.

Happily, your fledgling toddler won’t have to brake for as many regular checkups in the second year — but each one will be an important opportunity to make sure everything’s on track, and will be a welcome chance for you to ask the questions you’ll collect in between visits!

The physical checkup

The doctor will once again complete a full physical examination and probably do a quick finger prick to test for lead and hemoglobin levels in your baby’s blood.

He or she will also ask your toddler to show off that dazzling smile to see how many teeth she has — typically between two and eight — and also to check for signs of decay. Keep in mind: A few little ones are still sporting an all-gums grin and that’s fine, too.

Developmental milestones

Many little ones crawl their way well into their second year — not taking those first momentous unassisted steps until 14 months or later — while some start walking solo weeks or even months earlier. Some have a handful of meaningful words, while others haven’t said an intelligible word.

The doctor will try to observe some of these skills, but if your newly independent toddler refuses to show them off, you’ll have to tell all:

Pulling herself up to stand

Cruising — walking while holding onto furniture — or even walking without support

Using a few gestures to get what she needs (such as pointing, showing, reaching and waving)

Using fingers to feed herself

Responding to her name, or to words like “no” or “bye-bye”

Saying a word or two or even several with meaning; though many don’t say a first word before 10 to 14 months

Trying to imitate words you say

Playing games like peek-a-boo or patty-cake

Banging two objects together, putting objects into a container and then taking them out

Don’t forget, every baby is one-of-a-kind — and there’s a wide range of normal when it comes to development. Still, if you have any concerns about your little one’s milestones, make sure you check with your baby’s doctor.

12-month vaccines

Depending on how the doctor likes to space vaccines, your toddler might get a few new ones today, or they may come at the next visit. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends:

MMR (measles, mumps and rubella)

HepA (hepatitis A)

Varicella (chicken pox)

Now may also be the time for another dose of these vaccines. Remember, your little one needs all the recommended doses to be fully protected:

HepB (hepatitis B)

Hib (haemophilus influenzae type b)

PCV 13 (pneumococcal disease)

IPV (polio)

Questions to ask your doctor

Baby’s no longer putty in your hands? That’s because she’s no longer a baby. You’re probably starting to glimpse some signs of independence, like suddenly rejecting favorite foods , refusing boots on a rainy day or even hitting and biting.

What does it all mean, and how should you deal with it? Feel free to ask the doctor:

Is it okay that my toddler is so attached to her blanket ?

Can I start putting a pillow in her crib? What about bumpers?

My toddler is still breastfeeding to sleep, even during the night. Is that okay?

When should I start my toddler on cow's milk? What kind?

When should I wean my child off the bottle ?

My toddler is suddenly becoming a picky eater. How do I make sure she’s getting the right nutrition?

When should I schedule my toddler’s first dental checkup?

She loves playing with my phone. Is that okay?

Recognizing the signs of a delay

You’ve heard it over and over again by now, and it’s true: There’s a wide range of normal when it comes to a baby’s development. And most babies who don’t make all of their milestones on a developmental timetable that’s based on averages still fall within that normal range.

But sometimes a lag or slowdown in development or a sudden loss of skills is out of the norm and needs evaluation and possibly intervention — and the earlier any necessary intervention is made, the greater the impact it will have on a child’s developmental future and lifelong success and well-being.

Experts agree that parents can be invaluable in the diagnosis of developmental disorders — and early diagnosis can lead to the kind of early intervention that can make an enormous difference in a child’s future.

That's why it's so important to know the signs. So don’t keep concerns about your baby’s development to yourself. Let the doctor know if you’re worried that she’s falling behind, if it seems she’s forgotten skills she had already mastered or if you’ve just got a nagging feeling something’s not right.

Also be sure to know the signs of a developmental disorder and to tell the doctor if your baby doesn’t do the following by 12 months of age — or seems to stop doing them altogether:

Exchange back-and-forth sounds with you

Babble

Smile socially, or smile back and forth with others

Make and keep eye contact with you

Point or use other gestures to get needs met

Respond when you call her name

Look when you point at something

Bear weight on her legs with support, doesn’t sit with help

And before you leave, don't forget to get the next appointment scheduled, which will be the 15-month checkup .