These Pregnancy-Safe Leg and Booty Moves Boost Stability And Ease Aches

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnancy leg exercises, pregnant woman doing kettlebell squat

A strong lower body can help make your pregnancy a lot more comfortable and speed your postpartum recovery. Here are a few exercises pregnant women can try.

By now you may know that there are a slew of reasons to exercise while pregnant — like reduced back pain, lower risk of gestational diabetes, and faster postpartum recovery, to name a few potential benefits .

But if you thought the focus was solely on maintaining a stable core to rebound your abdominal strength postpartum, you're missing out on targeting some of the body's largest muscles — many of which are in the lower body.

Key-Takeaways

Strong glutes and legs are MVPs in pregnancy. They can ease pelvic and low back discomfort, improve stability, and make everyday moves like walking feel better.

Skip moves that aren’t pregnancy-safe. Steer clear of high-impact jumps, long stretches lying flat on your back, and heavy one-sided exercises if they cause pelvic floor discomfort.

Aim for consistent, moderate movement. Try to work in two weekly strength sessions plus light cardio like walking.

Benefits of butt and leg workouts during pregnancy

Building strength in the lower body is essential during pregnancy. Specifically, lower-body exercises that strengthen the glute muscles can help counteract common pelvic and lower back pain problems in expectant mothers .

As pregnancy progresses, many moms-to-be can experience a more extreme anterior pelvic tilt as their baby bellies grow. This tilt can put pressure on the low back and cause stiffness in the hamstrings. Ouch.

Strengthening the lower body through strategic leg and butt exercises can help prevent these imbalances and ensure you feel physically supported while your bump expands. Lastly, pregnant leg workouts can make walking easier and help increase overall stability for expecting moms.

Stay strong and safe through every trimester: Track your fitness and find expert-approved pregnancy workouts in the What to Expect app .

Butt and leg exercises to avoid during pregnancy

While many leg and butt exercises are safe to perform during pregnancy, you may need to modify the moves as the weeks tick by. When in doubt, always consult your doctor, but it's generally best to avoid leg and butt workouts that:

Compromise your balance. Your balance is already a bit off during pregnancy, so adding to that while working out sets you up for greater risk of falling.

Involve ballistic movements. Avoid jumping or other high-impact exercises common in CrossFit and HIIT training. They can lead to a greater sense of instability and may cause discomfort or pelvic injuries.

Position you flat on your back. Too much time in that position coupled with the added baby weight can compress your vena cava, the vein which carries blood from other areas of your body back to your heart.

Require putting weight on only one side. Unilateral weight-bearing exercises (such as split squats or single-leg deadlifts) can increase pelvic floor discomfort during pregnancy for some women. If this occurs, avoid single-sided exercises and opt for a balanced movement.

Best butt and leg exercises during pregnancy

Aim to do at least two strength-building workouts a week such as prenatal yoga or Pilates. Supplement your lower-body training (as well upper-body and full-body workouts) with a light aerobic routine like walking .

“I have a Fitbit, so I try to make my 10k steps and 10 flights of stairs daily. Some days I go over; some days under. But I usually walk every day,” says What to Expect Community mom babystarlord.

Altogether, most pregnant women should aim for at least 30 minutes of moderate exercise most days of the week.

Looking for some inspiration for your next pregnancy leg workout? Try these leg and butt exercises together for a targeted workout or individually add them to a full-body routine.

Squat to reverse lunge

squat to reverse lunge

Begin with your feet about hips-width apart, toes turned slightly out. Keeping the chest lifted, bend knees until thighs are roughly parallel with the floor.

Press through your heels as you squeeze your butt to return to standing.

Keeping your chest lifted, step back with your right foot, bending both knees to 90-degree angles. Torso should remain upright with hips square to the front.

Press through the front heel to return to standing.

Perform a squat and then step back with your left leg into a reverse lunge on the opposite side. That’s one rep.

Do 8 to 10 reps, alternating sides.

Curtsy lunge to side lunge

curtesy lunge to side lunge

Begin with your feet about hips-width apart, then step your right foot diagonally behind your left, bending both knees to about 90-degree angles. Ensure the front knee doesn’t drift too far outside the midline. (To increase the intensity: Pulse up and down three to five times on every curtsy.)

Push through the front heel as you squeeze your butt to return to standing.

Immediately, step your right foot out to the side, bending to a 90-degree angle with the right knee to come into a side lunge.

Press through your right heel to return to standing before repeating the pattern of curtsy lunge to side lunge. Complete all reps on the right, then all reps on the left.

Do 8 to 10 reps on each side.

Glute kickbacks

glute kickback

Begin on all fours with your palms beneath your shoulders and knees below your hips.

Extend your left leg straight behind you, to kick the air with your heel, keeping your abs engaged and your spine neutral. Return to the starting position. Complete all reps on the left side, then all reps on the left.

Do 8 reps on each side.

Side-lying leg raises

side-laying leg raise

Lie on your left side with your left arm supporting your head and right arm resting on your hip or the floor in front of you. Bend your left knee.

Slowly and with control, lift your straight right leg up until you feel your outer glute catch — no need to push the height. Keep your right hip stacked above the left.

Lower your right leg back down with control, never letting it drop to the floor, but hovering just above it. Repeat. (To increase the intensity: Pulse up and down a few inches at the top of your range of motion, or circle the leg forward, then backward.) Complete all reps on this side, then all reps on the opposite side.

Do 10 reps on each side.

Glute bridge

glute bridge

Begin laying on your back with feet planted about hips-width apart and knees pointed up. Your heels should be close enough to your butt that you can reach the back of your heels with your fingertips.

Place a Pilates ball, yoga block, or rolled towel between your inner thighs.

Inhale, then exhale to brace your core, squeeze the ball, then press through heels to lift butt off the floor. Be careful not to over extend at the top, and avoid arching your back.

Slowly roll back down to your starting position, releasing the pelvic floor when your hips come to the ground.

Do 8 to 12 reps.

Second position plié

second position plie

Begin standing with your feet wider than hips-distance apart with your toes turned out. Shoulders should be stacked over your hips. You can hold onto a wall or chair for additional support.

Inhale as you take two counts to lower your hips toward the ground, bending the knees and keeping them in track with your toes. Exhale, and press through your heels to return to standing, taking two counts to do so.

Do 15 to 20 reps.

Second position plié pulse

Begin standing with your feet wider than hips-distance apart with your toes turned out. Shoulders should be in line with your hips. You can hold onto a wall or chair for additional support.

Inhale as you take two counts to lower your hips toward the ground, bending the knees and keeping them in track with your toes.

Hold at bottom of the movement with knees at roughly 90-degree angles, and pulse, moving hips up and down an inch. Each pulse is one rep.

Do 20 to 30 reps.

Quadruped donkey kick

quadruped donkey kick

Begin on all fours with your palms beneath your shoulders and knees below your hips.

Maintaining a neutral spine, straighten your right leg, then lift it so it’s in line with your hips.

Flex through your right foot, and curl heel toward your butt, taking two counts to get as close to your glute as possible, engaging the hamstrings. Extend your right leg back out, keeping it parallel with the floor as you continue to curl.

Do 15 to 20 reps on each side.

Quadruped fire hydrant

quadruped fire hydrant

Begin on all fours with your palms beneath your shoulders and knees below your hips.

Maintaining a neutral spine, straighten your right leg, then bend at the knee to form a 90-degree angle.

Keeping the right leg bent, draw the knee down to the mat to come to the side of the supporting knee, then lift the bent leg directly out to the side until you can’t go any further without changing the alignment of the hips or spine.

Draw the knee back down to hover above the floor and then repeat, driving the knee straight back into the hamstring curl position.

Do 8 to 12 reps on each side.

Side-lying clamshell

clamshell

Begin laying on your left side, using your left forearm to prop your torso up, maintaining a lift through the bottom hip. Hips should be stacked.

Bend your knees together and bring them forward until your heels line up with your hips.

Engage the core and lift to open the top bent leg to create a diamond shape with the legs, edges of the feet still connected. Make sure your hips stay stacked.

Inhale and close the knees, returning to the starting position.