Thinking of Using Evening Primrose Oil to Induce Labor? Here's What to Know

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting.

evening primrose oil to induce labor, gel caplets

This herbal supplement is a common DIY labor trick, but research on its effectiveness and safety during pregnancy is mixed.

Has your due date come and gone but still no baby? You might've started Googling DIY ways to coax her into the world and found that evening primrose oil is one way people try to induce labor . But what exactly is evening primrose oil, does it actually work — and are there any risks to using it while you're pregnant?

Evening primrose oil is a popular natural option for inducing labor , and some women and practitioners swear by it. Before giving it a try, though, it's important to understand what the research says — and what it doesn't.

Key Takeaways

Evening primrose oil is popular, but evidence is mixed. While some women and providers swear by it as a natural way to induce labor, research hasn't consistently shown that evening primrose oil helps ripen the cervix or speed up labor.

It's not risk-free during pregnancy. Using evening primrose oil has been linked to potential downsides, including longer labor, increased need for interventions, postpartum bleeding risks, and bleeding or bruising in newborns, especially when taken close to delivery.

Always talk to your provider first. Because evening primrose oil hasn't been proven safe or effective for labor induction, it's important to get guidance from your doctor or midwife before trying it.

What is evening primrose oil?

Evening primrose oil (EPO) is derived from the seeds of the evening primrose plant. Often used as a health remedy, women have long taken it to relieve breast pain , PMS and menopause symptoms, and to induce labor.

The oil is considered an herbal supplement and is usually sold in capsules. Some women take the capsules orally, while others insert them vaginally. Still others do both.

"I did orally and vaginally and had a super quick birth with minimal tearing," says What to Expect Community mom Erosen44.

"I did it vaginally for two nights and went into labor," says mom hbr110924. "And yes it does fully dissolve! Just wear a pad because it is oil and can get a little messy."

Why do pregnant women take evening primrose oil supplements?

Some midwives recommend evening primrose oil supplements to induce labor naturally. The oil is thought to help soften and thin the cervix, which can encourage it to dilate and potentially jumpstart labor.

"I've been doing EPO inserted vaginally and then I just take it orally when I don't feel like going to the trouble," says What to Expect Community member BirdieBee4444. At her 38-week checkup, she says, "I was told that everything is 'very soft, thin, and ready for labor.' I genuinely feel like it helps, and it certainly doesn't hurt to try it."

Is it safe to use evening primrose oil to induce labor?

There isn't enough research to confirm that evening primrose oil is safe to use during pregnancy.

If you're thinking about giving evening primrose oil a try, be sure to talk with your doctor or midwife first. It's definitely not recommended for everyone. In fact, some studies suggest it may increase the risk of complications for certain women. Your practitioner can help you weigh the pros and cons, find out if it's safe for you, and — if it is safe — determine when and how to take it.

Does evening primrose oil actually induce labor?

Researchers are working on answering this question, but so far we don't have really good scientific evidence that it does.

While some small studies suggest that using EPO — especially vaginally — may help prepare the cervix for labor, others find no benefit. A randomized clinical trial published in the Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology found that evening primrose oil had no effect on cervical ripening or shortening the length of labor. Trusted SourceJournal of Obstetrics and GynaecologyEvening primrose oil and labour, is it effective? A randomised clinical trialSee All Sources [1] And some research has even linked evening primrose oil use during pregnancy to longer, slower labors.

Trusted SourceJournal of Obstetrics and GynaecologyEvening primrose oil and labour, is it effective? A randomised clinical trialSee All Sources

So why do some women and providers swear by it? It may be coincidence. Women who take evening primrose oil and begin contracting soon after were likely close to going into labor anyway. And when you're near or past your due date, labor is bound to start at some point, with or without a supplement.

That timing can make it seem as though the oil triggered labor, but there's no clear way to prove that it did.

"I did it with my first," says What to Expect Community mom AFaria16. "I don't know if it helped, but my water broke naturally."

"I tried this among many other things with my first pregnancy and still never went into labor," says What to Expect Community mom bbcharles, who wound up being induced at 40 weeks and 2 days.

While research on evening primrose oil is still evolving, you may be wondering how it fits into your prep-for-labor plan. The What to Expect app's expert-backed advice can help you weigh the potential benefits alongside other proven strategies — like staying active, hydrated, and mentally grounded as delivery day nears.

Evening primrose oil side effects and risks

As with many herbal supplements, experts don't fully understand the risks that evening primrose oil might pose to pregnant women. But a few potential side effects have been noted:

Longer labor with more interventions. Taking evening primrose oil during pregnancy has been associated with a longer active phase of labor, as well as an increased need for interventions such as Pitocin or vacuum extraction .

Postpartum bleeding problems. Evening primrose oil can have a blood-thinning effect, which could make it harder for blood to clot. That could increase the risk for postpartum hemorrhage , especially among women with pregnancy conditions like placenta previa . After taking EPO beginning at about 36 weeks, What to Expect Community mom Jelly-Belly says, "I ended up needing an emergency Cesarean and the pills resulted in my blood thinning and difficulty clotting. I ended up losing a lot of blood and needing a transfusion."

Newborn bleeding problems. Newborns of mothers who take evening primrose oil in the week before giving birth are at higher risk for bruising or bleeding under the skin.

Digestive discomfort. Some people find that taking evening primrose oil causes stomachaches, indigestion, nausea, or loose stools.

Are there any benefits of evening primrose oil during pregnancy?

There's not much research supporting the benefits of taking evening primrose oil during pregnancy. But it has been tied to a few positive effects:

Preparing the uterus for labor. Anecdotally, some claim that taking evening primrose oil during pregnancy can help strengthen the uterus for childbirth. But there's no solid research to back this up.

Cervical ripening. While some studies show little effect, one meta-analysis of seven studies found that evening primrose oil significantly improved Bishop scores (a measure of cervical readiness) in term and post-term pregnancies. Trusted SourceHeliyonThe effect of evening primrose oil on cervical ripening and birth outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysisSee All Sources [2]

Reducing gestational diabetes symptoms. One small study found that taking evening primrose oil plus vitamin D during pregnancy helped reduce symptoms of gestational diabetes . But if you have gestational diabetes, you shouldn't take the supplement without getting approval from your doctor first.

When to call the doctor

If you're thinking of trying a DIY option to get your labor started — whether it's evening primrose oil or another natural remedy — get the okay from your doctor or midwife first.

Your provider can help determine whether induction is appropriate, which methods may be safe, and when it's okay to try them.

Evening primrose oil remains a popular natural option for trying to kickstart labor. But there's little evidence to support its effectiveness and some potential risks to consider. If you're thinking about using it, be sure to discuss it with your provider before moving forward.