Thinking About Castor Oil to Kick-Start Labor? The Potential Benefits (and Drawbacks)

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

castor oil

When you're nearing your due date you might be willing to try anything to kick-start labor. But will a shot of castor oil do the trick? And is it safe?

Lots of pregnant mamas long for a shortcut to labor and delivery, but reaching for castor oil isn’t always the solution. While castor oil can cause contractions in some (but not all) cases, the side effects aren’t easy to bear. The bottom line: Talk with your doctor before trying anything to jumpstart your labor.

After 40 weeks of pregnancy — and 40 weeks’ worth of pregnancy symptoms, almost none of which are getting any easier to manage — you might be looking for just about any natural trick to induce labor . Castor oil might help induce labor, but no, it may not be safe to try. Here's what moms-to-be need to know.

Key Takeaways

Castor oil works for some. About half the women who take castor oil experience contractions and go into labor. The rest? Nada.

The side effects are no joke. Castor oil is like a strong laxative which means nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and cramping are in your future if you try it.

Never take it without a doctor’s say-so. Because the contractions can be painful, it’s important to take castor oil under the direction of your OB.

What is castor oil?

Castor oil is a rather thick and yucky-tasting concoction that women have turned to for millenia in the hopes of hastening a baby’s arrival. Made from the seeds or beans of the plant Ricinus communis, also known as the castor plant, castor oil is a folklore method to encourage labor.

While research shows that castor oil can, in fact, bring on contractions, it also triggers a host of side effects, ranging from icky (diarrhea) to potentially dangerous (dehydration). Trusted SourceNorthwell HealthInducing Labor: Is Castor Oil A Bad Choice?See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNorthwell HealthInducing Labor: Is Castor Oil A Bad Choice?See All Sources

How does castor oil help induce labor?

While castor oil is better known as a laxative, it can sometimes help induce labor by working on the uterus in much the same way that it does the intestines, which can potentially speed up the labor process.

In studies of women who’ve given birth at least once at term, more than half of those who took a dose of castor oil went into labor within 24 hours — that’s compared to only 4% of those who didn’t glug it at all. But that doesn’t necessarily mean castor oil will induce labor for you: Almost half the women who received castor oil didn’t go into labor immediately.

What are the risks of taking castor oil to induce labor?

The risks are real when taking castor oil to induce labor. Since you can’t target castor oil so it induces labor without affecting the intestines, you’ll be facing a good bit of diarrhea, an upset stomach, vomiting, and cramping .

Since diarrhea and vomiting can lead to dehydration, it’s important to be ready to drink lots of water to replace that lost fluid. But even if you stay on top of your water intake, the stress of severe cramping can be dangerous for your baby, potentially making his heart rate increase — and making you feel even more uncomfortable than you already were.

Some anecdotal evidence also suggests that castor oil passes through the placenta to your baby, which can make the baby pass his first stool, called meconium , before he’s born. And that can potentially cause problems after birth.

But other research, including a study looking at more than 300 pregnant women, found that complications like meconium — or even nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, for that matter — were rare after a mom took castor oil.

The other potential risk of castor oil is that it can cause irregular, painful contractions . While any contractions at all may seem like a good thing, hours of irregular contractions — which aren’t real labor and don’t get you any closer to snuggling your baby — can be exhausting.

One of the most common side effects of castor oil, in fact, (after diarrhea and nausea) is exhaustion, which can make labor trickier when it does finally arrive.

Waiting for your baby to arrive can feel endless! But the What to Expect app has all the info you need on labor, contractions, nesting, and more. Hang in there, mama!

Should you try castor oil to induce labor?

If you’re wondering whether you should try castor oil to induce labor, check with your health care provider first. Like any other medical intervention in pregnancy (and depending on your health and any associated risk factors), your doctor may have unique reasons for wanting you to forgo it.

If you do get the okay to try castor oil after you've passed your due date, follow your practitioner’s dosing recommendations. In most studies where labor was successfully induced, women received 60 milliliters (about 4 tablespoons, the upper maximum daily recommended amount) of the tonic, often mixed with orange juice to mask the taste.

It’s probably best to take the mixture in the morning, so you can monitor your symptoms, drink plenty of water, and won’t be kept awake in the bathroom all night. If the first dose doesn’t do it, don’t overdo it with another (or another). It is possible to overdose on castor oil, and too much can be poisonous. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline PlusCastor Oil OverdoseSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline PlusCastor Oil OverdoseSee All Sources

Just try to stay patient: Your baby will arrive eventually — even if it feels like that day will never come.

What to Expect Community parent pzdk was curious about castor oil but didn’t get the green light from her practitioner. “I just talked to my doctor about this since I went late with my last baby. She strongly advised against it.”

Is it okay to use castor oil as a laxative during pregnancy?

No, it’s not okay to use castor oil as a laxative during pregnancy , at least not without your doctor’s permission. Instead, it’s more likely your doctor will ask you to up your water and fiber intake, or may recommend a stool softener, rather than allow for castor oil to be taken.

You're better off avoiding the chance you unintentionally induce labor as well — you want to give your baby the best odds to be full-term when he is born, after all!