Thinking About Botox During Pregnancy? Here's What to Know

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting, and new medical review.

A woman touching her face looking at the mirror

You're tired of looking tired. But when you're pregnant, you may want to hold off on Botox injections and try some safer alternatives.

Hoping to smooth a few lines before little one arrives? If so, you might want to look beyond Botox or other wrinkle-smoothing injections — at least for now.

Here's what experts say about Botox during pregnancy and safer ways to pamper your skin while you're expecting.

Key Takeaways

Botox isn't recommended for cosmetic reasons during pregnancy. Since there's not enough research on its safety for pregnant or nursing moms, most doctors advise against Botox for wrinkles while you're expecting or breastfeeding.

In some cases, Botox may be used for medical reasons. If you're dealing with serious conditions like chronic migraines or muscle tightness, you and your doctor may weigh the benefits against the risks and decide to go ahead with Botox while you're pregnant or nursing.

There are pregnancy safe ways to pamper your skin. Think facials, exfoliating scrubs, and hydrating lotions. Plus, pregnancy itself may give you a natural glow — and you can always revisit Botox once your baby arrives.

What is Botox?

Botox is a brand name drug that's used for both cosmetic and medical reasons. Also known as botulinum toxin type A, Botox is made using the bacterium Clostridium botulinum . It works by reducing the signals between certain nerves that tell the muscles to move.

When given as a cosmetic injection (in very small amounts!), the toxin can temporarily smooth over wrinkles — namely, frown lines, crow's feet, and forehead lines.

Botox is also used to treat a wide range of medical conditions, including eyelid twitching, spasticity (abnormal muscle tightness), migraines, overactive bladder, urinary incontinence , and excessive sweating.

Depending on what it's used for, the effects of Botox can last anywhere from three to 12 months. Some of the more common side effects include pain or bruising at the injection site.

Can you get Botox while pregnant?

Most doctors agree it's not a good idea to get Botox for cosmetic reasons while you're pregnant — not because we know it's dangerous, but because we don't know that it's safe.

So far, most research on Botox in pregnancy comes from animal studies, which don't always apply to people. Some studies showed potential risks, while others suggested the drug doesn't cross the placenta .

There have been a handful of case reports about women who received Botox during pregnancy (including some who didn't know they were pregnant at the time of the injections), according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) . Out of these women, the vast majority (the same proportion as the general population) went on to have healthy babies.

Still, many moms choose to play it safe.

“I do it for cosmetic reasons, so I'm going to wait till after the baby,” says What to Expect Community mom babyksmommy724.

One pregnant mom who's a dermatologist agrees about holding off.

“I am avoiding during pregnancy because to me, the benefits of fewer wrinkles for 3 months don't outweigh even a negligible risk to the fetus,” says What to Expect Community mom eating4two.

Another plans to wait until after pregnancy and breastfeeding are over before she goes back to cosmetic treatments.

“I don't intend to get any until after I'm done (with pregnancy and breastfeeding),” says What to Expect Community mom jesscjones12, who is a long time Botox and filler user before pregnancy. “Embracing the wrinkles for now ... “

When might Botox be okay during pregnancy?

The Food & Drug Administration (FDA) says that Botox should only be used during pregnancy if the benefits justify the potential risks to the baby. There are medical reasons that may get the green light — such as chronic migraines or severe muscle tightness.

“Talk with your doctor if you're pregnant or breastfeeding and you have a medical condition that may be helped by Botox,” says What to Expect Medical Review Board Member Jessica Wu, M.D. , a board-certified dermatologist in private practice in Los Angeles, California.

Botox is effective at reducing the frequency and severity of migraines, for example. “Botox is FDA-approved to treat migraines for those with at least 15 headache days a month,” Dr. Wu says.

“I got it for migraines in my second trimester ,” says What to Expect Community mom SallyinStitches. “My MFM and neurologist both said it was fine.”

Your doctor can help you weigh the pros and cons and explore other treatment options. If you're dealing with migraines, for example, Dr. Wu suggests trying acupuncture (ask your doctor first) and avoiding known headache and migraine triggers, such as bright light.

Sometimes, though, when other safe treatments aren't working and when a condition impairs a woman's ability to care for herself or her baby, Botox may be a good solution, says Dr. Wu.

“I get Botox for migraine every 12 weeks, and I am almost 20 weeks pregnant,” says What to Expect Community member Mkayyy95. “My doctors all approve of the Botox since it is for medical reasons, and they agree that it is a good preventative for my migraines.”

Curious what’s safe for your skin while you’re expecting? Check the What to Expect app for expert-backed beauty tips and mom-approved advice.

Can you get Botox while breastfeeding?

We don't know if Botox passes into breast milk, which is why the FDA encourages caution for breastfeeding moms. While some research suggests that Botox may not enter the bloodstream, there isn't enough evidence to be sure.

If you're breastfeeding and thinking about getting Botox for cosmetic reasons, most doctors will recommend you wait until your baby is weaned . As with pregnancy, if it's for a medical condition like migraines or muscle tightness, talk to your doctor.

What can you do instead of Botox while pregnant?

You can still give your skin a little TLC while you're expecting. Here are a few pregnancy-safe alternatives to Botox :

Facials: Most facials — including steam and collagen facials — are safe during pregnancy. “Try products with vitamin C, niacinamide, and fruit acids,” suggests Dr. Wu. Stay away from facials that use retinoids and salicylic acid, though, because these ingredients can enter your bloodstream and aren't safe.

Exfoliating scrubs: Good options include scrubs that contain sugar, salt, or lactic or glycolic acid.

Moisturizers: Keep dry skin hydrated with a gentle lotion or cream that contains hyaluronic acid or coconut oil.

You may even find that you don't need Botox, thanks to your pregnancy glow! It's a real thing: When you're pregnant, hormonal changes can boost oil production (hello, dewy skin — and maybe a pimple or two), while natural fluid retention can plump up fine lines.

The bottom line: When it comes to Botox and pregnancy, the safest choice is to wait — unless you need it for a medical condition and you and your doctor decide the benefits outweigh the risks.

In the meantime, pregnancy-safe treatments (and your natural glow) can help you feel refreshed.