This Is What the Cervical Os Does During Pregnancy

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

cervical os, colorful rounded wooden planks in the form of spiral

The cervix makes childbirth possible thanks to its shape-shifting capabilities. Here’s how it’ll adjust to keep your baby safe during pregnancy — and eventually open up so he can make his way into the world.

When you're pregnant, you may learn about body parts you’ve never heard of before. Because let’s be honest: Even if your high school sex-ed class was detailed, how much do you really remember? During pregnancy, you’ll discover firsthand all the amazing things your body innately knows how to do to get baby-ready.

An important player in all this prep work is the cervical os. Here’s what this special region inside the cervix does during pregnancy and delivery, and after childbirth.

Key Takeaways

The cervical os refers to the two openings of the cervix — the internal os (toward the uterus) and the external os (toward the vagina) — that form the passage between the uterus and vagina.

During pregnancy, the cervix stays closed and protected by a mucus plug , then softens, effaces (thins), and dilates up to 10 centimeters during labor to allow childbirth.

After childbirth, the cervix gradually returns to its pre-pregnancy size and shape within about six weeks, thanks to its highly elastic tissue.

What is the cervical os?

The cervical os (pronounced like “ox” but with an “s”) is part of a woman's cervix.

First things first: The cervix is the narrow, lower end of the uterus. It looks like a cylinder that’s a little more than 1 to 2 inches long, and it connects the uterus to the vagina. The cervical os describes the openings at the two ends of this canal (called the endocervical canal): Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicinePhysiology, Cervical DilationSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicinePhysiology, Cervical DilationSee All Sources

The internal cervical os opens into the uterus

The external cervical os opens into the vagina

During pregnancy, the cervix helps keep the growing baby in the uterus, even as he moves closer to the cervical canal. It also contains the mucus plug — a barrier that protects your baby until he’s ready for the outside world.

In fact, losing your mucus plug can mean that your body is getting ready for childbirth. While some women lose their mucus plug weeks before labor begins, others lose it right as labor starts. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsLabor InductionSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsLabor InductionSee All Sources

"With my first, I lost my mucus plug and immediately started labor after that," says What to Expect Community user lemonadeandcaprese. "With my second, I was induced, so I never lost it."

The cervical os during childbirth

When labor does set in , the cervix begins softening, shortening, and thinning ( called effacement ). The internal and external cervical os will also move closer together. At the same time, the external os starts to open, or dilate.

Throughout labor, your doctor will periodically check your cervix to see how much it's dilated and effaced. It’s just another sign as to how you’re progressing.

If it’s medically necessary, your doctor can use medication to speed labor along . The labor drug Cervidil , for example, can help the cervix dilate and efface if it needs a boost.

The state of your cervix signals when it's time to push. This second stage of childbirth can begin when your cervix is 100% effaced and the external cervical os has dilated to 10 centimeters. It’s officially time for your baby to leave the womb — and finally meet you! Trusted SourceTranslational Research in AnatomyThe structure and function of the cervix during pregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceTranslational Research in AnatomyThe structure and function of the cervix during pregnancySee All Sources

You can keep track of symptoms that may be signs of labor using the My Journal tool in the What to Expect app , plus get tips for navigating labor, delivery, and postpartum.

The cervical os after childbirth

Given how much the cervix can change during pregnancy, labor, and delivery, you may wonder just how long it will be until the cervix returns to normal after birth.

While childbirth affects every woman's vagina differently, the cervix typically returns to its previous size and shape about six weeks after delivery.

The very elastic tissue that makes up the cervix is what allows it to thin, dilate, and eventually retract after giving birth — which is why the cervix and the cervical os are among the many biological wonders that make pregnancy possible.