This Is the Worst Day of the Year to Have a Baby, According to Parents

melting birthday candles on top of a white cake

You can still make a less-than-ideal date special for your little one.

Key findings

Christmas is officially the worst birthday, according to moms; 40% would prefer to avoid a December 25 birthday for their children. Leap Day followed closely behind, with 38% of moms not wanting a Leap Day baby.

Gen Z moms are less likely than Millennials to want "birthday twins." More young moms want to avoid giving birth on a close family member's birthday (22% of Gen Z versus 7% of Millennials).

A quarter of moms wouldn't rule out having an induction or C-section to avoid a certain birthday; 13% say they would do it, and another 12% aren't sure if they would.

When I found out my due date was right around Thanksgiving, my grandma offered one piece of advice: Never put a turkey on your baby's birthday cake . As a fellow late November baby , she spent the majority of her childhood with her birthday getting lumped together with Turkey Day. And as it turns out, I unexpectedly gave my now 1-year-old one of the worst birthday dates ever. In fact, 23% of moms consider any day too close to the holidays "the worst," according to a new What to Expect poll of 404 moms.

We asked moms and moms-to-be which days they would not want their children to have a birthday, and gave them a few dates — including December 25 (Christmas), February 29 (Leap Day) and more — to choose from. Each respondent had the option to choose any and all the days they didn't want.

While most parents can't actually choose the date they deliver on, it's still fun to know what they're hoping to avoid. And no matter when your child's birthday is, it's all about how you celebrate.

The worst birthdays, according to moms

The results are in, and 40% of moms shared that the worst of the worst birthdays is December 25. There's a lot going on at Christmastime , and many moms in the What to Expect community have expressed their grievances about late December birthdays , in general.

"I would pick after if I could," one mom responded when asked about scheduling a C-section before or after Christmas Day. "Everyone is so busy and stressed the week before Christmas."

"Before," proposed another, adding, "after the holidays, everyone's exhausted. I am getting induced week 39 and going to [choose] the soonest date as my due date is literally Christmas Day."

The next-worst date? Thirty-eight percent of respondents said February 29, aka Leap Day, which only happens once every four years.

"No experience with leap year birthdays, but the doctors wanted to induce me on Leap Day and I asked them not to," wrote one mom . "I think it would be cool as an adult, but as a kid I could see it being really sad not being able to say, 'Today is my birthday.'"

The Worst Birthdays, According to Moms | December 25 (Christmas) | 40% February 29 (Leap Day) | 38% The anniversary of a family member's death | 26% January 1 (New Year's Day) | 23% Any date too close to the holidays | 23% Their sibling's birthday | 23% October 31 (Halloween) | 16%

Other "bad due dates" were New Year's Day (23%) and Halloween (16%). Some non-holidays made the list, too. The anniversary of a family member's death (26%) and a sibling's birthday (23%) were also undesirable.

Over on the What to Expect Community , moms expressed how siblings sharing a birthday could cause challenges — both for the kids and the parents planning multiple celebrations around the same time.

"I can't speak for my kids because they're 1 and 3 years old , but their birthdays are 11 days apart and I HATE IT," one mom confessed . "I like to go all out for kids' birthdays, and their combined party this year was a nightmare."

Even though these dates are less-than-ideal for some families, 75% of moms would not request an induction or planned C-section to avoid a particular birthday.

How to make your child's birthday special

While there may be some cons associated with certain birthdays, 16% of moms polled didn't dread any of the listed days. Some moms have also shared positive sentiments, plus tips on how to make these celebrations extra special for your little one:

Recognize both occasions separately.

"Make sure everyone acknowledges the birthday AND the big holiday. And find a way to establish a special birthday tradition for the kid, with a bonus if it involves family or friends who you're celebrating the holiday with. It'll feel extra special!" — totchncoach

Celebrate a half birthday.

"My birthday is also in December, same with my soon-to-be-born baby! My parents always did my birthday as a kid on my half birthday, like a party with friends in the summer. It was a lot of fun! I'd recommend doing that when they are old enough to remember them." — Katecoblamb

Let family surprise you.

"I was so worried about [my baby girl's] birthday being ON Christmas Day (I am December 22), but it turned out to be perfect! My son (4 years old) woke up and went to the baby and sang 'Happy Birthday' before he even mentioned Santa! It was so sweet. My family was so respectful and asked what they can do to make this day even more special for her. I'm sure moving forward it will be a challenge with parties and whatnot, but I can say my anxiety about having a day 'for her' is gone!" — jmbarnard

Divide up the day.

"My birthday is on Christmas as well. When I was little especially, my mom made sure we had birthday separate from Christmas. Presents could not double for both holidays, and birthday presents could not be wrapped in Christmas paper. We always did Christmas earlier in the day and transitioned to birthday after dinner. It worked for me, and I didn't feel like I missed out." — lsampleycsu

Make your child feel special.

"Your child won't think having a Christmas time birthday is anything but AWESOME until others tell them that! I say, 'Of course you were born during the most wonderful time of the year [and] couldn't have come at a regular time because you're extra special! My first son's birthday is December 26 , and I love to celebrate birthdays, so I've put thought into how we'll make it special. I have a nice reusable birthday tablecloth that we put on for everyone's birthday for the whole day, and they love it, so simple but traditions can be small. I also blow up balloons and have them all down the hall and in his room, so it's BIRTHDAY the second he wakes up." — MamaTo3OKC

Lean into a celebration season.

"My kids are November 24 and October 21. They love it. When we found out [our next] baby is due at the same time, they got so excited. I think it depends on your family dynamic. They absolutely love all the holidays, birthdays and fun fall things around that time. We do combined birthday parties ." — StephFlowers

Take a trip.

"My babies are going to be 2 years and 1 month apart, so we will be doing birthday trips with them. I'm hoping they'll take turns every year to pick where we go for their birthday. Sooo excited!" — Rainbowbaby102

See it as a blessing.

"My due date with my first was the day after the anniversary of my dad's death 6 years earlier. I knew that time would be extremely hard on my mom, as my parents were madly in love. I ended up taking it all as a blessing and that he had a hand in keeping baby safe during my pregnancy." — ErinB19

Methodology

The Everyday Health Group Pregnancy & Parenting Talk to Moms Monthly Poll was conducted by Everyday Health Group – Pregnancy and Parenting between April 25 and 26, 2024. We surveyed 404 women ages 18 to 44 who are currently pregnant or have at least one child up to 5 years old.