This Is Your Sign to Have a Valentine's Day Photo Shoot With Your Baby

valentine's photo shoot

Because the baby stage goes so fast.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

My mom’s birthday is the day after Valentine’s Day, and I think I know the perfect gift: a V-Day themed photo album featuring her favorite person, my 23-month-old son. Lucky for me, the What to Expect Community is full of Valentine’s Day photoshoot ideas. Thank you, fellow mamas.

From leaving lipstick marks on your little one’s cheeks to stocking up on foil heart-shaped balloons, there’s no shortage of inspiration and sweetness if you’re looking to create a similar keepsake for the loveliest of holidays. Most of these are easy and relatively affordable to recreate, plus you might already have some of the recommended items at home.

1. Take your love to new heights

new heights

Moms Tamara and Red dressed their daughter in a heart sweater and skirt from Target and blew up a few balloons from Amazon to float around her. The secret to suspending those balloons to fit perfectly in the frame? Balloon glue dots to help them stay together! “This photoshoot captured such a sweet stage in our daughter’s life — full of love, curiosity, and joy,” they say. “It was a simple at-home setup that turned into one of our favorite Valentine’s memories.”

2. Snuggle up with your little Valentine

Valentine's snuggle shoot

For her son Cashton’s first Valentine’s Day, Valerie Coon sourced a red beanie and overalls with a heart pocket from Zara and tucked her little one into bed. “As a mom of three, I try to make every holiday feel magical, and it’s something my own mom always did for me,” she says. One idea to ensure you get a big smile like Cashton’s? Have your partner or a sibling there to make faces and funny sounds while you snap as many photos as possible.

3. Create your own kissing booth

kissing booth

Natalie Johnstone of Blush & Willow Photography relied on a plain paper backdrop, foil heart balloons in three colors, and heart-shaped confetti for this holiday mini-shoot. Fabric tape allowed her to design the heart-filled display behind this adorable tot. P.S. I think I found the same “Kisses 25¢” sweater featured in the photo.

4. Smother your baby in smooches

smooch valentine's shoot

What to Expect mom Kirstie put on red lipstick before covering her daughter, Lucia, in kisses. This quintessential Valentine’s Day photo was made even more adorable with a two-piece hat and dress set. As a single mom with a little one, she used a parent-favorite product to keep Lucia propped up and comfortable: “Our Boppy made sure she stayed in place safely,” she says. “Having photographs and taking them is the frozen moment I get to have forever of her on that day.”

5. Peek into sibling storytime

sibling valentine's shoot

Does it get any cuter than a big sibling reading to your baby? What to Expect mom deluxeee took this candid photo as her older son was flipping through Susan Lang’s book Grumpy Monkey Valentine Gross-Out , with his younger sibling by his side. If you can, ask your big kid to pick out a favorite Valentine’s Day story and have your camera ready to copy this casual setup.

6. Order an on-trend knit sweater set

sweater set photo shoot

Personalized sweater sets are too cute, and this Valentine’s Day-themed set is perfectly embroidered for the holiday. This set from Walmart looks just like the outfit a very sleepy baby wore in WTE mom’s sof7872’s photoshoot. After you secure the perfect outfit, just lay out a white sheet (or go with whatever is already on your bed) and snap away.

7. Sprinkle the floor with sprinkle cookies

sprinkle cookies photo shoot

WTE mom sarahsnf scattered teeny-tiny cookies all over her daughter’s blanket and even on her baby’s heart-covered overalls, placed her down on the blanket, and snapped away. You can pick up the outfit at Carter’s , and if you don’t feel like running to the store for the pre-made cookies, you can make your own using this Lofthouse-style cookie recipe .

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Easy-to-Take Holiday Photos You’ll Cherish for Years to Come By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Sweet Monthly Photo Shoot Ideas for Every Family By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

Picture-Perfect Maternity Photo Ideas for Every Parent-to-Be Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

From Birthday Jammies to Build-A-Bear Fun, Here's Some Inspiration For Your Baby's First Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

12 Family Maternity Shoot Ideas to Celebrate a New Sibling Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

8 Tips to Get the Sweetest Photos of Your Kids — Without Fancy Equipment or a Full Day Photoshoot Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

7 Photos Every Pregnant Mom Needs — Because You'll Regret Not Taking Them Later Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Unique First Birthday Party Ideas and Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Gorgeous Winter Maternity Photos Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

10 Fun Ways to Celebrate Your Baby’s Half-Birthday By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

13 Fabulous Fall Maternity Photos to Honor a New Season of Your Life Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

9 Creative DIY Pregnancy Announcements for Crafty Parents-to-Be Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

How to Throw a Winter Wonderland Baby Shower for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window