This Printable Potty Training Chart Can Help Your Toddler Lose the Diapers for Good

Light copy updates and updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

potty training chart, colorful star stickers

Here’s how a simple chart helps reward your little one for potty training successes.

You can’t wait for your little one to graduate from diapers to underwear, but your child has much more pressing things to do (those block towers aren’t going to build themselves). Thing is, even if your child is showing signs of potty training readiness — staying dry for an hour or two at a time, loudly vocalizing his bowel movements — he may be lacking the enthusiasm to use the toilet.

That’s why many parents use a potty training chart — a tool that relies on stickers, check marks, or smiley faces to reward your tot Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCreate a Potty Training Plan for Your ChildSee All Sources [1] for a bathroom job well done. Here’s how it works.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCreate a Potty Training Plan for Your ChildSee All Sources

Key Takeaways

Potty training charts may help with motivation: Kids earn stickers, smiley faces, or check marks for bathroom successes, which can be traded for small rewards.

These charts can be flexible and fun. They might track different milestones (asking to go, peeing, pooping, wiping, washing hands) and be personalized with decorations, favorite stickers, or characters.

Potty training charts can also build confidence. Visible progress helps toddlers stay engaged and feel proud — though if interest fades, it’s okay to pause and try again later.

What is a potty training chart?

A potty training chart is a fillable chart or calendar that tracks — and celebrates! — your toddler's bathroom progress. Not only can it help keep your child motivated throughout the potty training process , but it can also help you keep track of your little one's successes and setbacks .

There’s no one right way to set up a potty training chart, nor do you have to splurge on a fancy board. You and your tot can make your own using paper or poster board and some markers or fun stickers.

How to use a potty training chart

Each time your little one uses the potty successfully, fill an empty box on the chart with a sticker, a smiley face, or a check mark. Once the chart is full at the end of the day or end of the week (you decide!), he gets a reward that you deem appropriate, like a small toy, sticker, yummy treat, or another fun item or activity you know your child will love.

"With my oldest, we do one M&M for peeing in the potty, two if she asks to go," says What to Expect Community user mybabyishangry. "For poop, she gets one Hershey Kiss, plus a sticker. Once she fills her sticker chart she gets to go in the treasure chest (literally just a Christmas cookie tin). We keep some dollar store type toys and books [in there]."

How you want to fill up the chart is up to you and your tot, but personalization is a great place to start. Here are a few strategies to try: Trusted SourcePull-UpsPotty Training Sticker ChartsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourcePull-UpsPotty Training Sticker ChartsSee All Sources

Get artistic. To get your little one excited about participating, ask him to help you decorate the chart with fun stars or cartoon faces.

Hang the chart at eye level for your child. That way, your tot will be able to see it and, later, apply his own stickers to it. You can keep the chart near the toilet — in the bathroom or in the playroom — or whenever he can see it.

Personalize the boxes. For every milestone he crosses, have him draw a fun star, smiley face, or check mark in the box. Or, if he has a favorite animal, superhero, or movie character, you can order stickers with that on them to dial up the excitement. As long as he’s happy, the motivation to keep potty training should continue.

Different types of potty training charts

Some charts offer rewards just for using the potty, while others include more potty training goals. For example, you can also track milestones like asking to go to the potty, peeing on the potty, pooping on the potty, wiping, washing his hands, or staying dry all day.

You can also organize the rows on your chart by goals (every time your tot asks to use the potty, he gets a sticker) or day of the week (on Monday, your tot would get a sticker for each of the goals he accomplished, like peeing on the potty or wiping by himself).

How can a potty training chart help your toddler learn to use the potty?

Overall, a potty training chart is a great tool that helps keep your toddler motivated while he’s learning to use the bathroom like a big kid. Seeing all those stars and stickers he’s earned is a visible sign of his success — and the more goals your tot can master, the more confident he’ll feel. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicPotty training: How to get the job doneSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicPotty training: How to get the job doneSee All Sources

Free printable potty training chart

There are a variety of potty training charts available for parents to download and use during their tot’s potty training journey. You can even design your own with your child if you prefer. Below, find a potty training chart to download, print, and customize if you want to.

potty training chart

Teaching your little one to go to the bathroom in the toilet can sometimes feel challenging, but it’s also one of the most rewarding milestones your child will reach. While most tots will be ready to start potty training between the ages of 2 and 3 1/2 years old, every child is different.

If your little one doesn’t take to potty training right away, shelve the potty training chart (and the baby potty) for now and try again in a few weeks.

Have more questions about your child's potty training journey? Open the What to Expect app for guides on potty training readiness, tips to get started, and much more.

Sources

Create a Potty Training Plan for Your Child

Show in the article

Potty Training Sticker Charts

Show in the article

Potty training: How to get the job done

Show in the article

Tips on Starting Potty Training

9 Signs Your Toddler Is Ready to Be Potty Trained

5 Potty Training Problems and How to Deal With Them

How to Potty Train a Girl

How to Potty Train a Boy