In the third and final trimester of pregnancy, you may experience some uncomfortable symptoms. Here are some common thoughts many moms-to-be have towards the end of their pregnancies.

Anyone who’s had a baby will tell you: The third trimester is no joke. In addition to feeling epically uncomfortable, bloated and tired as all get-out (who can sleep with a belly that big?!), there’s the loop of thoughts that runs through your mind all day, every day.

If you feel like your mind is racing in the last trimester, rest easy (ha!) knowing that you’re definitely not alone. Here are nine thoughts many pregnant moms have as they get closer to their due date.

1. I am completely and totally done. The second trimester is often referred to as the “good trimester” for a reason — morning sickness has usually subsided and your bump isn't so big that every single thing is uncomfortable. The third trimester? Not so much. Once you're closer to your due date, many moms-to-be find that it’s almost impossible to think about anything other than how big and uncomfortable you feel.

2. But wait — I'm actually not done. I'm not ready! While physically you may feel ready to not be pregnant anymore, you may still not feel ready emotionally or mentally. Because, honestly, does anyone ever truly feel prepared to, you know, just start raising a human?

3. My life is about to change. Whether you have zero kids or five, there’s always something a little bit sad and emotional about saying goodbye to the life you know now. How will things change for you? How will things change for your kids? All very valid questions! You have every right to mourn a little bit each day. Change is hard.

4. I have to squeeze in every little thing I need to do ... now! There’s a reason you may feel like you’re up against a ticking timer each day — because you are up against a ticking timer each day! While “chilling out” is much easier said than done, it’s important to keep in mind that you may not be able to fit in every single thing you want to do before baby arrives, and that's okay. Focus on practical ways you can prepare for labor and childbirth , and allow yourself to rest when you need it.

5. I have to clean and organize every little thing in the house ... now! The nesting instinct is real in the third trimester — and while it’s kind of fun to clean and organize, it can also get tiring.

6. Can't wait for baby to get here, already! No matter how nervous you are about labor, delivery and parenting, you're probably also super excited. The final countdown is on and you'll get to meet your baby soon! Some days you may feel like you can't wait another second.

7. Grrrr. You’re super pregnant. You’re probably not sleeping that well a lot of nights. And you’ve got a ton on your mind. It would be weird if you didn’t find practically everything annoying, at least some of the time.

8. I hope I'm a good mom! The sheer fact that you’re hoping, wondering and caring about what kind of mom you'll be speaks volumes. Don't worry too much, and try not to give into the #momguilt (it starts early!). You're going to be a great parent.

9. Welp, I’m ready as I’ll ever be, I guess! You may not think this every day during the third trimester, but there will come a time when you just say to yourself, “To hell with trying to be organized and orderly. This baby’s going to come when she/he comes.” And of course that’s exactly when the baby will come!

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Your Guide to the Third Trimester of Pregnancy , September 2018. WhatToExpect.com, 12 Ways You Can Prepare for Labor , May 2021.