Thyroid Conditions During Pregnancy: What You Need to Know

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnant woman with thyroid disorder

Hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism are easy for physicians to miss in pregnant women because the symptoms are so similar to those of a “normal” pregnancy. But proper diagnosis and treatment are critical to both mom and baby.

Feeling tired, moody, achy, and forgetful? Are you gaining weight, breaking out, and swelling up? Of course you are — you’re pregnant! While these symptoms are common among moms-to-be, they can rarely also be signs of a thyroid disorder. So how can your doctor tell the difference?

If you’ve never been diagnosed with a thyroid condition before but you’re experiencing the symptoms of one (and especially if you have a family history of thyroid disease), your doctor will run a simple blood test to check your thyroid function. Luckily, thyroid disorders can be treated safely with medication during pregnancy, minimizing any risks to you or your baby.

Key Takeaways

Thyroid changes are common in pregnancy — but sometimes they signal a thyroid disorder. Because pregnancy symptoms can overlap with thyroid issues, your doctor may run a simple blood test to be sure.

Both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism are treatable during pregnancy. With the right medication and regular monitoring, you can keep your levels in a healthy range for you and your growing baby.

Tell your provider if you’ve had thyroid problems before or notice concerning symptoms. Early testing and treatment help protect your baby’s development and keep you feeling your best throughout pregnancy.

What is a thyroid disorder?

The thyroid gland, located at the front of the neck just below the voice box, is part of the endocrine system, which produces all of the hormones in your body. The hormones your thyroid creates play a key role in regulating your metabolism — the way your body uses energy — along with your temperature, weight, cholesterol levels, and other key bodily functions.

Production of thyroid hormones, in turn, is regulated by levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), generated by your pituitary gland (in your brain). The levels of thyroid hormones in your blood naturally fluctuate throughout the day; usually, the pituitary gland responds by creating more or less TSH.

Hypothyroidism (too little thyroid hormone), can cause many of the body’s functions to slow down, while hyperthyroidism (too much thyroid hormone) can cause many of the body’s functions to speed up. While both conditions are treatable with medication, if untreated, they can lead to pregnancy complications, according to the American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists (ACOG).

How does pregnancy affect thyroid levels?

When you’re expecting, two pregnancy hormones you’re probably pretty familiar with already — estrogen and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) — increase your thyroid hormone levels.

In the first trimester, hCG — which is similar to TSH — stimulates production of thyroid hormones. And throughout pregnancy, increased estrogen levels produce a hormone that helps transport thyroid hormones in the blood. By the third trimester, the thyroid’s volume may be 10% to 15% percent greater than before you were pregnant. All of this is normal.

For both of the above reasons and because many symptoms of a normal pregnancy and a thyroid disorder (like fatigue) are similar, thyroid tests can be more difficult to interpret when you’re expecting.

And because thyroid hormones are crucial to the healthy development of your baby’s brain and nervous system — especially during the first trimester, before your baby’s thyroid has developed and he’s completely reliant on you for thyroid hormone — it’s all the more important to understand your risk factors and symptoms so you so can get treatment if you need it.

Hypothyroidism and pregnancy

Hypothyroidism is a deficiency of the thyroid hormone thyroxine due to an underactive thyroid gland. During pregnancy, the condition — which occurs in about 2 to 3 of every 500 expecting women — is usually caused by Hashimoto’s disease, an autoimmune disorder that causes chronic inflammation of the thyroid gland and interferes with its ability to produce hormones, according to the National Institutes of Health (NIH).

Women who have been diagnosed with hypothyroidism in the past and those who have a family history of thyroid disorders have the highest risk of experiencing the condition during pregnancy.

Your thyroid hormones are critical to normal development of the baby’s brain and nervous system — which means babies who don’t get enough of these hormones in the first trimester, when they’re dependent on their mother’s supply, can be born with neurological development problems.

Symptoms of hypothyroidism in pregnancy

Do any of the following sound familiar? While common in pregnancy, it’s still best to play it safe and mention them to your doctor:

Extreme fatigue

Feeling cold

Memory loss

Muscle aches and cramps

Higher than average weight gain

Skin problems

Hair loss

Swelling (especially of the hands and feet)

Constipation

Hypothyroidism risks during pregnancy

If left untreated, hypothyroidism during pregnancy can lead to:

Premature birth

Preeclampsia (a severe increase in blood pressure)

Miscarriage

Low birth weight

Anemia for the mother

Stillbirth

Rarely, congestive heart failure for the mother

Your doctor will discuss the symptoms you’ve been experiencing and then run a blood test to check for levels of TSH and T4 (a thyroid hormone).

Hypothyroidism treatment during pregnancy

Your doctor will prescribe a synthetic hormone called levothyroxine — which is not only safe during pregnancy, it’s vital to both you and your baby. Work with your endocrinologist and obstetrician to determine the right dose for you.

“The meds make a huge difference once you find the right dosage,” reports What to Expect Community mom k-jo-98.

If you had hypothyroidism before getting pregnant, they will likely need to increase your levothyroxine dose now, since the body requires more thyroid hormones when it’s in baby-growing mode.

During pregnancy and postpartum, your thyroid hormone levels will be monitored every six to eight weeks to see if your dose needs further adjustment.

In addition to medication, be sure to eat a healthy, balanced diet and take a prenatal vitamin. Most likely your doctor will also suggest a supplement of 150 micrograms (mcg) of iodine a day during pregnancy (if there’s not already that much in your prenatal vitamin), since iodine is important for thyroid health. You’ll also find iodine in seafood and iodized salt, so opt for that over sea salt or kosher salt (which do not contain iodine).

Hyperthyroidism and pregnancy

Hyperthyroidism is when an overactive gland produces too much thyroid hormone. The condition occurs in about 1 to 4 out of every 1,000 pregnancies.

Hyperthyroidism in expecting moms is usually caused by Graves' disease, an autoimmune disorder where the immune system makes an antibody called thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI) that causes the thyroid to overproduce thyroid hormone.

More rarely, hyperthyroidism during pregnancy is linked to hyperemesis gravidarum (severe nausea and vomiting), since both conditions are triggered by higher hCG levels.

Looking for guidance on symptoms, milestones, and “is this normal?” moments? Check the What to Expect app for all that (and so much more).

Symptoms of hyperthyroidism in pregnancy

Call your doctor if you experience any of the following:

Irregular or increased heartbeat

Fatigue

Nervousness

Severe nausea or vomiting

Trouble sleeping

Weight loss or less weight gain than a “typical” pregnancy

The good news: If you had preexisting Graves Disease, you may actually see an improvement and even remission in symptoms in the second and third trimesters, since the body suppresses the immune system during pregnancy.

And if your condition was linked to hyperemesis gravidarum, it will likely disappear along with nausea and vomiting in the second trimester due to lower levels of hCG.

Hyperthyroidism risks during pregnancy

As with hypothyroidism, untreated hyperthyroidism can lead to serious complications for both you and your baby, including:

Congestive heart failure in the mother

Preeclampsia

Miscarriage

Premature birth

Low birth weight

Your practitioner will review your symptoms and run a blood test to check for TSH, T3, and T4 levels.

Hyperthyroidism treatment during pregnancy

If your condition is mild, you likely won’t need any treatment. More severe cases require antithyroid medications called propylthiouracil (PTU) in the lowest effective dose for the first trimester.

After the first trimester, if necessary, your doctor may switch you to the antithyroid medication methimazole (Tapazole, Northyx). Either way, you’ll need to check in with your doctor regularly to make sure the medications and dose are still right for you.

“My advice is to have a good team around you and do the frequent blood tests. It helps stop me from getting anxious unnecessarily, and things can change quickly in pregnancy,” says What to Expect Community mom 1sttimemummaxxx.

In rare cases (if you don’t respond to medications or experience severe side effects), you may need surgery to remove part of the thyroid.

With hyperthyroidism, if the mother has specific antibodies that can stimulate the thyroid, then this may also affect baby's thyroid. Baby may have circulating antibodies for a few weeks after birth, and in that case will need extra monitoring.

Bottom line? The body’s need for thyroid hormone fluctuates during pregnancy. So if you’ve ever been diagnosed with any thyroid problems in the past or currently take medication for a thyroid condition, be sure to let your practitioner know. It’s possible you may require medication again or need to adjust your dose.

Also be aware that after pregnancy, many of the symptoms of a thyroid disorder can be similar to those of postpartum depression (PPD) . So if you’re experiencing any of the above, be sure to let your doctor know so you can receive a diagnosis and get the treatment you need.