Tips for Handling the First Days of Preschool

girl waving goodbye to dad

Even if your newbie preschooler will be away from home for just a few hours, the first day of school is a big step for someone wearing such little sneakers. Help him ace it (and the days and weeks ahead) with these get-ready-for-school strategies.

Your preschooler’s been playing school with his stuffed animals for a few weeks now, has had playdates with a few of his classmates, and can’t stop talking about his new lunch box and backpack (Trains and cars on both? Way cool!). All good preparation for the big day ahead — and good signs that your pint-sized pupil is ready for his preschool debut. But will that excited anticipation translate into a smooth, stress-free transition on day one? Maybe — or maybe not as much as you’d hoped. Either way, these tips can make the first day of preschool (and the days after) a more manageable experience for your little one — and for you.

First Day of Preschool Tip 1: Don’t rush through the morning.

No one likes to race through the school morning routine — especially on the first day. So get everyone up at a reasonable hour. That way, you won’t have to hurry your child as he munches through his morning meal — or risk being late because you had to tame your frazzled tot’s tantrum.

First Day of Preschool Tip 2: Arrive fashionably early .

This way, your little one can slowly settle in before the real action starts. He’ll also get more face time with the teacher, too, which will be tougher to do once all the other kids are there to vie for her attention.

First Day of Preschool Tip 3: Bring a comfort object.

If the preschool allows it, let your child bring along his favorite stuffed animal (or blanket, or whatever object does the trick) so the new setting doesn’t feel so scary. And once your teddy-toting tot feels comfortable with his surroundings, he’ll let go of his lovey — or at least leave it in his cubby when he plays. (If there’s a no-lovey rule at school, follow these steps to help him separate from his security object at school.)

First Day of Preschool Tip 4: Put on a happy face.

Anxiety may be eating you up inside, but don’t let on — nerves are highly contagious. If your tone’s upbeat and you seem confident that your child will have a good time, there’s a better chance that he’ll be upbeat, too.

First Day of Preschool Tip 5: Hang around, but don’t hover.

Many preschools let (or even encourage that) parents stay in the classroom for all or part of the first few days, so if you can swing it, stick around. Knowing that you’re within clinging distance will give your kid the courage to explore his new digs. Then, as your child feels more secure, gradually melt into the background. Your goal is to let the teacher take over so you can get on with your day.

First Day of Preschool Tip 6: Keep good-byes short and sweet.

When it’s your cue to make an exit, hold back your tears a little longer (smiling helps unscrunch those furrows in your worried brow), give your new preschooler a hug, and let him know when you’ll be back (“I’ll pick you up after lunch”). Then head out — don’t linger (he can’t get on with his day until you do). And no matter how tempting, never sneak out when your preschooler is looking the other way. It’ll make him feel insecure and less trusting.

Just remember, it’s normal for kids to have a meltdown when it’s time to separate (though many don’t). But even if your child is howling like a banshee and clinging like a barnacle, chances are he’ll be fine five minutes after you walk out the door. If it’s taking a while for your little one to adjust, don’t panic — preschool teachers (and their assistants) have seen it all and they know just what to do, so ask his teacher for help. Just don't be surprised if your child's too happy to say hello to you (or talk about his day) once preschool pick up rolls around!