Making Bathtime Fun for Babies and Toddlers

Bathtime fun

Want to make a splash in the bath? Pump up the tub fun (but stay safe) with these age-by-age activities.

Among the nerve-wracking tasks that new parents face is a baby’s first bath. Indeed, washing a wriggly, slippery newborn is a bit tricky, but once you both get your sea legs, bath time can also be a great way to bond. Your goal is a clean cutie, of course, but for babies and toddlers, the bathtub is like a personal water park, complete with games, bubbles and toys galore.

And the best part? Bathtime plays on endless repeat, as your child gets to come back a few times a week for yet more wet and wild adventures. To up the fun quotient, try these games and activities on your bathing beauty and see which ones float your baby's (toy) boat!

Tips to make bathtime more fun

Bathtime activities for babies

Choose the best toys. There are a ton of bath toys on the market, but the top ones help a baby learn while she plays. For example, plastic cups in a variety of sizes encourage pouring, filling and dumping, while a set of floating sea creatures allows for imaginary play , language practice and counting skills.

Bring on the bubbles. You can blow and your child can pop; once she's a bit older you can switch jobs. A variety of wands let’s your baby explore the concepts of big and small (not to mention high and low and fast and slow). Narrate as you go, and she'll soon learn the words "float" and "pop."

Make it foamy. Add some tear-free foam soap or bubble bath to the water and you've got the makings for some excellent beards, mustaches and more!

Try bath books. Yup, there are plastic-coated bath books that are ideal for reading in the water. Choose ones that match the scene, such as tales about ocean creatures, boats or mermaids.

Sing while sudsing. Unleash your inner songstress and sing a mashup of made-for-the-tub tunes (like "Splish Splash" and "Rubber Duckie") or your latest playlist fave. Your baby will love it — even if you're totally off-key — and you'll expand her music and language skills.

Add a mirror. A baby who’s not too keen on her bath routine might be swayed by mirror play in the water. Just make sure to choose an unbreakable one made from baby-friendly plastic or acrylic.

Introduce textures. Bathtime is a great opportunity to tickle your little one's senses with new textures, such as a bath sponge, a wet washcloth, a dry towel and shaving cream.

Throw a puppet show. Got a bath mitt? Insert your hand into this little terry pocket and create a talking creature to entertain your baby.

Splash — a lot! Face it, the best fun in the tub is slamming your hands, kicking your legs and shrieking to hear the echo bounce off the tile. Allow your baby to let loose (safely, of course!).

Bathtime activities for toddlers

Hit the wall. Where else can your toddler scrawl on the walls than the bathroom’s tile? Just give her the tools she needs and watch the creativity explode. Options include soap crayons, bathtub finger paints and markers, reusable stickers and foam shapes that stick when wet.

Foster a fantasy. Your tub can become a pirate ship sailing the high seas or a fishing vessel trawling for the next big catch. Stories can make bathtime fascinating, so break out your best water-themed tales and encourage your little one to imagine along with you.

Play some music. Play tunes on your phone to up the jazzy feel of bath night.

Offer your tub. Her bathroom is perfectly fine, but yours is divine! As a special treat, let your toddler have her shampoo in your tub.

Swap in real toys. Bath toys lose their luster after a while, so consider all other plastic playthings in your child’s room for a change. Army men, plastic animals and dolls are safe in water, and most float!

Add a treat. Drippy ice pops are hard to manage at the kitchen table, but they’re ideal in the bathtub. Save dessert for this easy-clean space and wash the sugary, sticky mess down the drain.

Make a race track. Use the entire tub as a play space by bringing your tot’s cars into the bathroom. Mini trucks and convertibles can vroom and zoom along the tub’s edge.

Join the fun. You probably used to share the tub with your baby, but she’s long forgotten. But the novelty of you squeezing in now will no doubt thrill your toddler. Bonus: She can wash your back and your feet while you sit back and relax.

DIY bath toys to try

Make a few waves by introducing bath toys your little one is sure to love. These DIY baby toys for the tub guarantee bathtime fun, plus they score high on creativity (and low on out-of-pocket expense).

A rain shower. When it rains it pours — or if you make this DIY baby toy, gently showers. Use an awl (or any pointed tool) to punch a few holes in the bottom of a yogurt cup or plastic container. Then let your little one at it. As fast as she fills it up, she’ll see (and feel) the drops drizzle out the bottom — the kind of instant feedback that wows wee ones. Take a turn letting the rain drip on her noggin, then let her do the same on your hand (or your head if you're bathing with your baby).

Baby-friendly water balloons. What makes for great baby bath toys? Easy-to-grasp items that most babies can manipulate. That’s why these homemade water balloons are sure to be a hit. To make these DIY bath toys, let your honey help you pour water into Ziploc plastic bags until they're three-quarters full, then seal them up and hand them over. (Real balloons are a no-no for babies, since they can break and pose a choking hazard.) She can hold them, shake them, squeeze them, or throw them back into the water — and laugh when they make a splash. For sportier fun, place a small plastic colander at the other end of the tub and show your little one how to shoot a basket.

A squirt gun. Real water guns are too much for little hands to manage (and who needs guns, anyway?). Get the same effect for your little squirt with this DIY baby toy — a plastic turkey baster. Let her watch as you squeeze the bulb, plunge the tip in the water, then fill up the tube with H2O. Gently shoot at those chubby thighs and show her how to aim at other tub toys. She might even manage to use the baster to blow a few bubbles under water — a neat trick on its own and one that builds hand muscles as she squeezes. No turkey baster? A nose-bulb syringe works well too, and it’s easier for your tot to grasp. Just keep a separate one on hand to suction out your sweetie’s nostrils when she’s sick — baby bath toys tend to grow mold quickly, and you don’t want to stick a grimy bulb up her nose.

A sponge boat. The most awesome thing about the bathtub? Stuff floats! Sure, that’s old news to you, but to babies it’s mesmerizing (and the best toys for babies are ones that grab their attention). One easy-to-make DIY bath toy that’s fabulously floatable: A sponge boat. Cut a slot in a new kitchen sponge, then cut another sponge into a large triangle for a sail and slip it into the slot. Now show your bathing beauty how her rubber duckie can take a cruise around the tub. (Just keep an eye out so your cutie doesn’t chomp down and tear off a chokeable mouthful.) Sponges also provide excellent squeezing opportunities, so show your water baby how to soak it up and smoosh it out. Amazing!

Playing with babies and toddlers safely in the tub

You can use a bath seat or ring if it makes you feel more comfortable, but it's no substitute for being within arm's reach during every single second of your baby's bath. Never leave your child unattended in the bath.

Here’s more about water safety:

Gather supplies ahead of time. Be sure to arrange everything you need for bathtime before you start, including her towel and lotion. If you forget something, someone else will have to get it for you, or you’ll need to take your baby out of the tub and carry her with you to retrieve the item.

Check the temp. Keep the water temperature on target by putting the thermostat setting of your hot-water heater at 120 degrees Fahrenheit or below. And always test the water with your elbow or inner wrist before you put your baby or toddler in for her scrub-down.

Add non-skid decals. Wet, slippery surfaces are an accident waiting to happen. To help prevent falls, choose a bathroom rug with a rubber backing, apply textured decals or a shower mat to the bottom of the tub, and wrap the tub spout with a soft cover to ease the pain if your tot bumps her head on it.

Remove electronics. It goes without saying, but electricity and water do not mix. Before bathtime, stash hair dryers, razors and similar devices in a locked cabinet. Even better: Keep them in a linen closet in the hallway, if you can.

Bathtime is the best time for babies and toddlers. They have your undivided attention in a wonderland filled with bubbles, toys and more. If you always keep safety in mind when your child is near water, your scrubs in the tubs will go off without a hitch.