8 Toddler Room Ideas That Turn Any Nursery into a Magical “Big Kid” Room

toddler room ideas

Get inspired with these easy kids' bedroom ideas that look anything but babyish.

One minute, you’re counting down the weeks until your due date, and the next you’ve somehow whizzed through the baby years and sailed right into toddlerhood. In the blink of an eye, your kiddo is toddling around and exploring her world. It’s all part of your little one’s newfound independence, and you wouldn't trade it for the world. But now, it's time to acknowledge that baby of yours isn't really a baby anymore, by creating a toddler room to match their curious little spirit.

Making the leap from nursery to toddler room

“Moving from a nursery to a toddler room is a big step,” says interior designer Melanie Raver, of Rave Interior Design . And not just for your toddler. “For me, the transition from baby to toddler was a huge transition,” Raver continues, “and the design of the room had to capture that.”

Her biggest tip for making sure the transition goes smoothly? Keep it simple and child friendly.

“You don't have to completely overhaul the room and spend tons of money for the new digs,” says Raver. “A fresh coat of paint or a fun wallpaper, a new area rug and a legit toddler bed can really make a huge impact.”

The most important first step is buying a safe toddler bed . You can choose from a toddler bed, which fits a crib-sized mattress, or a twin-size bed frame and mattress equipped with safety rails.

Avoid bunk beds , which have two dangers: the child on bottom getting injuried if the bed collapses, and the child on top falling off. (In fact, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Consumer Product Safety Commission say that children under 6 should never sleep in a top bunk.)

Give the room some personality — inspired by your toddler

“I think it’s important to include your children in the design process,” adds Amy Romfo, of The Coastal Oak . “You can achieve this by compiling some of your favorite ideas and then letting your child browse the images.”

She also suggests you take your little one shopping with you, and to “let them get their hands dirty” if the redesign turns into more of a DIY project. “This gives them ownership in their room and helps them become excited about the transition,” she explains.

Along those lines, consider letting your little one personalize the space in small ways, Raver adds.

“Add kid touches with fun sheets [they] pick out themselves and whimsical pillows or stuffed toys!” she suggests. “I love to have the kiddos draw art or pick art that is colorful and lively.”

Consider skipping a theme, which could quickly look outdated

“Often, babyish rooms come with a theme, and I find it is best to steer away from a theme when designing a toddler room,” says Romfo. “If your child insists on superheroes, find and frame some old comic books, but don’t go out and buy superhero bedding sets.”

If your kid is dead-set on a princess theme, for example, Romfo suggests folding it in gently to the room — with a simple crown placed on a stack of books on the dresser (remember to bolt dressers into the wall to avoid tipping) or the addition of some sparkle and shine in small decor items.

“Just add a touch here and there,” she says. That way, if they ditch the phase quickly, you won’t have to redo the whole room.

Remember: Less is more — and don’t forget to have fun!

By far, the key to creating a great toddler room is to remember this should be fun, not stressful.

Raver suggests keeping a simple, neutral base, and then make a few simple changes that give the room a more “grown up” style.

“Add fun pops of kiddos personality in artwork, pillows, and sheets,” she advises. “Boom, you have a toddler room that is stylish enough that even you are jealous of it!”

Scroll on for more ideas to give your toddler’s room a “big kid” vibe.

Use wallpaper for an accent wall

chair and table

Now that the wallpaper trend is back (and probably here to stay), Raver says you shouldn’t be afraid to “let your inner child come out” and really go for a fun, bold print to give the room some style.

“I love choosing neutral backgrounds and letting my wallpaper be the POP!” she says, adding that peel and stick wallpaper is definitely a smart and convenient option. “It is incredibly easy to install, and you can completely change the look of a room by installing wallpaper in less than an hour!”

(Plus, it’s easily removable, so you can just peel it off the wall when you feel like changing things up.)

Create a cozy reading nook

girl in a reading nook

Part of toddlerhood means graduating from board books to the wonderful world of picture books. (Not to mention the thrill of letting your kid turn the pages all by herself!) Creating a cozy little reading nook in the corner — with a fun tent like this one, or a kid-sized armchair and bookshelf — is a surefire way to bring on that love of reading early. It also reinforces that sense of independence, since kids can grab books on their own. Just be sure to add a library bookshelf that’s low enough to the ground for little hands to reach (and bolt all furniture to the wall to prevent tipping).

Make a kid-friendly wardrobe

shelves in a toddler's room

Toddlers are amazing in all sorts of ways, but the struggle to get them dressed and out the door on time is real. (Especially when they’d much rather be running around the house in their “big girl” undies, singing “Let it Go.”) This pint-sized wardrobe, which keeps everything at eye-level for small kids, makes it way easier to teach kids how to dress themselves — which will definitely take some stress off of you. (Again, just remember to bolt wardrobes, dressers, etc. to the wall.)

“The wardrobe has helped tremendously!” says Nicole Cole, of The Polished Playhouse , who created this room for her son. “It not only helps him with independence, but it gives him a sense of ownership over his choices. It also serves as a visual reminder for me on what clothes need to be washed and anything that needs to be replaced. It's a win, win for both of us.”

Repurpose old furniture

old dresser

If you’re on a budget, you might be tempted to scour the Internet for a deal on a new collection of toddler furniture. But Amy Romfo says there are smarter ways for you to save big.

“I recommend looking around your home and taking inventory of your current furniture pieces,” she says. “A lot of times you may already have one or two pieces of furniture that can be repurposed for the toddler room.”

In her case, she found a dresser for her shared toddler room, and designed the room around it. Of course, transforming an antique dresser into the look she wanted did take a fair amount of planning and elbow grease, but it paid off.

“Select pieces that are both safe and serve a purpose,” she advises. “The bedside dresser is low enough for the kids to access their own clothes, with drawers that easily open and close.” Always bolt dressers to the wall in your child’s room to prevent tipping.

Streamline the toy stash

toddler room with tiny furniture and decorations

Keeping toys at a minimum in your toddler’s room will cut down on mess in a big way, and make it easier for her to access her playthings. If you have a separate playroom, you may want to keep all the toys there, but if their room functions as both, create a set corner or space in the room where toys go — along with bins to store small items — so your little one gets in the habit of keeping them there.

“One of the things we did to make [my son’s] room look less baby-ish was to relocate most of his toys into his play area,” says Cole. “His big boy room has a lot less clutter and is more of a relaxing place to rest. He rests a lot better now that the room has less ‘stuff’ in it.”

Add some fun name decor

little girl looking up at Ella name sign

Your kiddo may not start to recognize her name spelled out until age 3 or 4, but you can begin to familiarize her with it by adding a sweet wall hanging like this one. Not only will it add a bit of style to the room decor, but it will also help break up any vast, empty wall space you may have.

If monogrammed art isn’t your thing, try looking for wall prints you can frame that better suit the look you’re going for. Consider prints that feature inspirational quotes from classic novels or children’s books or something educational, like the alphabet or a map of the world .

Invest in stackable shelves and storage space

cute bench for kids

Speaking of great organizational ideas … Casey Freeberg from Home and Hallow turned these multi-purpose bookcases from IKEA into a hybrid storage unit meets kid-friendly reading spot, all in one fell swoop. Something like this does require a bit of craftiness (at least when it comes to that no-sew bench cushion) and you must bolt pieces to the wall for safety reasons, but the pay-off is well worth it.

Paint an inspiring wall mural

little girl looking up at rainbow wall mural

If wallpaper isn’t your thing, consider adding wall decals, or painting a simple, yet eye-catching wall mural. While it takes a bit of planning and a somewhat steady hand, you don’t have to be Monet to pull off something truly great. This simple rainbow mural is beautiful, but it also has a special added meaning: Lifestyle influencer Vanessa Scott added it to her daughter’s room in honor of her rainbow baby .

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

How to Prepare Your Toddler to Share a Room With Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Books to Help Your Toddler Transition to Their Big Kid Bed Medically Reviewed by Kelley Yost Abrams, Ph.D.

Space-Saving Tips for Baby’s Nursery By Maria Masters, Contributing Writer/Editor

Safe Sleep Tips for Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Stop Co-Sleeping and Move Your Little One to Her Own Crib or Bed Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Best Toddler Beds to Safely Transition Little Ones From Their Cribs Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Creating a Nursery on a Budget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Babyproof Every Room in the House Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Establish a Bedtime Routine for Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

8 Walking Safety Tips for Toddlers to Keep Spills and Hazards at Bay Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Keep Your Toddler from Getting Out of Bed Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Dressing Toddlers By Maressa Brown, Contributing Writer/Editor

How to Transition Your Baby From a Bassinet to a Crib Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Making Bathtime Fun for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window