Toddler Dinner Ideas

Toddler dinner ideas

Some days you're fried from chasing after your little dumpling all day. To the rescue: these low-prep, high-flavor simple toddler dinner recipes that you'll both happily inhale.

Once your toddler starts chowing real food, you can add “short-order cook” to your (long) list of parenting duties. But serving your toddler a separate dinner to suit his pint-sized palate, then making a second meal for yourself and the rest of the family, can really cut into quality time together, not to mention tucker you out.

No need to switch chef hats with this toddler meal planner. Here are easy, healthy meals for toddlers that’ll appeal to everyone else in the house, too.

Homemade Pizza

Homemade pizza

Pizza's a great choice for kiddies with more gums than teeth. Kick up the wholesome quotient with refrigerated whole-wheat pizza dough (arm your little sous chef with a mini rolling pin), then swirl some tomato sauce, sprinkle reduced-fat mozzarella cheese (the fat-free stuff turns rubbery instead of melting…blech), and you’ve got a canvas primed for healthy toppings.

Since toddlers are notoriously picky, leave half plain cheese; on the other half, introduce her taste buds to pineapple, turkey sausage or sautéed mushrooms (just cut any toppings into quarter-inch pieces so they’re not choking hazards).

Now pop that beauty in the oven and about 20 minutes later, you’ll have a piping-hot homemade pie (just let it cool, to avoid burns).

Butternut Squash Soup

butternut squash soup

Even if she’s relatively new to real food, your toddler will be bowled over by the smooth texture, crayon-perfect color and natural sweetness of this soothing dinner. Plus, filling her up with the nutrients packed in butternut squash — potassium, vitamin C, iron, calcium and beta-carotene — will make you one savvy chef.

To save time, buy freshly packaged squash that’s already peeled and cubed, and whip up a couple of batches to freeze for later (makes the hour of roasting worth it). For a flavor bonanza, roast the squash with chunks of onion and tart apple.

Pour it in the blender with some low-sodium veggie (or chicken) broth and stir in a spot of half-and-half and shredded cheddar for a tummy-pleasing puree. Complete your toddler dinner with whole-grain crackers or bread. Yum!

Fruity-Glazed Chicken Drumsticks

chicken drumsticks

Bored by chicken breasts? Drumsticks could be just the ticket for you and your munchkin. Toddlers love the big-kid aspect of holding their own chicken leg. Just wait until your tyke is pretty good with managing finger food and those toddler molars are in and ready to chew the meat (usually around 19 months).

Even if he’s a little iffy on the texture at first, coating the drumsticks in apricot preserves or orange marmalade before baking them for about 30 minutes (lay nonstick foil over your pan to keep the legs from getting glued) lends a sweetness he’ll eat up. Then add a nutritious side to your toddler meal planner — while the oven’s on, slice up sweet potatoes, then toss with a little olive oil and salt and pepper to make healthy baked wedges.

Turkey Meatballs With Bow Ties

turkey meatballs

You’ll have this toddler dinner done in about a half hour. Buy a package of lean ground turkey and shred zucchini or carrots into your mix to make the meatballs more moist and vitamin-packed. Then, brown them and pop them in a pot of jarred (or homemade, if you’ve got it) tomato sauce.

Since toddlers judge a food by its looks, give it a toddler meal makeover — boil up a fun whole-grain pasta shape, like farfalle or squiggly rotelli. Extra veggie option: Toss chopped broccoli florets into the water just as the pasta's finishing.

If you don't think your tot is ready for whole meatballs or pasta, halve the meatballs and pasta pieces. (By the way, leftover meatballs rock for lunch the next day.)

Soft Tilapia Tacos

soft tilapia tacos

Your toddler will dive into fish (beyond those frozen sticks) if you choose your fillet wisely: Select a mild, un-fishy type of fish for toddlers, like tilapia, and your tot will get plenty of protein, vitamin D and many of the B vitamins.

To assemble this festive fish dish, spread vegetarian refried beans on a warm soft tortilla, layer on ripe avocado slices and some shredded reduced-fat cheese, then tuck in broiled or baked pieces of flaky tilapia (scan for little bones first). A dip of mild salsa is optional.

I Heart You Blueberry Pancakes

breakfast for dinner

Instant smile-maker: breakfast for dinner. Cookie cutters make this toddler meal planner idea even more kid-friendly. (If heart-shaped cakes won’t wow him, how about a race car or Mickey Mouse?)

Use whole-wheat pancake mix (better than white flour) and sprinkle some fresh blueberries into the batter; if you’re using frozen berries, don’t drop them in until the pancakes are sizzling in the skillet (unless you want blue cakes).

And don’t let this sweet supper fool you: Blueberries pack a major punch of fiber and vitamin C. Offer plain yogurt, applesauce or fruit preserves for dipping. Partner your short stacks with turkey bacon or veggie sausage patties for a delicious (and fast) toddler dinner. If this first brinner's a hit, try more breakfast ideas for kids.

"Fried" Chicken Nuggets

chicken nuggets

Lean meat in moderation is core to the Mediterranean diet, and while chicken nuggets are a toddler favorite, the ones served at fast-food venues are often high in fat and calories. Making your own, though, is easier than you think: Just cut boneless, skinless chicken breasts into thin strips or squares, dunk in low-fat milk, and then dip in seasoned whole-wheat bread crumbs (use whatever herbs you like to flavor).

Sauté the chicken in olive oil to brown, then bake at 350 degrees Fahrenheit until the pieces are fully cooked (about 10 minutes). Serve with ketchup or your toddler's favorite low-fat dipping sauce along with colorful steamed veggies, like peas and carrots.

Split Pea or Lentil Soup

lentil soup

Beans and lentils are protein-powerhouse meat alternatives that offer loads of fiber, folate and iron. If you don't have a couple of hours to wait for a potful to simmer on the stove, opt for canned pea or lentil soup — just look for varieties labeled reduced sodium and reduced fat.

Serve as a snack in a cup topped with a handful of whole-wheat croutons or as a meal in a bowl with whole-wheat crackers or toast.

Nachos With Refried Beans and Guacamole

nachos

Both you and your toddler will dig digging into this flavorful, hearty snack. The base is a layer of fat-free refried beans, a good source of fiber, followed by a sprinkling of low-fat cheese. Bake until the cheese is gooey, then top with guacamole (avocados are a rich source of the monounsaturated fat) and salsa.

Serve with tortilla chips you make from scratch to control fat and sodium: Spray whole-wheat tortillas with olive-oil cooking spray, cut in wedges, and bake at 350 degrees F on a parchment-lined baking sheet for 10 minutes or until crisp.

Whole-Wheat Pita Triangles With Hummus

hummus

Low-fat, protein-packed and vitamin-rich, beans top the list of recommended foods in the Mediterranean diet — and this dish is made with fiber-rich garbanzos (chickpeas) along with garlic, olive oil, tahini (sesame-seed paste) and a bit of lemon juice.

Plus, it's so easy to prepare: You just toss the ingredients in a food processor and blend! For an easy recipe, puree 1 (15-oz) can chickpeas, drained and rinsed; 2 garlic cloves; 3 tablespoons tahini; 3 tablespoons olive oil; 2 tablespoons lemon juice; and ½ teaspoon of salt.

Little ones love spooning up hummus as its own tasty treat, or you can serve it with whole-wheat pita triangles, soft steamed baby carrots or steamed broccoli florets for a fun meal or snack.