Toddler Mall Trips — Tips for Shopping With Children

mom and toddler in mall

Remember when going to the mall was about finding the right pair of boots for yourself? When you're shopping with children, it's much more likely to be about tracking down chicken nuggets for a simmering small-fry. Still, there are ways to take your toddler mall shopping — and maybe even have some fun!

You might love to shop till you drop, but when it comes to shopping with children, your toddler might drop a lot sooner than you’d like. After hanging out in the dressing room, waiting at the cash register, and sitting in a stroller looking at the bottom half of mannequins, your tot may (rightfully) tire of the mall. So, it’s time to tweak your shopping routine. First and foremost, taking a toddler mall shopping works best if you keep it short and sweet — leave the marathon adventure for a day when you have a willing partner or sitter to stay home with your tot. Here are a few more shopping-with-children strategies:

Team up. Taking your toddler mall shopping is much more fun when you make it a social event, so buddy up with a mom friend to share the adventure (and challenges) of shopping with children. Not only do you have someone to ask how that lip gloss looks, but you can also take turns checking out the sales racks and trying on clothes while your mall-mate watches the wee ones.

Bring the good stroller. An umbrella stroller is fine for quick errands, but for a couple hours of shopping with children, you want the real deal. A big, sturdy full-size stroller gives you a place to stash your purchases, plus the roomy ride provides a comfy spot for your mall munchkin to snuggle up in.

Break up a toddler mall trip. Small segments of browsing, separated by a snack at the food court, a run through the indoor playground, or a ride on the carousel can extend your shopping day and your toddler’s willingness to wait while you shop. And all that activity may even tucker him out, so he’ll be more than ready to take a snooze while you peruse.

Find 15 minutes of fun. Most malls have play areas where kids can blow off steam, but if your mall is lacking in that department, here’s another idea: Hit the bookstore when your tyke needs a break and spend a chunk of time with Madeline or Curious George. Also, some children’s clothing stores have playground-like amenities, so it’s worth stopping in for a brief romp (even if your cutie’s closet is fully stocked). If you're not going to buy anything for your little one, make it clear before you stop by the children's section (just as you would do if you were taking your toddler shopping at the toy store).

Choose the right shopping time. This may take some trial and error. Some tots do better shopping first thing in the morning, when they’re completely rested and the mall is quiet. But a toddler mall outing at naptime may make sense if your child sleeps soundly as soon as the stroller starts moving. In that case, consider yourself lucky, and shop in peace while your sidekick sleeps.

Skip the big sales. Crowds and chaos may not deter a bargain-hunter like yourself, but all that fuss may be too frantic for easily overwhelmed tykes. Plus, strollers are harder to maneuver when stores are clogged with shoppers and littered with clearance merchandise. So save the mega-sales for a solo shopping day.

What to Expect The Second Year , Heidi Murkoff and Sharon Mazel. WhatToExpect.com, How to Run Errands with Your Toddler , January 2015. American Academy of Pediatrics, Take Steps to Keep Kids Safe on Escalators, Elevators , 2007.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

How to Handle Toddler Tantrums When Leaving the Playground Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

11 Tips to Make Flying With a Toddler Go More Smoothly Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Dressing Toddlers By Maressa Brown, Contributing Writer/Editor

When Your Toddler Tags Along on Your Doctor's Visit By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

Why Toddlers Wander — and How to Keep Them Safe Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Walking Safety Tips for Toddlers to Keep Spills and Hazards at Bay Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Why Can't Toddlers Sit Still? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler Fact Checked by Jill Malter

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Toddler Temper Tantrums Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do When Your Toddler Constantly Asks for Things Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

13 Tips to Make Flying and Traveling With Twins Less Stressful Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Buy a Baby Stroller By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window