Toddlers Love Throwing Things — Here’s Why, Plus How to Deal With It

Light copy updates and updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

toddler throwing, little girl throwing water balloon

Tired of playing fetch every time your toddler flings a toy, a dish, or even your phone? Here's how to put the brakes on this hurling habit.

Quick, duck! Whether it's throwing his teddy across the room or launching his bowl from his high chair, your toddler just loves to throw toys (and everything else).

"Like most other kids, my toddler throws things around," says What to Expect Community parent frsttimemoma. "I know it's a phase and it shall pass, but he also throws things at other people. Just yesterday, he threw his wooden puzzle board at me, which hit hard on my toe."

Whether he's just seeing what happens when they land — crash! — or voicing some intense frustration and anger, here's what you can do to stop the projectiles.

Key Takeaways

Toddlers throw objects because they’re exploring cause and effect or expressing frustration ; it’s a normal developmental phase that fades with time.

Set clear boundaries by allowing “safe” items and places for throwing, and redirect or remove off-limits items while following through with consistent consequences.

Help prevent problem throwing by offering acceptable ways to throw and by teaching alternative outlets for anger, such as using words or engaging in physical play.

Why toddlers throw things

Any new milestone , including the ability to propel an object through the air, is exciting at this age. Cause and effect fascinates most tots. ("I wonder what will happen if I flip my fork over the edge of the table? Wow — it lands on the floor! This is fun!")

Then there are those flingers who are actually venting anger or frustration in the form of athletic temper tantrums . ("We have to leave the playground now? Watch me toss these toys in protest!")

The good news is that a child's throwing impulses will pass over time, when the novelty wears off and he discovers other new — and, if you're lucky, less destructive — ways to manipulate objects ("See this cool block tower? I made it all by myself!").

How to stop a toddler from throwing things

While he will eventually outgrow this urge, try these strategies in the meantime when your toddler won't stop throwing toys — and everything else.

Don't implement an all-out ban

If you think you can simply draw the line and forbid your toddler to throw things, think again. Telling your tot that he can't throw anything will only make it more tempting to do so. Plus, it's not fair — or wise — to keep him from doing what's developmentally appropriate.

Set some boundaries

Point out that some things (balls, paper airplanes, beanbags) are fine to throw and some things (books, crayons, toy cars, dishes) are not. And specify where it's okay to throw things. For example, the Frisbee is okay to throw outside but not in the house.

"Mine went through a throwing phase," says What to Expect Community member NelsonMom42. "We tried to redirect him to throw soft, appropriate things (toy balls, small stuffed animals) and never at people."

Follow through with consequences

When your little pitcher throws (or gets ready to throw) an item that's off-limits, take it away from him. Explain why random throwing is wrong. ("That toy truck is hard. You could hurt someone or break something.") Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsWhat%u2019s the Best Way to Discipline My Child?See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsWhat%u2019s the Best Way to Discipline My Child?See All Sources

Don't cave if he cries or rants. Instead, give him a "legal" soft toy to play with or quickly distract him with another activity.

Address the anger

If your toddler's hurling habit stems more from frustration than exuberance, teach him other ways to deal with anger. Let him know it's okay to be mad, and encourage him to use his words. ("Can you tell me why you're upset?")

Another proven tactic: Provide physical outlets so he can blow off steam, like giving him room to run or clay to knead. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Shape & Manage Your Young Child%u2019s BehaviorSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Shape & Manage Your Young Child%u2019s BehaviorSee All Sources

How to prevent a toddler from throwing things

You'll head off unwanted pitching by offering lots of opportunities for acceptable throwing. Play ring toss or a game of catch with soft, squishy balls. Bounce a beach ball or balloon outside.

Remember, though, his hand-eye coordination is a work in progress, so don't expect a golden glove. The point is for him to have fun and to steer him away from tossing the wrong stuff, so keep a close eye on your toddler and intervene when you need to.

Have more questions about toddler behavior? Open the What to Expect app for your complete guide to the toddler years, plus tips from other parents who have been there.