How to Bathe Your Toddler

kid in bathtub

Want to make toddler bath time a breeze? Follow these simple strategies for keeping your tot happy while getting her squeaky clean.

Not long ago, bath time may have been a calm, soothing affair. Your baby was happy to just sit in the tub, cooing or splashing her toes, while you sudsed her soft, sweet scalp. Ah, remember those days?

Things might look a little different with a toddler. Now that your not-so-little one is more mobile (and a full-force splasher), bath time has gotten trickier. Here's a quick guide to making tub-time fun and tear-free — for everyone.

How to bathe a toddler

Your ultimate goal — get your cutie clean! — hasn't changed since that first newborn bath . But your techniques for achieving it may need to adjust, especially if your tot is going through an anti-tub phase. Your step-by-step guide to help you declare mission accomplished:

Gather your supplies

A dime-sized dollop of no-tears shampoo is your best bet when it comes to hair-washing. No matter how cooperative your customer may be, she's bound to get some suds in her eyes when you rinse or she splashes. Stick to a mild fragrance-free soap for her body that won't deplete the skin's natural oils.

Steer clear of bubble baths (or make them a once-in-a-while treat), since they can irritate a toddler's sensitive skin and can cause urinary tract infections . You'll also want a washcloth for cleaning your cutie's body and plastic cup or pitcher for rinsing her hair.

Fill the tub (but not too much)

Make the water level no deeper than waist-high for your seated tot. A totally topped-off tub is too deep for your toddler, plus, her splashing will just send more water onto the floor.

Check the water temperature

Young skin is super-susceptible to burns, so be extra vigilant about water temperature. After you fill the tub, check that the water's between 90 and 100 degrees Fahrenheit with a thermometer (or use your elbow or wrist).

Too warm? Add some cold water or wait a few minutes until the temp is just right. If you haven't already, set the water temperature on your hot-water heater no higher than 120 degrees F as a surefire way to prevent bath-time burns, and make sure you read up on treating burns in children (accidents happen!).

Have a seat

Remember when you could just plop your peanut in the baby tub (or sink)? Your more willful wee one might be less content staying seated these days, but the safest place for her is still on her butt, where she's less likely to slip.

Let her splash around a bit to show her how much fun (and how much warmer) sitting in the water can be.

Add some safety features, if needed

If your stubborn toddler is more likely to throw a fit than sit, make sure the tub is lined with a non-stick mat to reduce the risk of slipping. You can wash her with a handheld sprayer or a plastic pitcher while she holds onto the wall (or a grab bar, if you have one).

Up the fun factor

You know tub time is a necessary part of toddler grooming , but your busy tot may have other plans. Coax her in by adding tons of floating fun : Boats, rubber ducks, mini water guns, waterproof books and washcloth puppets can work wonders on enticing a bath-wary toddler. Don't forget creative options like stick-to-the-tub decals and bath crayons and paints — she'll be so busy, she'll barely notice she's getting clean.

Low-tech playthings work just as well. Toss in Tupperware containers, plastic measuring cups, funnels and a spritz bottle, and the possibilities are endless. Toddler tub tip: Rotate the toy selection every so often so playthings seem new again (and you can get a chance to wash them in the dishwasher or with a bleach solution to nix soap scum and germs).

Buddy up

If bath toys aren't luring your little one in the tub, recruit a toddler tub playmate like an older sib or even you (swimsuits optional). The extra company will make bath time feel special and ease any toddler tub fears.

No takers or no room for two? A washable doll can be the perfect partner — your tot can wash her little sweetie while you wash yours. For more ideas on keeping a tub-wary kid distracted, try these resisting bath time problem-solvers.

Go (mostly) from head to toe

Aside from the size, washing a toddler isn't too different from washing a baby. It's best to work from the top down and save the hair for last.

Using a washcloth, gently wipe, starting with that (adorable) face, always being extra careful around her sensitive peepers. Pay close attention to folds and crevices (neck, outside of the ears, sides of nose), which are often pretty grimy. And even though they've been soaking, give her hands and feet a gentle scrub since they're getting into all kinds of places. Last stop for your washcloth: her genitals and bottom.

Save shampooing and toddler hair care for the grand finale to prevent her from sitting in a tub of suds, which can be especially irritating to a toddler vagina . Stand her up once her hair is sudsy, so shampoo (and leftover soap and grime) runs down the drain with the bathwater as you rinse.

Towel off and lotion up

Help your cutie step out of the tub to keep her from slipping or falling. Gently pat her skin dry with a clean towel, and slather on a fragrance-free moisturizer to keep her skin hydrated, especially if it tends toward the dry side .

How long should toddler bath time be?

Once you get your cutie into the tub, she might very well be content to splash the night away. But it's best to keep baths short and sweet for the sake of her skin. Limit tub time to 10 or 15 minutes tops, since longer soaks can strip her skin's natural oils and lead to dryness. Trusted SourceHarvard Health PublishingDoes Your Child Need to Bathe Every Day?See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceHarvard Health PublishingDoes Your Child Need to Bathe Every Day?See All Sources

How often should I bathe my toddler?

Even though you might feel icky without a daily shower, your toddler doesn't necessarily need a bath every day. Two to three baths per week is enough to get rid of the grime without irritating her more delicate skin.

That said, it's fine to bathe her more often if she gets really dirty, like from playing outside or having a really messy diaper, or if baths are a part of your wind-down routine before bed. Again, just make sure to keep the soaks on the shorter side to prevent her skin from drying out. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicHow Often Should Your Kids Take a Bath or Shower?See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicHow Often Should Your Kids Take a Bath or Shower?See All Sources

Can a toddler with a fever take a bath?

If your toddler has a fever , popping her in the water can temporarily bring her temperature down, but you'll need to make a few adjustments to your usual tub routine.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends filling the tub with just 1 to 2 inches of tepid (85 to 90 degrees F, which will feel slightly warm on your wrist) water, and using a clean washcloth or sponge to spread water over your toddler's body. (But if she'd rather just play, that's okay too.) Keep sponging her for 30 to 45 minutes, which should be long enough to reduce her fever by a degree or two.

If your toddler fights you on getting into the tub or wants to get out sooner, it's fine to skip the bath. Forcing her to do something uncomfortable or upsetting won't help the situation and will likely only leave her feeling worse.

Finally, resist the urge to put your feverish toddler in cold water. Not only will it be uncomfortable, it can actually raise her body temperature by causing her to shiver. If your toddler starts to shiver in the tub with tepid water, take her out.

Never put rubbing alcohol in the bath water either: It can be dangerous if your toddler breathes it in or if it gets absorbed through her skin. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsTreating a Fever Without MedicineSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsTreating a Fever Without MedicineSee All Sources

Safety tips for toddler baths

In the process of washing off the gunk and grit, you'll want to protect your sweetie and that tender toddler skin. Here's what to keep in mind:

Never leave your toddler alone. Stay no more than an arm's length away from your tot at all times. To make sure you can stay close, prep your toddler grooming supplies (shampoo, washcloth, towels, robe) ahead of time. Consider the tub a phone-free zone if possible too.

Pull the plug. Make sure you check that the tub has emptied after you're done: Standing water is a safety no-no, too.

Hide the hazards. Move all glass items and electric appliances (blow-dryers, radios, curling irons) far from the tub and make sure your bath and shower products (which are rarely kid-friendly) are well out of reach.

Get a grip. Don't be fooled into thinking a bath seat will keep your child safe in the tub. Bath seats or rings may make it easier to hang on to a slippery child, but they absolutely won't ensure safety in the tub. Suction cup bath mats and appliqués are more reliable tub safety choices for reducing the risk of slips, but there is simply no substitute for adult supervision.

Pad and protect. Your curious cutie will try to explore the tub with the same gusto as everywhere else, so protect her head from the faucet with a cute plastic cover or pad it with a washcloth.

Baths can be a sweet way for your toddler to unwind and de-grime after a busy day. Just make sure to keep an extra couple towels on-hand for after tub time is over. With all that splish-splashing, you'll need them for drying up the floor!