Toddler Train Travel: 7 Tips for Easier Trips

toddler in train

Can a locomotive ride with your kid drive you loco? Definitely, so find out how to stay sane on the train when you travel with a toddler.

Driving long-distance with a toddler in the back seat may not be your idea (or anyone’s idea) of a good time, but air travel with a toddler can be pricey — even if you make the ultimate sacrifice and keep your little one on your lap the whole time. Toddler travel by train is a good compromise: It can be speedier than a car ride and (usually) costs less than plane fare. Still, train trips come with their own set of challenges. Here’s how to make toddler travel easier when you’re riding by rail.

Travel at off-peak times. This is when the train will be least crowded, which means you may be able to snag some extra seats for your child to move around and play, a sanity-saver during toddler travel. If your partner’s coming along, that additional space may be enough for you to stretch out and sneak in some Z’s.

Arrive early. Since trains don’t always allow you to book assigned seats, getting there early will help ensure that you find seats for the family to sit together, which makes traveling with a toddler that much easier. When riding with kids and two adults, consider sending one adult on board first to hold the seats while the other adult boards with your slow-moving toddler.

Snag the first set of seats. If you arrive early enough, and there are no wheelchair-bound passengers who need the space, aim for the group of chairs that face each other, usually in the front or back of the car. Since there are no rows of seats between these chairs, your toddler’s little legs won’t be able to kick the patience out of fellow passengers.

Bring diversions — lots of them. Your tot will enjoy watching the scenery out the window for only so long. So bring toys and games (check out toddler travel activities for on-the-go entertainment ), just as you would when traveling with kids by any other mode of transportation.

Get moving as much as you can. Let your toddler take walks down the train’s aisle (only while holding your hand) to let him blow off some steam. Similarly, take advantage of any stops you may make to let your toddler wander around the train station and exert some energy.

Don’t count on the dining car. There may not be food on the train, but even if there is, you can’t guarantee your toddler will be willing to eat what they’re serving. So, just as you would when you travel with a toddler by car or plane, bring your own snacks and drinks (you know your toddler’s favorites).

Turn your seats into a sleep sanctuary. Some kids will sleep anywhere; others need some help. The more you make the train chairs like your toddler’s bed, the more likely he’ll rest. Bring a pillow and a blanket (bonus points for bringing his pillow and blankie!) so he has no trouble napping. Try to mimic your child’s bedtime routine — whether you read a story or sing a lullaby — to up the odds that he nods off.

What to Expect The Second Year , Heidi Murkoff and Sharon Mazel. WhatToExpect.com, Toddler Air Travel: What to Know Before You Fly , January 2019. American Academy of Pediatrics, Air Travel Tips from the American Academy of Pediatrics , July 2018. American Academy of Pediatrics, Travel Safety Tips , August 2018.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

11 Tips to Make Flying With a Toddler Go More Smoothly Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Handle Toddler Tantrums When Leaving the Playground Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

13 Tips to Make Flying and Traveling With Twins Less Stressful Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Sleep Train Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Smart Tips for Getting Your Baby to Sleep Anywhere (Yep, Even on Vacation) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

What to Pack When Traveling With Baby Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Why Can't Toddlers Sit Still? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Ways to Discipline Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

8 Walking Safety Tips for Toddlers to Keep Spills and Hazards at Bay Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

How to Establish a Bedtime Routine for Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Soothing Sleep Across Time Zones? Learn How to Ease Jet Lag in Babies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

I’d Pay Double for This $24 Travel Toy By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler Fact Checked by Jill Malter

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window