Tongue-Tie in Babies

Updated with the latest guidelines from the AAP.

Tongue-tie in babies

Wondering if your baby might have a tongue-tie? Learn the causes, symptoms and treatment options for tongue-tie here.

Is your baby having problems latching on during breastfeeding? Is it painful when you breastfeed? If you're a rookie breastfeeding a newborn, the answers to both of these questions will probably be "yes, and yes."

But if you also notice that your baby isn't able to fully stick out her tongue and is having difficulty latching, it could be a condition known as tongue-tie (aka ankyloglossia). Trusted SourceMayo ClinicTongue-Tie (Ankyloglossia)See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicTongue-Tie (Ankyloglossia)See All Sources

There's a lot of confusion about tongue-ties these days (and plenty of old wives' tales). Pediatricians don't always check for it, and it's not always easy to notice. Here's some information to help you sort through the facts.

What is tongue-tie?

Tongue-tie is largely genetic. It occurs when the lingual frenulum — a small stretch of tissue that connects the bottom of the tongue to the floor of the mouth — is too short and tight and the tongue doesn't separate fully from the bottom of the mouth before birth. This can cause babies not to have enough tongue mobility and may make breastfeeding harder.

Fortunately, many babies with mild cases can compensate without issue and continue to nurse normally even if they have a tongue-tie.

What are the symptoms of tongue-tie in babies?

Tongue-tie related symptoms may include:

Nipple pain and trauma

Difficulty with latching on to the breast

Frequent or insufficient feedings

Uncoordinated sucking

Audible clicking sounds during feeding

Chomping or chewing instead of sucking

Liquid coming out of the sides of the mouth during feedings

Difficulty gaining weight

These tongue-tie-related problems may result in a mom deciding to forego breastfeeding. If you're experiencing any of these systems, talk with a lactation consultant and your pediatrician.

Are there different types of tongue-tie?

Tongue-tie can be mild or severe, and it depends on how much extra tissue connects the bottom of the tongue to the floor of the mouth. The closer the frenulum is to the front of the tongue, the more severe the tongue-tie.

There are both anterior and posterior tongue-ties, and some babies who have tongue-ties also have lip-ties .

How does tongue-tie affect breastfeeding?

Babies use their tongues a whole lot when breastfeeding; it's kind of a key part of the whole process. If your baby can't fully move her tongue around and open her mouth wide enough, it may impact her ability to latch on the breast and form a good seal. (Of course, there are plenty of mildly tongue-tied babies who don't have any trouble.)

What else can happen? Well, if the tongue is tight and can't move around, it makes it harder for a baby to suck. Combined, these effects can prevent a baby from getting the milk she needs from the breast.

Aside from having a very hungry baby on your hands, tongue-tie may potentially lead to other health problems:

Failure to thrive (not gaining weight as quickly as they should)

Dehydration in baby

Mom may also notice some effects like:

Clogged milk ducts

Cracked nipples

Low milk supply

Mastitis , an inflammation of the breast that sometimes involves infection

Note: Most breastfeeding problems are not caused by tongue-tie and can be overcome with support. Don't be afraid to reach out to a lactation consultant or your baby's pediatrician for help.

What is the treatment for tongue-tie?

You've heard the phrase "if it isn't broken, don't fix it." Well, this can be applied to tongue-tie treatment: If your baby is feeding normally and you aren't experiencing any additional health problems as a result of tongue-tie, treatment is not always needed.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has recently changed its guidelines for treatment of tongue-tie in babies, and advises parents and doctors not to "jump to surgery." Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAAP: When breastfeeding problems arise in infant with tongue-tie, don%u2019t jump to surgerySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsAAP: When breastfeeding problems arise in infant with tongue-tie, don%u2019t jump to surgerySee All Sources

The AAP now recommends starting with non-surgical methods first to manage tongue-tie in babies and help with breastfeeding. The group's research has shown an overdiagnosis of tongue-tie in babies and an overuse of surgeries to remedy it that may not be necessary and may not resolve problems with breastfeeding.

Normally, the surgical remedy for tongue-tie involves a frenotomy, or clipping the frenulum with sterile scissors in the pediatrician's office. General anesthesia is not required, and many babies latch immediately after, while others take a little longer. Clipping the frenulum can allow a baby's tongue to move freely enough to latch on to the breast with a good seal.

The AAP says that if all other treatment and management options are explored first and a baby does actually have tongue-tie, this in-office procedure may be a reasonable option.

"Tongue-tie clipping" has been the subject of debate for several years. Some experts caution that it's done too often and say that babies can learn to compensate for tongue-tie if they actually have it. Other experts have recommended the procedure right away to help with breastfeeding and other issues that may crop up later. Trusted SourceChildren's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP)Ankyloglossia (Tongue Tie)See All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceChildren's Hospital of Philadelphia (CHOP)Ankyloglossia (Tongue Tie)See All Sources

Talk your options over with the pediatrician or ENT to learn what is best for you and your baby. Ask about before and after care if the procedure is recommended.

How can you continue breastfeeding if your baby has tongue-tie?

If your baby is having trouble latching, talk to a lactation consultant and/or your baby's pediatrician to see if tongue-tie is the problem. In the meantime, here are some things to try:

Special nipple shields. There are ones made specifically for moms of babies with nursing challenges. Just make sure you work closely with a lactation consultant when using a nipple shield .

Different positioning. Holding your baby in a less-traditional way may improve feeding. Talk with your lactation consultant (or a pediatric physical therapist familiar with tongue-tie) for ideas.

Mouth exercises. Some lactation consultants and pediatric physical therapists recommend exercises to help strengthen your baby's suckling ability.

Don't be too discouraged if your baby's mouth problems make breastfeeding difficult or impossible. Whether you pump breast milk and bottle-feed your baby or choose to feed her formula instead, rest assured that your baby will get the nutrition she needs.