Too Much Saliva in Pregnancy? What It Means and What Can Help

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

woman

An abundance of saliva during pregnancy can make the already unhappy symptom of morning sickness even more uncomfortable.

Excessive saliva build-up in the mouth in pregnancy, sometimes called ptyalism gravidarum, is one of those strange pregnancy symptoms some moms-to-be experience. It's relatively rare, and it's most often reported by women who also have morning sickness.

Here's what you need to know if you're experiencing excess saliva during pregnancy, including a few tips that might help keep this symptom in check.

Key Takeaways

Lots of spit happens. Excess saliva starts in the first trimester and shows up with morning sickness. The good news? It protects your mouth and throat from acid reflux.

You can blame those hormones. While you wait it out, your best bet is to trick your mouth by chewing gum, sucking on ice, or brushing with minty toothpaste.

It’ll fade pretty fast! After the early weeks, excess saliva gets better and it definitely goes away once your wee one has arrived.

When does excess saliva during pregnancy generally start?

If your mouth is filling up with more saliva than usual, it's most likely happening early in your pregnancy , during the first three months.

As strange or unpleasant as it sounds, there is a reason for this odd symptom: Experts suspect this is the body's way of protecting your mouth, teeth, and throat from the corrosive effects of stomach acid.

A combination of factors in pregnancy increases the amount of reflux — which may be happening even if you're not feeling sick — and the excess saliva helps to buffer these destructive effects.

Whatever the cause, the good news is that excessive saliva isn't serious, but there's no known cure except delivery — though most cases end well before then.

Got another odd pregnancy symptom? The What to Expect app has expert explanations plus a community of moms-to-be who understand what you’re dealing with.

What causes excess saliva during pregnancy?

Experts aren't sure, but the most likely culprit for excess saliva during pregnancy is the one blamed for so many other charming pregnancy woes: those pregnancy hormones. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicinePtyalism in Pregnancy 2014 A Review of Epidemiology and PracticesSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicinePtyalism in Pregnancy 2014 A Review of Epidemiology and PracticesSee All Sources

As if feeling sick to your stomach weren't enough, that extra saliva may pool in your mouth, adding to your queasiness and upping the chances that you'll be turned off by your next meal .

What can I do about excess saliva during pregnancy?

You won't be able to get that extra saliva during pregnancy to evaporate, but you can try to get some relief by:

Sucking on ice

Using a minty mouthwash

Brushing your teeth often with a minty toothpaste (it's also good for dental care , which is extra important during pregnancy)

Chewing sugarless gum

Eating or drinking something sour, like sucking on lemon slices

Carrying tissues and a wipe towel with you at all times, so you can blot any saliva that escapes from your mouth

What to Expect Community parent Francess33 is experiencing a lot of extra spit right now: “I am going crazy. I have tried everything and it seems to get worse every day. I drink so much water, use sugarless gums, and candies.”

But don't resort to spitting as a solution; doing so excessively can lead to electrolyte imbalances, so it's best to try another tactic.

Can I prevent excess saliva during pregnancy?

Alas, there is no known magic pill or prenatal habit that can prevent excessive drooling during pregnancy. Just try not to be too upset or grossed out if it happens to you. Keep a sense of humor, and know that this, too, shall pass.

When can I expect excess saliva to end?

Like many pregnancy symptoms, this one is both completely annoying and completely harmless. It's also temporary, and should pass after the first trimester of pregnancy , though it may persist longer for some women.

No matter what, it will disappear after your baby is born for sure and probably sooner. Until then, tell yourself it's cool to drool.