Top Choking Hazards for Babies and Toddlers

top choking hazards

You should always keep these household items and foods out of reach of young children.

Choking happens when an object gets inhaled and then stuck in a person’s airway. Babies and small children are particularly at risk of choking because of their small throats and tracheas, making it easy for things to get stuck.

Food makes up over 50 percent of choking episodes in babies and children, which is why it’s so important to watch young kids carefully at mealtimes. But curious tots love to put practically anything in their mouths, and small items can be particularly dangerous.

Here's what caregivers need to know about some of the most common choking hazards for young children and how to keep your little one safe.

Top choking hazards for babies and toddlers

You should always keep these household items out of reach of babies and toddlers under the age of 4:

Coins

Buttons

Batteries

Small toys like marbles

Balloons

Dice

Magnets

Pen caps

Small hair clips, bows, hair ties, etc.

These foods should also be avoided until your child is at least age 4:

Hot dogs

Nuts and seeds

Whole grapes (and for babies, uncooked raisins)

Popcorn

Pieces of raw veggies or hard raw fruits

Hard candies

Gum

Chunks of meat and cheese

Chunks of peanut butter

How to prevent choking in babies and toddlers

Since food is such a prevalent cause of choking, watching your child during mealtimes (and being careful about what you feed her when she’s little) is crucial. Here are some key ways to prevent choking in babies and toddlers while they’re eating:

Stay close. You should actively watch every bite your child takes, especially when she’s starting solid foods .

Offer age-appropriate food. Once your child has started finger foods (either after graduating from purées or as part of baby-led weaning ), offer foods in age-appropriate sizes and textures.

Keep portions small. Place only a few pieces at a time on the plate so your baby doesn’t eat more than she can handle. Portion sizes can be a bit larger for toddlers, but still moderate — she can always ask for more if she’s hungry.

Sit down during meals. Not you, but your little one. Offer finger foods to your child only when she’s sitting down — never while she's crawling, running around, playing or reclining.

Avoid risky foods. No matter how strong your mealtime safety game is, avoid giving children under the age of 4 foods from the list above (such as hot dogs, popcorn and nuts), which are common choking hazards.

For non-food related choking risks, here’s how to keep your kids safe:

Provide age-appropriate toys... Age guidelines on toys don’t only factor in how fun or difficult a toy would be for a kid; they also consider the toy’s choking risk. Don’t give toys or games meant for an older child to your toddler or baby. And never buy vending machine toys for your little one, as they often have small parts and don’t have to meet the same safety regulations as what’s sold in stores.

...and keep them in good condition. Be on the lookout for toys that are broken or falling apart that could potentially pose a choking risk.

Keep things tidy. You might not normally give the change between your couch cushions or the pen caps under your desk much thought, but your child could easily discover those items and put them in her mouth. Check under furniture, between cushions, in your car and anywhere else your child is to ensure that there’s nothing she could access that she’d choke on.

Keep harmful objects out of your child's reach. There are some things you have to have in your home — like batteries or detergent pods — but they shouldn’t be accessible to your little one. Keep these kinds of items in child-proof cabinets or containers out of harm’s way.

How to prepare for choking emergencies

The best way to prepare for choking emergencies is to take a first aid and CPR course. That way, you’ll have the best possible training to ensure that you can help your child safely survive a choking incident. You can sign up for classes through the American Heart Association , American Red Cross or your local hospital.

Choking can be a parent’s worst nightmare. But thankfully it’s a largely preventable situation, and doesn’t have to lead to worst-case scenarios. With some proper precautions and safety training, you and your child can breathe a little easier.