Toxoplasmosis During Pregnancy

Updates throughout to include latest guidelines and new medical review.

your health woman cat

Toxoplasmosis is an infection caused by a parasite that cats and other pets may carry, which can be harmful during pregnancy. Here's what you can do to stay safe.

If you’re the “parent” of an adorable fur baby — and have another (human) baby on the way — you probably can’t wait for your two little ones to meet.

But because pets , and in particular cats, can carry a parasite that can be harmful to a fetus, you may want to keep a bit of distance from your kitty (or at least the litter box) until your baby is born.

Here's more about toxoplasmosis, including some precautions you can take to avoid it while you're pregnant.

What is toxoplasmosis?

Toxoplasmosis is an infection caused by a single-celled parasite, Toxoplasma gondii. Cats and other animals can be carriers of toxoplasmosis, which can then be excreted into the feces and accidentally ingested by humans. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionToxoplasmosis: Pregnancy FAQSSee All Sources [1] This can happen after changing your cat's litter box if you touch your mouth before you have the chance to wash your hands, for example.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionToxoplasmosis: Pregnancy FAQSSee All Sources

So if you have a cat or other pet, it’s important to make sure to do double time at the sink when you’re pregnant. Keeping your hands and face clean after handling your cat or any items your cat uses will help ensure that you have a safe pregnancy.

Pets aren’t the only transmitters, however. You can also catch toxoplasmosis by eating undercooked meat or unwashed fruits and vegetables harboring the parasite (Toxoplasma can be present in the soil on farms where your food is grown). Make sure to wash fruits and vegetables and stay away from undercooked meat while pregnant.

Undercooked or contaminated shellfish (for example, oysters, clams or mussels) can also contain the parasite. That’s why the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that pregnant women stay away from raw or undercooked shellfish, as it may be contaminated with Toxoplasma that has washed into sea water.

What are the symptoms of toxoplasmosis during pregnancy?

Most people who have toxoplasmosis aren’t aware of it because they won’t have any symptoms. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicToxoplasmosisSee All Sources [2] That’s because a strong immune system usually keeps the parasite in check and symptoms at bay.

Toxoplasmosis

Some people who have toxoplasmosis report feeling as though they have the flu, with these symptoms in particular:

Swollen lymph glands

Muscle aches and pains that may last for a month or more

Fever

Headache

Who is most at risk for toxoplasmosis during pregnancy?

Anyone can become infected, but babies who are born to mothers who acquired the infection during (or just before) pregnancy are at risk for developing complications from toxoplasmosis.

People who are undergoing certain types of chemotherapy or have a weakened immune system are also at risk.

Some babies may have symptoms when they’re first born, such as a build-up of fluid in the brain or an abnormally small head. Others may develop problems such as vision or hearing loss as they get older. Toxoplasmosis infections also can result in miscarriage or stillbirth.

How common is toxoplasmosis?

More than 40 million people in the U.S. are estimated to have the Toxoplasma infection, according to the CDC.

As for the number of babies born with toxoplasmosis (i.e. congenital transmission), statistics are hard to come by, but researchers estimate that dozens to a few hundred cases occur in the U.S. each year, making it very rare.

Most infants who are infected may not show signs of the infection at birth, but could develop symptoms later in life, while a small percentage of infected newborns have serious eye or brain damage at birth.

What are the potential complications of toxoplasmosis during pregnancy?

There’s little risk to the mother from toxoplasmosis. In fact, if you’ve been a cat owner for a while, you may have already been infected with the parasite, so in that case, you can’t become infected with Toxoplasma again.

But if you’re infected with Toxoplasma for the first time during your pregnancy — or were infected just before you got pregnant — you can pass toxoplasmosis to your baby.

The risk of a fetus becoming infected if the mother has contracted toxoplasmosis is about 30 percent. The earlier the infection crops up during pregnancy, the more serious the health risks — including eye, hearing and learning problems — may be. Later in pregnancy, the consequences tend to be less serious.

How is toxoplasmosis treated during pregnancy?

If you think you might have contracted toxoplasmosis, your practitioner can give you a blood test to find out for sure if you’ve been infected.

If the test comes back positive, you’ll likely be treated with antibiotics to reduce the risk of transmitting the disease to your baby.

If, after you gave birth, you suspect that you may have had toxoplasmosis during your pregnancy, you can have your baby tested for the infection.

If the test comes back positive, your baby will also take antibiotics (pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine) for at least a year to minimize the chances of developing symptoms later in life.

How can you prevent toxoplasmosis during pregnancy?

The best way to protect your baby from the effects of toxoplasmosis is to avoid infection in the first place. Don’t worry: You don’t have to find a new home for your cat while you're pregnant. But you should take these precautions:

Have someone else change the litter box . Cat feces are a source of the parasite, so have someone else handle that job for the duration of your pregnancy. If you have to do it yourself, wear gloves and wash your hands afterward.

Don’t eat raw or undercooked meat. Likewise, don’t feed raw or undercooked meat to your cat or allow your cat to roam outdoors and hunt mice or birds (which can then transmit the parasite to your pet).

Avoid raw eggs and unpasteurized milk .

Wash and peel fruits and vegetables before eating them, since Toxoplasma can reside in the soil.

Wear gloves when gardening because the dirt can contain the parasite.

Don’t clean out a child’s sandbox. It could be used as a litter box by local cats.

Wash up carefully. Be scrupulous about washing your hands as well as any utensils, cutting boards or plates that have been in contact with raw meat.

Be sure to talk to your doctor or midwife about any concerns you have when it comes to pets and pregnancy and the risk of toxoplasmosis.

By taking the proper steps, you can set yourself up for a healthy nine months and keep your baby safe and sound until you can hold him — and your cat, dog or other beloved pet — in your arms.