Your Ultimate Guide to Traveling While Breastfeeding

Breastfeeding while traveling

Whether you're traveling by plane, train or car, here's how nursing mamas can plan ahead.

Traveling while you're breastfeeding or pumping can seem like an overwhelming task, especially before you’ve gotten the hang of it. Trying to find privacy to feed your baby or a place where you can pump in peace can be tricky. Whether you're traveling by plane, train or car, feeding a baby on the go takes a little preparation.

Best breastfeeding travel gear

First, you'll need the right gear. Having everything you need on hand can make breastfeeding away from home that much easier.

A nursing cover or top. Not so sure about breastfeeding in public? It can be hard to find a clean and private place to breastfeed on the go, but having a good nursing cover or nursing top can make feeding your baby in public no big deal.

Storage bags or bottles and a portable cooler. If you’re pumping on the go, you’ll need a place to safely store your milk . Investing in freezable storage bags or bottles and a portable cooler is a good place to start. Make sure to bring totally frozen ice packs so they'll stay cold for your entire journey.

A portable pump. If you’re going to travel often as a new mom, you may want to invest in a portable pump for times when you're not near an outlet.

Dual-voltage power adaptor. If you’re traveling internationally, you may need to pack a power adaptor to plug your pump in or recharge the battery at your destination.

Traveling with baby while breastfeeding

No matter where you're headed, planning ahead is key.

Don't rush. If you're flying to your destination, leave enough time so that you never have to choose between making your flight or meeting your baby’s needs.

Seek out breastfeeding-friendly spaces. Call the airport ahead of time to see if there are any designated lactation rooms. Some airports now have "lactation pods" where you can breastfeed or pump. While these rooms tend to be small, if you’re timid about breastfeeding in public, they can be very handy. The Mamava Pod locator can help you find out which airports have these pods installed.

Grab the window seat. If you're flying with a partner or family member, nabbing the window seat with your travel companion beside you can make breastfeeding feel a little more private.

Plan ahead for road trips. Nicer gas stations, grocery stores or restaurants on your route can be more comfortable to nurse in, and you might be able to scope them out ahead of time using online review sites like Yelp or Tripadvisor . If you're staying in the car, just make sure that you pull over to breastfeed, because baby always needs to be strapped into her car seat whenever the vehicle is moving.

Feed your baby expressed milk. One trick of the trade is to have your partner drive while you sit in the back to pump and then bottle-feed expressed milk to your baby all while he's strapped into his car seat. This way, you can avoid having to pull over at all.

Drink enough water. You’ll have to pull over regularly anyway for diaper changes, so it's no big deal if you need to make some bathroom pit stops too. And making sure you’re hydrated is one of the keys to successful breastfeeding on the road.

Know your rights . No matter where you are in the U.S., you have a legal right to breastfeed your baby in public. And if you’re comfortable breastfeeding without a cover or top, go for it!

Stay safe. Wash your hands frequently and pack hand sanitizer or sanitizing wipes to clean high-touch surfaces in any space you're nursing in, and wear a well-fitting mask in crowded indoor transportation hubs like airports and train stations.

Traveling without baby while pumping

Pumping can be difficult when you’re traveling, in part because doing so in public is often more cumbersome than breastfeeding. Still, you have options.

Plan ahead. Before you leave, determine how many bottles of breast milk you'll need to bank ahead of time to ensure your baby has enough during your absence.

Again, preparation is key. Know where you can safely and privately pump before you get to the airport or on the road. As mentioned above, look for designated lactation rooms in airports that contain a private space (other than a bathroom) with a chair, table and electricity outlet that will make it comfortable for you to pump.

No lactation pod? Ask at the guest services desk if there's a phone booth or another private space you can use, or you can pay extra to access the airport courtesy lounge.

Bring gear to wash your pump. If you’re planning to pump more than once before you get to your destination, make sure you have a brush and soap to clean your pump and bottles.

Get on a schedule. Try to maintain your baby’s normal feeding schedule so you can keep up your supply and avoid discomfort.

Breast milk storage when you're traveling

As long as it's not in direct sunlight or in a room warmer than 77 degrees Fahrenheit, breast milk can be stored at room temperature for up to four hours before it needs to be refrigerated. But if your trip is longer than that or baby isn’t with you, you'll need to cool it down.

An insulated cooler with totally frozen ice packs will keep milk cool for up to 24 hours.

Fill breast milk storage bags no more than three-quarters full to leave room for expansion. The same is true if you’re using bottles.

Make sure to label your breast milk with the date and use up older milk first.

Thaw frozen breast milk by placing it in a bowl of warm water or by moving it into the fridge for 24 hours.

How to travel with breast milk

Breast milk and formula are not subject to the same rules as other liquids when you’re traveling through an airport. According to the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), formula, breast milk and juice in quantities greater than 3.4 ounces or 100 milliliters are allowed in carry-on baggage. Ice packs and other accessories required to cool formula, breast milk and juice are also permitted in your carry-on.

If you have trouble at security, ask to speak with a manager and show them the rules listed on TSA's website.

Prefer not to deal with breast milk in the airport at all? You can also pay a little extra to have your milk transported home by a company such as Milk Stork , which offers overnight shipping from most U.S. and international destinations.