Treating and Preventing Mosquito Bites in Children

treating mosquito bites in children, little boy putting calomine lotion on a mosquito bite on his leg

Your child probably won't even notice if a mosquito bites him — although the itching afterward will probably bug him big-time. Here are some tips for treating mosquito bites and keeping those itches away.

Does your child seem to have magnetic appeal to mosquitoes and the painful, itchy bites they leave behind? It’s not that bugs are more attracted to babies and toddlers, but little kids may be oblivious to them — which make them easy targets for insect bites, especially from pesky mosquitoes.

The best way to prevent them? Be vigilant about where your child plays outside. Still, mosquito bites are bound to happen. Minimize the scratching by getting savvy about treating them.

How to prevent mosquito bites in children

Avoid mosquito dens. Try to stay away from areas where mosquitoes are prone to nest or congregate, such as garbage cans, small pools of water, uncovered foods and gardens. Also dump out any standing water (e.g., your tot's kiddie pool) in your yard or around your house weekly: Mosquitoes breed in it.

Choose your hours wisely. Wait until after dawn to go outside and head indoors at dusk, when mosquitoes are most active.

Close up shop. Keep mosquitoes and other flying insects out of your house by using screens on doors and windows.

Cover up. Dress your child in long-sleeve shirts and long pants if you’re going to be where mosquitoes can’t be avoided.

Spray on protection. Use insect repellent sparingly on the exposed skin of children over the age of 2 months old. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsChoosing an Insect Repellent for Your ChildSee All Sources [1] Most common insecticides are made with the chemical DEET, which is effective at preventing mosquito bites in children as well as tick and spider bites in children . Just be careful about the concentration levels in whatever repellent you choose: up to 30 percent DEET or 10 percent picaridin is okay for little ones. Avoid spraying your child's hands and face and don't reapply unless needed. You can also spritz it on top of clothes for added protection. If you aren’t sure if a particular insect repellent is okay for your baby or toddler, ask your doctor to recommend a safe one.

Protect your clothes. Spray permethrin, a type of bug repellent that works well against ticks, on clothes (never directly on skin). It's usually good for several washes.

How to treat mosquito bites in children

Head off swelling. If you happen to catch a mosquito munching on your child, brush it off his skin with a gentle sweep of your hand, then apply ice to the scene of the crime to prevent itching and swelling.

Ease itching. Apply calamine lotion or hydrocortisone cream to treat the bite as needed.

Discourage scratching. Sharp little fingernails can break the skin around a bite and let bacteria in. Besides doing all you can to prevent itching, explain to your child that scratching or picking will make the bug bite worse, and trim his fingernails as short as possible.

Watch out for symptoms of illness. Mosquitoes can carry disease — in particular, West Nile virus. Four out of five people who are infected with this virus don’t get sick at all, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), but you should still be aware of the symptoms, which include fever, headache, nausea and vomiting. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionWest Nile VirusSee All Sources [2] If your child experiences any of these, check in with his pediatrician and mention that he’s recently been bitten. Also check in with your child's doctor if you see any signs of infection (usually because your child scratches or picks at a bite) such as redness, swelling or pus, or if the area around the bite feels warm to the touch.

Sources

Choosing an Insect Repellent for Your Child

Show in the article

West Nile Virus

Show in the article

Can You Use Bug Spray on Babies and Toddlers?

American Academy of Pediatrics, Choosing an Insect Repellent for Your Child , July 2021. | Show in the article

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, West Nile Virus , July 2021. | Show in the article

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff.

WhatToExpect.com, Can You Use Bug Spray on Babies and Toddlers? , August 2021.

Updates history

August 5, 2022

Editor: Caroline Picard

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Medically reviewed to ensure accuracy.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

Treating Spider Bites in Kids Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Treating Bee Stings in Children Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do if a Dog Bites Your Child Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Lyme Disease in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Mouth Injuries in Children Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Head Lice in Children Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Preventing Waterborne Illness in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Frostbite in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Mosquito Bites During Pregnancy: Why You're a Magnet and How to Stay Protected Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Children's Medication Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Seasonal Allergy Medications That Are Safe for Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Toddlers Bite — and What You Can Do About It Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Sunscreen and Sun Protection for Babies: What Parents Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

How to Help Your Toddler Stop Biting His Nails Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Treat Scraped Knees and Cuts in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window