Trying for a Baby? Folic Acid May Matter for Men Too

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

A person is holding a white pill bottle and reading the label on it

Folic acid isn’t just for moms-to-be. Learn how folic acid supports cell health and why men might also benefit when you're trying for a baby.

"I know I should take folic acid to prepare myself for pregnancy, but do men need folic acid too? Should my partner be taking a supplement?"

Key Takeaways

Folic acid may matter for men, too. While evidence isn't conclusive, some research suggests higher folic acid intake in men may reduce sperm abnormalities and potentially support fertility.

Folic acid is essential for healthy cell division and DNA . Also known as vitamin B9, folic acid plays a key role in making DNA and new cells, which is critical for reproduction in both women and men.

Food first, supplements for insurance . Folate (the natural form of the vitamin) is found in leafy greens, fruits, beans, and fortified grains. Women trying to conceive should take a prenatal vitamin with folic acid, and partners might also benefit from supplementation.

Moms-to-be aren’t the only ones who should lay into the leafy greens. Soon-to-be dads need to think about what goes into their bodies too. That’s because good nutrition is always beneficial when trying to reproduce. There’s even some evidence showing a link between folic acid and male fertility .

In fact, one study showed that men who consume high levels of folic acid through the foods they eat (over 700 mcg a day) actually lower their risk of sperm abnormalities by up to 20%. Lowered sperm abnormalities may improve pregnancy rates. However, this data isn't conclusive, and some studies have shown no impact of increased folic acid on male fertility. In other words, it won’t hurt men to load up on folic acid along with other vitamins and minerals, and it might have a benefit.

Folic acid (the synthetic form of folate) is the B9 vitamin. Its main job in the body is to help produce and maintain new cells, and it’s especially important during cell division. Without folic acid, the body couldn't produce DNA (essential when it comes to making babies!) and red blood cells.

For women, getting enough folic acid before conception and during early pregnancy is definitely a must, as it has been found to significantly reduce the risk of neural-tube defects (such as spina bifida ) in developing babies.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists says that most pregnant women need 600 micrograms of folic acid daily, and to make sure you get this amount you should take a prenatal vitamin with at least 400 micrograms starting at least one month before you get pregnant and through the first 12 weeks of your pregnancy.

For moms-to-be whose family history shows a high risk of neural-tube defects, the guidelines go a step further, recommending that they get 10 times that amount, or 4 milligrams, from folic-acid supplements. That's why if you're expecting to expect, your doctor has likely already recommended taking a daily prenatal vitamin containing an adequate dose of folic acid.

You can find this important baby-building nutrient in such foods as leafy green vegetables (think spinach and kale), beets, most fruits (including avocados), beans, and fortified cereals and breads. So encourage your man to hit the salad bar for lunch for some leafy greens and beets, or even just his favorite Mexican spot for bean burritos with a dollop of guacamole. Better yet, share a dinner that's rich in folate.

What to Expect Community member Justine256 recommends making an avocado and banana smoothie to boost your folate intake, while member auntie7xmommy2x makes green juice and smoothies, as well as a breakfast of spinach, egg, cheese, onion, and peppers.

Because of the important connection between folic acid and your fertility, you might as well have your partner participate in consumption of this essential nutrient. But what if he isn’t eating a nutritious diet? Have him talk with his doctor about nutrition and male fertility and let them figure out the best way for your guy to get proper nutrition. This way, he’s doing his part to help ensure that the two of you have a healthy pregnancy.

Use the What to Expect app to get more expert advice, to connect with other moms-to-be, and to keep track of your pregnancy journey through every stage.

Here’s to making that healthy baby!

Heidi Murkoff

What To Expect Before You’re Expecting, 2nd Edition. Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Folic Acid During Pregnancy , April 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Spina Bifida , November 2021. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Healthy Eating During Pregnancy , December 2025. March of Dimes, Folic Acid , May 2020. Fertility and Sterility , Micronutrients intake is associated with improved sperm DNA quality in older men , November 2012.

Updates history

January 30, 2026

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Editors: Karen Miles/Rebekah Wahlberg

What Our Community Is Talking About

Too late for acupuncture?

Testing out trigger

First time IVF

There are 11,393 active discussions happening now in our Fertility Treatments community group.

Your Next Read

Do Fertility Supplements Really Work? What the Science Says Before You Try Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Folic Acid During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Your Preconception Nutrition Plan: How to Prep Your Plate for Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

10 Ways to Increase Sperm Count Naturally Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

Can Iron Help You Get Pregnant? Why This Mighty Mineral Matters Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

7 Foods Linked to Healthier Sperm — and 6 That Could Harm It Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

Which Vitamins Do I Need During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Can Prenatal Vitamins Really Help Your Hair Grow? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

A Dozen Tips for Getting Pregnant Fast Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

How Early Should You Start Taking Prenatal Vitamins? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Why Omega-3s Matter During Pregnancy and How to Get Enough Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Can You Take Prenatal Vitamins Without Being Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

How Much Vitamin C Do You Actually Need During Pregnancy? A Doctor-Approved Guide Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

The 9 Best Prenatal Vitamins That OB/GYNs Recommend — and Moms Actually Take Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnant and Low on Vitamin D? Here’s How to Boost Your Levels Safely Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window