TTC Acronyms Explained: How to Connect and Find Support While Trying to Conceive

Major update and new medical review.

decoding ttc talk

Hoping to keep away AF and see a BFP? With the many acronyms on TTC (trying to conceive) message boards, it can seem like a whole new world. Here's your primer on what some of the most common ones mean.

When you're trying to get pregnant and looking for answers, online message boards are a great resource.

Joining an online TTC (meaning “trying to conceive”) community can be incredibly helpful, says Alex Robles , M.D., an OB/GYN and reproductive endocrinologist at the Columbia University Fertility Center in New York.

“It offers a space to connect with others who truly understand what you're going through, both emotionally and physically,” he says. “Many people find comfort, support, and practical advice from those who are on a similar journey.”

But on your first visit to a message board, the dizzying array of acronyms used in the TTC world can feel a lot like a whole new language, which can just slow you down when you're looking for a quick answer to a question.

Even if you've been active on other message boards for years and know many common acronyms — SO (significant other), OP (original poster), SAHM (stay-at-home mom) , and so on — it's easy to feel confused.

What is that member talking about when she says her RE recommended an OPK? Why does everyone need distractions during the TWW? And what do women mean when they say they got a BFN after they POAS?

Luckily, learning the language doesn't take long and is so worth the time.

Here's what you need to know — from advice to help you find a board to decoding the lingo — so you can get the most out of the online TTC community.

Key Takeaways

You’re not alone. TTC message boards are filled with people navigating the same twists and turns, and connecting with them can give you emotional support and practical tips.

Every board has its own vibe. Some groups are larger, others more intimate — taking a moment to explore can help you land in a community where you feel comfortable.

Learning the lingo saves time. TTC acronyms may seem confusing at first, but once you pick them up, they make it faster to ask questions, follow discussions, and share updates.

Finding a TTC community

Finding a TTC board is truly easy. On the What to Expect TTC board , in addition to the main board, you'll find a number of member-created groups, or you can create a group of your own. Member-created groups have a smaller number of participants but offer a more private experience.

Beyond the WTE TTC boards, an online search for "trying to conceive" or "TTC" and "discussion board," "forum," community," or similar terms will provide pages of results.

Before joining a community, take the time to make sure it's a good fit for you. Go through some of the conversations to see what the vibe is like. Look for a lot of interaction (no sense in joining a board if no one ever posts). And make sure the board is easy to use and well-moderated to keep internet trolls away and drama to a minimum.

Many people find comfort, support, and practical advice from those who are on a similar journey.

Alex Robles, M.D., OB/GYN and reproductive endocrinologist at Columbia University Fertility Center

TTC acronym meanings

So what's the deal with all the weird acronyms? Simply put, they make things a whole lot easier once you know the most common ones.

Trying to conceive comes with its own language, Dr. Robles points out, and becoming fluent in it “makes it easier to follow conversations, ask questions, and share experiences with others in the community.”

Some terms used in TTC talk are quite long (for instance, "micro injection fallopian transfer" and "artificial insemination from husband"), and typing out the full thing every time you post can get tedious.

That's why members of TTC forums use acronyms ("micro injection fallopian transfer" becomes MIFT and "artificial injection fallopian transfer" becomes AIH). Much simpler, right?

To make things even less difficult, here's a list of some of the most common acronyms you'll see. If there are any others you stumble on and don’t know, don’t hesitate to ask the providers at your next OB/GYN or specialist appointment.

“There’s no such thing as a silly question, especially when navigating something as personal and complex as fertility,” Dr. Robles says.

General

AF: Aunt Flow (aka your period)

BC: birth control

IF: infertility

PCOS : polycystic ovary syndrome (this condition in which the female sex hormones are out of balance can prevent ovulation from occurring regularly, which is why it’s “one of the most common causes of female infertility,” according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists(ACOG) Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsPolycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS)See All Sources [1]

Testing

BFN: big fat negative (a negative pregnancy test)

BFP: big fat positive (baby's on board!)

EPT: early pregnancy test

hCG: human chorionic gonadotropin (a hormone produced during pregnancy; elevated levels result in a positive pregnancy test; it’s the “first pregnancy hormone the placenta makes after conception,” according to the Cleveland Clinic) Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicHuman Chorionic GonadotropinSee All Sources [2]

HPT : home pregnancy test

PG: pregnant

POAS: pee on a stick (take a home pregnancy test)

TWW : two-week wait (the two-week period between ovulation and when you can test for pregnancy)

Doctors and specialists

CNM: certified nurse midwife (a nurse — usually an R.N. — who has completed graduate-level programs in midwifery, is licensed by the state, and usually has a collaborative relationship with a physician)

OB or OB/GYN: obstetrician or obstetrician/gynecologist

PCP: primary care physician

RE: reproductive endocrinologist (a doctor who specializes in treating reproductive disorders and infertility in women and men)

Fertility charting

BBT: basal body temperature (the body's temperature when first waking up in the morning; it's tracked using a special thermometer and rises sharply around the time of ovulation, helping a woman to determine when she's fertile)

CD: cycle day (usually followed by a number, the cycle day is when a woman is at in her menstrual cycle; if the average cycle is 28 days, CD1 is the first day of your period, and ovulation usually occurs at the midpoint of the cycle, though timing varies)

DPO: days post-ovulation (the number of days since ovulation — e.g., four DPO; the term is usually used when someone is waiting to take a pregnancy test)

EWCM: egg white cervical mucus (the clear, slippery, egg white-like discharge that occurs near ovulation)

O: ovulation (or ovulated)

OPK or OPT: ovulation predictor kit or ovulation predictor test (urine or saliva tests that can detect an upcoming ovulation 12 to 24 hours before it happens)

Assisted reproductive technology (ART)

AI: artificial insemination (sperm is inserted into the woman's uterus using a catheter)

IVF: in vitro fertilization (a procedure to treat infertility where an egg is fertilized with a sperm outside the womb and then implanted in a woman's uterus; “it may take more than one cycle to succeed,” according to ACOG) Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsTreating InfertilitySee All Sources [3]

Pregnancy

EDD: estimated due date ( the estimated date a baby might be born , determined based on the first day of a woman's last menstruation or estimated date of conception)

LMP: last menstrual period (the first day of your last period)

MC or M/C: miscarriage

US: ultrasound

In addition to the acronyms, some terms can throw you for a loop. One that may appear on some boards is "den mother," someone who has been part of the group for a while (often years) who volunteers to welcome new visitors to the board, introduce them to other members, encourage participation in conversations, and help assure the board runs smoothly by reporting violations to the moderators.

Still learning the TTC lingo? Track your cycle, decode acronyms, and connect with others on the same journey in the What to Expect app .

Another term you'll see on many TTC forums is "baby dust." People sprinkle baby dust on each other — and ask for it too.

“Who just got their BFP and can send us baby dust?” posted What to Expect Community member valeryapt.

So what exactly is baby dust? It is just a super cute way of wishing someone who is trying to conceive good luck on their conception journey.

What all these TTC terms and acronyms have in common is that they’re a way to connect with an entire network of parents and parents-to-be who know what you’re going through and have your back through all the ups and downs. That sort of support, and the knowledge that you’re not alone, are crucial during the emotional and sensitive TTC stage.