Twin Pregnancy Myths, Busted: What’s Really True When You’re Expecting Two

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Woman pregnant with twins

From morning sickness to delivery day, a lot of what people say about twin pregnancy just isn’t true. One twin mom sets the record straight so you can stress less and enjoy the ride.

Most people don’t have a clue about what it’s like being pregnant with twins . I certainly didn’t — at least until I saw that first ultrasound showing two beating hearts and my midwife handed me a book about expecting multiples. Uh oh.

Some of the things I’d heard about twin pregnancies turned out to be dead-on. But others were complete fallacies — at least in my experience.

Here’s a guide to five myths you may have heard about being pregnant with twins.

Key Takeaways:

Twin pregnancy doesn’t always mean extreme symptoms. Morning sickness, weight gain, and how you feel day to day can be totally different from what you’ve heard (and even from your singleton pregnancies), so try not to compare your experience to anyone else’s.

You’re not literally “eating for three.” With twins, you’ll usually just need some extra calories — not double — and your provider can help you find a healthy weight gain range that supports both babies.

Twins don’t automatically mean a super-early birth or a guaranteed C-section. Many twin pregnancies reach term or near-term with healthy birth weights, and you may be able to discuss vaginal birth with your doctor.

You’ll have really bad morning sickness

Truth: I was nauseated with my twin boys, but it was totally manageable and ended at 14 weeks. In fact, it was nothing compared to the morning sickness I had when I was pregnant with my daughter — which got so bad I accidentally fell asleep on the bathroom floor one day.

You’re eating for three

Truth: When you’re pregnant, you’re not really eating for two (or three). If you were, then you’d be consuming somewhere around 4,000 calories a day.

In reality, you aren’t supposed to up your caloric intake until the second trimester, and even then it’s only about 300 to 350 calories per day . That number does go up if you’re expecting twins — ordinarily an additional 300 calories per day for each baby — but certainly nothing like if you were actually eating for three full-grown people.

Want week-by-week tips, twin-specific advice, and a Community of parents who get it? Download the What to Expect app to track your babies and connect with other twin moms every step of the way.

You always give birth early to small babies

Truth: At one of my first doctor's appointments, the OB/GYN told me that twins are usually born early and very small. While that's often the case, it doesn't mean it's a given. About 50% of twins are born early.

Most of the mothers of twins I know all went at least 35 weeks or later and had two full-sized babies. In my case, my boys didn’t want to come out. When they were finally born at 38 weeks (considered full-term for twins ), Baby A weighed 5 pounds, 5 ounces, and Baby B was 6 pounds, 6 ounces.

You gain double the weight

Truth: Doctors usually recommend that pregnant women gain 25 to 35 pounds if they’re having one baby, and 37 to 54 pounds if they're pregnant with two — which is certainly not double the weight gain . With both my pregnancies, I packed on the pounds. Whether I was pregnant with one or two, I gained the same exact amount of weight in the same exact places.

“If your doctors aren’t worried, you don’t need to be worried. Bodies gain all sorts of different weight when pregnant. Keep active, feed yourself with healthy food, and don’t stress,” suggests What to Expect Community member amanda2633, who had a twin pregnancy.

You have to give birth via C-section

Truth: While many women give birth to twins via C-section , not every woman does. My mother gave birth to twins vaginally. For me, I had the choice. Baby A was head down and ready to go. But Baby B switched positions three times in three weeks. Because my doctor told me I had a 50% chance of starting to give birth vaginally and then needing a C-section, I opted for the C.

But your experience might differ from mine, depending on several factors, including your overall health and what position your babies are in. If you have your heart set on a vaginal birth , tell your doctor, who can help you determine if it's the safest option for you and your little ones.

You’ll hear lots of strange things when you’re pregnant with twins. Remember: Most of them aren’t true, and even if they are, every pregnancy journey is unique. If you have questions or are concerned about anything, talk to your doctor.

Felissa Allard is a contributing writer at What to Expect, the most trusted pregnancy and parenting brand.

Experience

Allard has over a decade's experience working in beauty, style, health and lifestyle. After graduating, Allard found her niche working at Health magazine, followed by stints at The New York Daily News, Life & Style, Everyday Health and more.

Education

She has a Master's in Journalism from Columbia University.