Two-Vessel Umbilical Cord? What It Means For Your Pregnancy

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

two-vessel cord, U-shaped magnet conceptual

Two-vessel cord — also known as single umbilical artery (SUA) — occurs in under 1% of singleton pregnancies and 5% of twins and multiples pregnancies. Here’s what to know.

There's nothing like an ultrasound to get your heart racing with anticipation (there's a baby inside!) and at the same time get you worried about every possible complication . So if your ultrasound technician informs you that you have a two-vessel umbilical cord, otherwise known as a single umbilical artery (SUA), your first reaction may be to freak out.

Rest assured, this is one of the most common differences to affect the umbilical cord , the supply-and-waste line that connects you with your baby. Fortunately, most two-vessel cords have a happy ending — and a healthy baby to show for them.

Key Takeaways

Most babies are perfectly fine with a two-vessel cord. While this umbilical cord variation can sound alarming (instead of one vein and two arteries, this version has one vein and one artery), most infants with it are born healthy.

Expect extra monitoring. Once the two-vessel cord is seen on ultrasound (around 18 to 22 weeks), you’ll have more screening and scans along the way.

If nothing else is found, the prognosis is very good. There’s a slight risk of birth defects and slowed growth with a two-vessel umbilical cord, but most babies are born a good size and pretty close to on time.

What is a two-vessel cord?

During your ultrasound, it may be hard to process the information that your baby has a two-vessel cord. Here’s a quick explainer. In a normal umbilical cord, there are three blood vessels — one vein (which brings nutrients and oxygen to the baby) and two arteries (which transport waste from the baby back to the placenta and the mother’s blood).

But in some cases, the umbilical cord contains only two blood vessels — one vein and one artery. This condition is called either a two-vessel cord or a single umbilical artery.

How common is a two-vessel cord?

Having a two-vessel cord is very rare. Here's a snapshot:

About 1/2 to 1% of women carrying a singleton pregnancy and 5% of women with multiple pregnancies will have a two-vessel cord.

About 20 to 30% of babies with a single umbilical artery have health problems, including heart, kidney, or digestion problems and genetic conditions. This means that most babies with a single umbilical artery have no health problems.

Girls are thought to be more often affected than boys, though at least one study found that the sex of the baby doesn't have an impact on the risk of the condition.

When a detailed ultrasound of the baby is normal, the chance that the baby has a genetic condition is very low.

There’s no evidence that a two-vessel cord is hereditary.

What causes a two-vessel cord?

Researchers don't quite know what causes a single artery umbilical cord, though they think it happens because the second artery disappears at some point during early pregnancy.

You’re thought to be more at risk if you:

Are Caucasian

Are over 40

Are carrying multiples

Have diabetes or high blood pressure

Smoke

Got pregnant with assisted reproductive technology

Just remember, you can have a two-vessel cord without any of these risk factors.

It’s normal to worry about ultrasounds and other scans, but the What to Expect app has your back with expert info and support from a community of mamas in the same boat.

How is a two-vessel cord diagnosed?

There aren’t any signs or symptoms. A two-vessel cord diagnosis typically occurs during a routine second trimester ultrasound , usually done between 18 and 22 weeks of pregnancy.

Although one artery can certainly perform the job of two and sustain a perfectly healthy pregnancy, your practitioner will likely keep a particularly close eye on your baby's development. Your doctor may recommend further tests, including:

A detailed ultrasound of your baby

Screening tests or diagnostic tests like cell free DNA or amniocentesis to check for genetic conditions such as Down syndrome

An echocardiogram, a special ultrasound that checks your baby’s heart

Extra ultrasounds in the third trimester, to check on your baby’s growth

What risks does a two-vessel cord present?

A single umbilical artery is usually enough to maintain a healthy pregnancy, but there are some concerns, including:

Birth defects. There’s a slightly higher risk that your baby might have a problem with other organ systems such as the heart and kidneys, or chromosomal conditions like Down syndrome.

Pregnancy complications. There’s a possible chance for problems like low birth weight or preterm delivery . But on average, these babies weigh 6.5 pounds and arrive after 38 weeks of pregnancy.

If your doctor doesn’t find any other abnormalities, a two-vessel cord isn’t likely to impact your pregnancy. Your baby is most likely to be born completely healthy.

What to Expect Community parent Aunttef learned her baby-on-board has this exact condition: “They told me the main concern would be the baby's growth, but he’s measuring in the 68th percentile, so she said that doesn’t seem to be a concern currently," she says. "I will go back for another growth scan at 28 weeks.”

After delivery, there is no use for these arteries. They simply shrivel up and waste away. So, all you need to do from here on out is to continue taking good care of yourself and enjoy your pregnancy, keeping it as worry-free as possible.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Fetal Growth Restriction (FGR) in Pregnancy , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Your 20-Week Anatomy Scan: What It Is, What It Checks, and What to Expect , October 2025 WhatToExpect.com, Pregnancy Complications , 2026. Kaiser Permanente, Single Umbilical Artery (SUA) , April 2023. March of Dimes, Umbilical Cord Abnormalities , June 2016. UT Southwestern Medical Center, Helping You Understand Scary (But Often Harmless) Pregnancy Ultrasound Findings , October 2017. UptoDate.com, Single Umbilical Artery , February 2024. American Heart Association, Fetal Echocardiogram Test , September 2023. Mayo Clinic, Placenta: How It Works, What’s Normal , March 2024. National Institutes of Health, National Center for Biotechnology Information, Embryology, Umbilical Cord , January 2025. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Modern Ultrasonography of the Umbilical Cord: Prenatal Diagnosis of Umbilical Cord Abnormalities and Assessment of Fetal Wellbeing , April 2019. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Isolated Single Umbilical Artery: Evaluating the Risk of Adverse Pregnancy Outcome , January 2015. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Estimated Fetal Weight and Birth Weight Associated with Isolated Single Umbilical Artery: The University of Utah Experience , March 2015. Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology, Single Umbilical Artery and Risk of Congenital Malformation: Population-based Study in Norway , May 2019.

Updates history

February 25, 2026

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Rebekah Wahlberg

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

What Is Velamentous Cord Insertion and How Will It Affect My Baby? Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Cord Knots During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Cord Prolapse During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Uterine Blood Clots in Early Pregnancy: Don't Panic Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Can You Have a Vaginal Birth With Twins? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

What Is Subchorionic Bleeding (Hematoma) in Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Should You Delay Cutting Your Baby’s Umbilical Cord? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

What Does It Mean to Have Placenta Previa? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

What to Know About Twin Pregnancy Risks — and How to Stay Ahead of Them Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Placental Abruption During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Butt, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Uterine Rupture During Labor and Delivery Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

What Is Chorionic Villus Sampling (CVS)? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Vaginal Birth or C-Section? What to Know When You’re Expecting Twins Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

What Is a Lotus Birth, and Is It Safe? Here's What Doctors and Parents Say Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

How a Bicornuate Uterus Can Impact Fertility and Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window