Understanding Your 3-Month-Old's Sleep Schedule — and What's Typical Now

Light copy updates and updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

3-month-old baby sleep schedule

Wondering how much sleep a 3-month-old needs? Here's how to start establishing a sleep schedule for your baby.

Your 3-month-old is constantly changing. Not only is he outgrowing diapers and onesies at a furious pace, but his sleep needs are evolving, too. At this age, you may be wondering if a sleep schedule can help your baby get the rest he needs.

Although it's unlikely that a 3-month-old will stick to a predictable schedule, you may start to notice patterns emerging, such as the number of naps your baby takes, how much time he spends sleeping, and when he tends to wake up and falls asleep. Still, your child's daily routine will continue to vary this month. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources

Here's what parents should know about a 3-month-old's sleep schedule, plus how much sleep your baby needs now.

How much should a 3-month-old sleep?

Every baby is different, but a typical 3-month-old needs between 14 and 17 hours of sleep in a 24-hour period, including three to four naps totaling four to six hours. However, it's also normal for 3-month-olds to sleep a little more or less than that. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursNapsSee All Sources [2]

Naps

Your 3-month-old may sleep for longer stretches at night, possibly five hours (or even a bit more) at a time. Don't panic if your little one is up more frequently, though. Some babies still wake to eat every few hours at this stage.

Key Takeaways

Most 3-month-olds need to sleep 14 to 17 hours in 24 hours, with three to four naps totaling four to six hours and longer (but still variable) nighttime stretches.

Schedules are unpredictable at this age, but parents can support healthy sleep by noting wake windows (around 60 to 90 minutes), establishing a calming bedtime routine, and putting your 3-month-old down drowsy but awake.

Night wakings, trouble self-soothing, and fussiness can be normal around the 3-month mark; you can help manage these sleep challenges by maintaining a consistent bedtime routine and engaging in plenty of daytime play with your little one.

Sample sleep schedule for a 3-month-old baby

The best sleep schedule for your 3-month-old ultimately depends on his needs. While your child's routine will probably still be unpredictable at 3 months, a typical day might look like this: Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusBedtime Habits for Infants and ChildrenSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusBedtime Habits for Infants and ChildrenSee All Sources

7:00 a.m.: Awake

8:30 a.m.: Nap

9:30 a.m.: Awake

11:00 a.m.: Nap

12:00 p.m.: Awake

1:30 p.m.: Nap

3:00 p.m.: Awake

4:30 p.m.: Nap

5:30 p.m.: Awake

6:30 p.m.: Bedtime routine

7:00 p.m.: Bed

This sample schedule assumes your little one is awake for around 90 minutes at time and naps for about one-hour stretches throughout the day. However, keep in mind that babies at this age can stay awake for 60 to 90 minutes at a time, while naps can last between 30 minutes and two hours. Trusted SourceStanford MedicineInfant SleepSee All Sources [4]

Infant Sleep

Can you sleep train a 3-month-old?

The term sleep training refers to different ways of teaching your baby to sleep through the night. If you're considering sleep training, keep in mind that many experts recommend waiting until your baby is 4 to 6 months old.

3-month-old sleep tips

Your baby is still too young to have regular sleep cycles at 3 months old. However, a few strategies can help teach him healthy sleep habits.

Play with your baby during the day. Although your 3-month-old will still spend much of the day napping, playing with him when he is awake will help him learn how to differentiate between day and night. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicBaby Naps: Daytime Sleep TipsSee All Sources [5]

Stick to a routine. If you haven't already established a bedtime routine , now is a good time to do so. A calming, consistent end-of-day routine (think giving baby a bath, listening to music, and reading a book) signals that it's time to sleep. "I am also a mama to a 3-month-old," says What to Expect Community user Andrea6P. "We do a simple sleep routine, change, PJs, clean face and hands, lotion, light on with ocean waves, eat, and sleep."

Observe your baby's sleep tendencies. Your baby may now have a preferred bedtime. To help him wind down, aim to start his routine 30 minutes or so before that time.

Try to put your baby to bed when he's drowsy. Placing your baby in his crib when he's drowsy but not yet asleep helps him learn how to drift off on his own.

Put your baby to sleep in the same place. Sometimes your baby will fall asleep on the go, but try to offer his crib for naps as much as possible.

3-month-old baby sleep problems

Sleep problems can happen even when parents do everything "right." These are a few of the more common ones you may encounter at this age:

Your baby won't go back to sleep. When you enter your baby's room to feed or change him during the night, keep the lights off and do your best not to stimulate him too much.

Your baby struggles to fall asleep on his own. Continue putting your baby to bed drowsy but awake . Holding or rocking him until he's asleep can make it harder for him to learn how to go back to sleep on his own if he wakes up during the night.

Your baby often fusses in the night. Wait a few minutes before you respond and see if he can go back to sleep on his own. If he doesn't, check on him, but don't pick him up or turn on the light. Continued fussing may be a sign that he's hungry, needs a diaper change, or isn't feeling well.

Your baby doesn't want to go to bed. More frequent night wakings and trouble falling asleep might indicate a sleep regression . Although sleep regressions can happen at any time, the first regression often occurs between 3 and 4 months . Be diligent about your child's bedtime routine and make sure your little one has plenty of opportunities to nap during the day, since it's even harder to get an overtired baby to fall asleep at night.

Your baby wants constant nighttime feedings. At 3 months, your baby will probably still need to eat once or twice during the night. But three or four nighttime feedings usually aren't necessary at this age. Make sure your baby is getting plenty to eat during the day and maybe try a dream feed . (And don't put cereal or other solids in your little one's bottle. It won't help him sleep longer, and it's a choking risk.) Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCereal in a Bottle: Solid Food Shortcuts to AvoidSee All Sources [6]

Teething pain is keeping your baby up. Some babies show signs of teething as early as 3 months. If you suspect that your baby is teething, stick to your bedtime routine and try to calm him when you go into his room at night by patting his back or singing him lullabies. You can also talk to your pediatrician about trying acetaminophen if he's really uncomfortable. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsTeething Pain Relief: How to Soothe Your Baby's DiscomfortSee All Sources [7]

Having trouble setting up a consistent sleep routine? The What to Expect app has tons of tips to help figure out the right sleep schedule for your baby as he gets older, plus a community of parents who have been there.

Bottom line? Don't worry if your 3-month-old isn't following a predictable sleep schedule just yet. Establishing healthy habits takes time, but these strategies will help set your baby (and you!) up for better sleep going forward.

More sleep schedules for babies: