Unsafe Foods to Avoid at Restaurants While You're Pregnant

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Rows of hot dogs with mustard on blue background

Good nutrition is almost always on the menu — though in some restaurants, you'll have to look a little more closely to find it.

Truth: eating out — or ordering in — can feel a bit fraught with a baby on board. You really want to dine safely, but that triple-decker turkey sandwich (with Brie!) is calling your name. To help, we’ve got a handy list of what to avoid as well as good-for-you options to focus on when you’re scanning a restaurant menu. Here’s to eating out (and no dishes!).

Whether you're anticipating a special occasion reservation or ordering some spur-of-the-moment takeout, here's how to cater the menu to you and your baby's best interests when dining out.

Key Takeaways

Memorize the no-nos. For the safest meal, skip high-mercury seafood, unpasteurized foods, deli meats, and raw or undercooked meat and fish.

Order wisely. Opt for grilled proteins, whole grain dishes, and lots of veggies. And don’t be afraid to ask for a substitution or modification to your pick (unless the restaurant specifically says it won't do substitutions).

Eat mindfully. A baby on board can mean heartburn for some, as well as feeling fuller faster, so nosh slowly and take home leftovers if you need to.

Which foods should you avoid when eating at restaurants during pregnancy?

Alas, there are some specific items and food categories you should avoid right now. As a refresher, steer clear of these foods and beverages during pregnancy :

Alcoholic drinks

Unpasteurized dairy

Raw or seared seafood

Rare or undercooked meat

Hot dogs

Deli meat

Raw or undercooked eggs

High-mercury fish

Raw sprouts

But cravings can be all-too real when you’re pregnant, as What to Expect Community parent mbbruns discovered. “I am craving cream cheese lol. My usual go-to is deli ham with cream cheese rolled around a pickle. Trying to avoid deli meat.”

Got more menu questions? Download the What to Expect app for expert-backed advice on what’s good to eat and drink these next nine months. You’ve got this, mama!

How can you make eating out more pregnancy-friendly?

Don’t despair — you can definitely eat healthy at restaurants and when ordering in. Get the most out of your meal by following these dining tips when you're pregnant:

Choose the restaurant

You may not always have the opportunity, but seize it when you do. (Cash in the "I'm pregnant" chip when you can!) Certain restaurants better suit pregnant clientele than others. A Mediterranean spot with lots of grilled veggies and fish, good — a sushi bar with limited cooked options, not so much.

If heartburn or other tummy troubles have your meal options limited to the bland, blander, and blandest, you may want to skip the restaurant that prides itself on its spicy food or one that fries everything.

Speak up about special requests

Wait staff and chefs in most establishments are used to substitutions and requests of all kinds. Ask for the Cobb without blue cheese or see if the rare duck breast can be cooked through. Don't be shy. You're pregnant — it's okay to request food that's safe for you to eat. (Just keep in mind that not all restaurants will be willing or able to accommodate your requests, and have a backup plan ready.)

Go for greens and beans

Make a habit of ordering a salad or grilled veggies as your first course or a sautéed leafy green such as spinach, escarole, or broccoli as an extra. Even fast-food restaurants offer healthy side dishes these days. Steamed veggies, a baked potato (instead of fries or onion rings), or yams are all super sides.

If there's lentil, bean, or vegetable soup on the menu, ask for a bowlful. Same goes for tomato-based broths — another opportunity to get in some veggies!

Search out nutrient-packed entrees

Scan the menu for protein-packed mains — like grilled or braised fish, chicken, veal, or lean beef, tofu, lentils, and beans — plus nutritious whole grains — such as brown rice, quinoa, bulgar, barley, and buckwheat — that will keep you energized past lunch.

Don't forget about healthy dips and condiments like fresh salsa, guacamole, tzatziki, hummus, or baba ganoush to go with your dish!

Save your leftovers

Many restaurants serve entrée portions large enough to feed small villages. Because pregnant women are especially prone to indigestion or heartburn, keep tabs on when you feel full and ask your server for a container to save any leftovers for tomorrow's lunch or dinner.