Vaginal Birth or C-Section? What to Know When You’re Expecting Twins

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"I'm 20 weeks pregnant with twins. Will I be able to deliver vaginally? I really don't want a C-section."

When it comes to being pregnant with twins , you get two for the laboring price of one (and take it from someone who's labored twice — that's not a bad deal).

But while you'll be laboring only once, you'll be delivering twice — and it's probably anyone's guess at this point which delivery route your babies will take.

Right now, your chances of delivering twins vaginally are 50-50 (which means that your chances of having a C-section are also 50-50), according to Lamaze International . While there’s no way to predict with certainty which camp you'll fall in, certain things can influence how your delivery ends up going.

Key-Takeaways

Your delivery plan with twins depends on many moving parts. Factors like baby positions, the number of placentas, and size differences (to name a few) all play a major role in whether you'll have a vaginal birth or a C-section.

Head-down Baby A boosts your chances of a vaginal birth. But both babies' positions can shift even late in the game, which means plans may change too.

The safest delivery is always the right delivery. As you get closer to 37 weeks, your provider will walk you through likely scenarios so you can feel prepared — no matter which route your little duo takes.

How your twins make their way into the world will depend on many factors that will ultimately determine which mode of delivery is safest for both you and your babies, including:

How are the babies positioned? If both babies are head-down — and twins are this cooperative only 40 percent of the time — chances are good that your practitioner will attempt a vaginal birth (assuming all other factors are favorable). But if both babies haven't settled into that best of all possible birthing positions (one's head-down and one's breech , or both are breech, or both are sideways, for instance), their route to the outside world is more likely to be a surgical one. That said, things could change in the weeks or days leading up to delivery, which is what happened for What to Expect Community mom Becca-K. “I had a vaginal delivery for my twins. Baby A was breech a few weeks before delivery, but I visited my chiropractor who is familiar with the Webster technique and baby A flipped head down the night before my last ultrasound,” she recalls.

How is the twin closest to the cervix positioned? If the baby in that key position is breech or sideways, chances are you'll need a C-section. But if that baby is head-down, there's a greater chance a vaginal birth can be tried.

How is the second twin positioned? If your first twin is delivered vaginally, the second twin has an excellent shot at taking that route too, especially if she is head-down (and remember, that path will already have been broken in, so to speak, making it easier to travel). If the second twin is sideways or breech, your practitioner may attempt to 1) turn twin two to a head-down position after delivery of her sibling, 2) attempt a breech delivery, or 3) opt for a C-section (which would mean you'd actually end up having both a vaginal and a cesarean delivery — something that fortunately rarely happens). What to Expect Community mom mm3121 experienced the first scenario with her twins. “When I delivered, my doctor actually did an internal version to turn baby B because she was transverse. I was then able to deliver baby B head down also. I did have some pretty bad tears, but it was still worth it for me.”

Are both twins the same size? If there's a big size difference between your babies, your practitioner may opt for a C-section to ensure the safety of the smaller twin.

Is there one placenta or two? If your twins share a placenta, you'll probably have a C-section. That's because delivering the placenta after the birth of the first baby but before the birth of the second would be very dangerous.

Once delivery draws closer (and keep in mind that it'll probably draw closer faster for you than for a mom expecting a single baby, since term for twins is considered 37 weeks), you'll have a chance to talk over the various delivery scenarios with your practitioner and discuss the odds of having the vaginal birth you're hoping for.

Need more support as you prep for delivery day? The What to Expect app offers expert info, community wisdom, and resources made just for expecting parents of twins.

But as you do, remember that the best route your babies can take to your welcoming arms is the safest one.

Wishing you the safest delivery (and happy cuddling afterward!),

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Can You Have a Vaginal Birth With Twins? , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Ultrasound During Pregnancy , July 2023. WhatToExpect.com, What Are the Possible Fetal Positions When You're Pregnant With Twins? , October 2025. American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists, Multiple Pregnancy , May 2025. American College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists, If Your Baby Is Breech , November 2024. Lamaze International, Giving Birth to Twins – Vaginal or Cesarean? , August 2022. Mayo Clinic, Twin Pregnancy: Getting Ready for Twins or Multiples , December 2024. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office on Women’s Health, Twins, Triplets and Other Multiples , September 2025.

Updates history

December 11, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

What Our Community Is Talking About

Twin delivery

How many weeks did you start to notice a bump?

When did your twins arrive?

There are 17,727 active discussions happening now in our Multiples and Twins community group.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Can You Have a Vaginal Birth With Twins? Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

What Are the Possible Fetal Positions When You're Pregnant With Twins? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

What to Know About Twin Pregnancy Risks — and How to Stay Ahead of Them Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Twin Pregnancy Myths, Busted: What’s Really True When You’re Expecting Two Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Twins on the Way? Here’s When They’ll Likely Make Their Debut Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

What Are Your Chances of Having Twins? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Expecting Two? Here Are 10 Surprising Facts About Twins Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

Having a C-Section? Here’s What You Should Know Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Here's How Your Body Changes After Having Twins or Multiples Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Having a Vaginal Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

A Mom's Guide to a Hospital Birth Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Curious About Different Types of Birth? Here are 5 Real-Life Videos to Help You Prepare Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

What to Know About Having a Vaginal Birth After Cesarean (VBAC) Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

What Happens During a Natural Birth? Here’s What to Know Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Breech Baby: What It Means, Why It Happens, and Your Options Before Delivery Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window