Vaginal Discharge During Pregnancy: What's Normal and What's Not

Light copy updates, updates to sources, and fact-checked for accuracy.

vaginal discharge

Here's how to cope with leukorrhea, the harmless vaginal discharge that you'll have instead of your period for these nine months of pregnancy.

Vaginal discharge is certainly nothing new. But if you’re trying to conceive or think you could be pregnant, you might be wondering whether changes in vaginal discharge are an early sign you’re expecting.

Known as leukorrhea, an increase in vaginal discharge can be an early sign of pregnancy — although some changes in vaginal discharge can be attributed to other things too.

Key Takeaways

Leukorrhea is vaginal discharge many moms-to-be notice early in pregnancy. This discharge is thin, milky-white, mild-smelling, often increases over time, and is usually normal.

During pregnancy, hormonal shifts boost discharge , which clears dead cells, protects against infection, and supports healthy vaginal bacteria.

Normal discharge during pregnancy is thin and white. Check in with your doctor if you notice lumpy, foul-smelling, colored, itchy, painful, or very watery discharge, since this could signal an infection.

What is leukorrhea or pregnancy discharge?

Leukorrhea is the medicalese term for the thin, milky white, and mild-smelling (sometimes odorless) vaginal discharge that many women first experience in early pregnancy.

The amount will likely increase as your pregnancy progresses. Leukorrhea is similar to the vaginal discharge you might experience between periods, only heavier. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsVulvovaginal HealthSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsVulvovaginal HealthSee All Sources

"Something that’s not talked about often enough is the amount of discharge," says What to Expect Community mom chellyyybeannn. "In a typical cycle you have only a week of it, but with pregnancy it’s ALL the time."

What causes leukorrhea during pregnancy?

When you’re expecting, an increase in estrogen levels causes increased blood flow to the pelvic area. More blood flow stimulates the body's mucous membranes, leading to an increase in vaginal discharge in early pregnancy and beyond.

And it has an important purpose: Pregnancy discharge removes dead cells from the vagina, protects the birth canal from infection, and maintains a healthy balance of bacteria in the vagina.

Is white vaginal discharge normal during pregnancy?

Thin, white vaginal discharge is normal and healthy throughout your entire pregnancy. However it could be a sign of an infection if it's lumpy or thick, especially if it's accompanied by other symptoms (like itching or a fishy odor). Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Bacterial Vaginosis (BV)See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionAbout Bacterial Vaginosis (BV)See All Sources

You may also notice your vaginal discharge is brown or pink. In early pregnancy, that could be implantation bleeding. Later on, vaginal spotting during pregnancy (not heavy bleeding) is also most often normal, especially if it appears after sex or a pelvic exam. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBleeding During PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBleeding During PregnancySee All Sources

Since "normal" vaginal discharge is different for everyone, you can keep track of any changes in the What to Expect app . But if you’re concerned, don’t hesitate to check in with your doctor.

What is early pregnancy discharge?

Early pregnancy discharge is vaginal discharge that comes early in pregnancy. It's completely normal, since early pregnancy is typically when you'll first notice leukorrhea.

Tips on what to do about vaginal discharge when you're pregnant

Having vaginal discharge is normal during pregnancy, just as it's typical when you're not pregnant. To stay healthy and avoid infections when pregnant, keep these tips in mind:

Bathe regularly and wear underpants with breathable cotton liners. Keeping clean and dry down there helps keep bacteria in balance and prevent vaginal infections. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsVaginitisSee All Sources [4]

Wear pads or panty liners, if discharge bothers you . These absorb excess discharge and may help you feel more comfortable. Skip the tampons, which can introduce germs into your vagina.

Leave the douches at the drugstore. Douching has not been shown to be safe in pregnancy and should be avoided completely. It can also upset the natural balance of microorganisms in your vagina and lead to bacterial vaginosis.

Don't bother with wipes . Your vagina is self-cleaning! Wipes could change the pH in your genital tract, increasing risk of infection. If you absolutely have to have that "clean feeling," choose wipes that are pH-safe and free of alcohol and chemicals.

When to call the doctor about vaginal discharge during pregnancy

Call your practitioner if:

Your discharge is yellowish, greenish, blood-tinged, or thick and cheesy

Your vagina has a foul or fishy odor

The inside of your vagina and/or your vulva burns or itches

It burns when you urinate

Sex is painful

You may have an infection (like a pregnancy-induced yeast infection or bacterial vaginosis), possibly linked to a change in the balance of yeast and bacteria in the vagina. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCandidiasisSee All Sources [5] Your doctor can prescribe a treatment, such as antifungal medication or antibiotics, to restore the proper balance down there and clear up your symptoms.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCandidiasisSee All Sources

Abnormal vaginal discharge may also be a sign of sexually transmitted diseases such as chlamydia, gonorrhea, or trichomoniasis, all of which require rapid diagnosis and treatment of you and your partner.

You'll also want to get in touch with your clinician if you notice excessive watery discharge (a possible sign of leaking amniotic fluid ).

But while pregnancy discharge can make a mess of your underwear, rest assured that it’s most often perfectly normal and has the noble duty of protecting you and your baby. And if it is something more, a visit to your doctor will get you the answers and treatment you need.