Varicose Veins During Pregnancy

varicose veins pregnancy

Varicose veins during pregnancy are relatively common, and usually painless and harmless — and after delivery they'll shrink along with the rest of you.

Varicose veins are the large, swollen blood vessels found predominantly in the legs, but that can show up almost anywhere in the lower half of your body — even your rectum or vulva. In fact, hemorrhoids are nothing more than varicose veins in the area around your rectum — but at least you don't have to look at those.

When they swell above the surface of the skin, they create those distinctive purplish lumps that look alarming but are quite harmless and fairly common, affecting up to 40 percent of pregnant women, according to some research. They’re different from spider veins or visible veins, which are usually smaller and minus the bulge — another side effect of pregnancy.

When do varicose veins start to appear during pregnancy?

Varicose veins can develop anytime during your pregnancy, but they tend to get larger and more pronounced as you get bigger. After birth, they'll recede, and you’re likely to look like your pre-pregnant self again.

What causes varicose veins during pregnancy?

The extra volume of blood you produce during pregnancy is essential to support two growing bodies. It does, however, put extra pressure on your blood vessels — especially the veins in your legs, which have to work against gravity to push all that extra blood back up to your heart.

Add to that weight gain and the pressure your burgeoning uterus puts on your pelvic blood vessels, and the vessel-relaxing effects of the extra progesterone your body is producing, and you have a recipe for varicose veins.

What can I do about varicose veins when I'm pregnant?

There are some tricks you can try that may help minimize any varicose veins that make an appearance while you're expecting, or at least keep them under control. And remember, not all women experience this symptom, so you may be one of the lucky ones. But if they do pop up, here are some possible remedies and tips:

Keep your blood flowing. Get off your feet whenever you can, and keep your legs elevated when sitting. When standing, put one foot on a low stool and alternate legs. Flex your ankles every so often, and break the habit of sitting with your legs crossed. Bonus: This strategy also helps keep spider veins at bay.

Get moving. Exercise is key in preventing varicose veins — so take a walk or two each day, or do some other form of low-key, circulation-increasing exercises. Research suggests moving around in water is especially helpful, so if you can get to the local pool, go for it!

Keep it comfy. Make sure you wear clothes — including underwear — that fit well and don't bind, especially around the tops of your legs. Don't wear tight belts or socks with tight elastic tops, and stay away from tight-fitting shoes and stiletto heels (as if you could balance in them anyway).

Cinch it in. One kind of tight that can feel helpful: support hose, which can counteract the downward pressure of your belly and give the veins in your legs a little extra upward push. While there’s no research that supports compression hose as a fix for varicose veins, they can provide temporary relief. Okay, they’re not exactly sexy — but putting them on before you get out of bed in the morning helps prevent the blood from pooling.

Gain pregnancy weight steadily. Follow your practitioner's recommendations for weight gain during pregnancy . Exceeding that number increases the demands on your already overworked circulatory system.

Sleep on your left side. This helps avoid pressure on your main blood vessels and keep circulation going strong.

Don't strain. Heavy lifting or straining on the toilet — if you’re feeling that other fun pregnancy symptom , constipation — can add to vein visibility. Remember, hemorrhoids are just varicose veins in the rectum.

Get your daily dose of vitamins. A balanced pregnancy diet can help keep your veins healthy. Make sure to eat lots of foods with vitamin C , which your body uses to produce collagen and elastin, connective tissues that repair and maintain blood vessels.

Can I prevent varicose veins during pregnancy?

Maybe, but don't count on it. Some people believe that wearing compression socks , exercising and elevating your feet can all prevent varicose veins, but they're not surefire ways to avoid this particular pregnancy symptom. The above-mentioned tips and remedies are definitely worth a try, though, and may help the situation.

When can I expect my varicose veins to go away?

You may not like the way varicose veins look, and they may itch or ache, but they're unlikely to put either you or your baby at any risk. The good news is that in most cases, if you didn't have them before you got pregnant, your varicose veins will shrink or disappear altogether within a few months after you give birth.

The not-so-good news? If you have another baby, there's no way of preventing varicose veins that time around (the same veins are likely to pop out again). And like many other pregnancy symptoms — including stretch marks — varicose veins tend to be hereditary, so if your mother had them during pregnancy, you're more likely to have them, too.

When should I call the doctor about varicose veins during pregnancy?

As soon as you notice them. Because there is a general association between varicose veins and the risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT), or blood clots, that isn't just in pregnancy, be sure your health care provider is aware of your condition.

Last thought: If your varicose veins don't go away after the baby has arrived, you can think about having them medically treated or surgically removed then, just not during pregnancy. Try to be patient and remember that there's a good chance they'll become less noticeable or disappear entirely at some point after you give birth.