Wait, Can I Actually Go on Rides? The Truth About Amusement Parks and Pregnancy

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Toy roller coaster with colorful cars

Thinking about hopping on a ride with your baby-to-be? Here's what's safe, what to skip, and how to safely enjoy the amusement park.

A trip to the amusement park can be fun, but be cautious about rides while you're pregnant. At the very least, skip rides that are jerky, stop and start suddenly, or have moving platforms. Follow posted warnings, trust your instincts, and opt for gentle rides or other activities, such as games.

You're already having the ride of your life — it's called pregnancy — but if that's not enough to satisfy your sense of adventure, here's the scoop on amusement parks.

Key Takeaways

Skip high-thrill rides during pregnancy. Roller coasters and rides with sudden starts, stops, or jerky motions haven't been proven safe and could put stress on your abdomen, potentially increasing the risk of pregnancy complications.

Choose safer, low-impact activities. Stick to gentler attractions, games, or relaxed park activities — especially since your balance and coordination can already be affected by pregnancy (not to mention the nausea!).

When in doubt, play it safe. Follow posted warnings and trust your instincts. If you’ve already gone on a ride, don’t panic — just mention it to your health care practitioner for reassurance.

Should I go to the amusement park while I'm pregnant?

There's no need to skip your day at the park, but you might want to consider keeping things more chill than thrill.

Even early in pregnancy, moms-to-be should use discretion when it comes to rides. While there isn't clear scientific evidence that roller coasters and other high-speed rides are harmful during pregnancy, they haven't been proven completely safe, either.

"I'm going with a group of friends and having a friend ride the rides with my kids," says What to Expect Community mom ObsidiousOstrich. "I'm not going to chance anything."

Which amusement park rides should I avoid?

It's wise to avoid rides with rapid starts and stops or jarring motions, which could place excess pressure on your abdomen and may increase the risk of complications such as placental abruption . Not to mention, some rides are enough to make anyone hurl, morning sickness aside. That's why parks and fairs display warning signs on more intense rides, advising pregnant women not to ride.

"I did feel pretty motion sick after like two rides, and standing and waiting in line wasn't very fun," says What to Expect Community mom nora71301, who went on some tame waterslides with her toddler when she was pregnant.

Depending on how far along you are — and how steady you feel — rides that require stepping onto moving platforms or navigating lots of steps could prove tricky these days, no matter how tame they seem.

"If it felt too extreme for me or if the lap bar was falling on my belly instead of my lap, I chose not to ride," says Community mom dakotaongman.

What can I do at the amusement park?

Instead of hopping on those knuckle-whitening, gravity-defying rides that take you from zero to 60 in seconds, you'd be smart to stay in the slow lane. Try your luck in the arcade or game booths, or opt for gentler rides, though even some mild ones may still be worth skipping.

"I wouldn't go on anything more than the kiddie rides," says Community mom dks92929. "Seems like too much worry for me, lol."

The bottom line: Pay attention to the park's warning signs and trust your instincts. If you're unsure about a ride, it's safest to sit it out. There will be plenty of opportunities to enjoy those thrills again — next year and for years to come with your child. Besides, isn't pregnancy action-packed enough on its own?

By the way, if you already went for a spin on the corkscrew coaster, don't panic — just keep your practitioner up to speed on what you've been doing.

Connect with other moms-to-be with similar interests, get more expert advice, and track your pregnancy journey on the What to Expect app .

Here's to an exciting pregnancy!