Walking for Two: How This Simple Workout Helps You (and Baby!) Stay Healthy

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Pregnancy and Fitness

Walking is easy on the knees, ankles, and back — plus it’s free! Here’s why walking during pregnancy, even right up to your due date, is so beneficial.

For most pregnant women, exercising while expecting definitely gets the green light. And one of the easiest ways to do it is to simply lace up your sneakers and head outside. Brisk walking during pregnancy is a great low-impact exercise that benefits both you and baby.

Always check with your doctor before starting a new exercise routine, but know that in general, nearly every parent-to-be can walk safely during pregnancy. Here’s more about what you’ll gain from this activity and how to do it during each trimester.

Key Takeaways

Walking for the win. This low-impact, safe exercise option is one of the best ways to workout while pregnant (just get the okay from your doctor first).

So. many. benefits. If you’d like better sleep, a sunnier mood, less back pain, and eased constipation, walking is definitely for you.

Be smart out there. Always take breaks, stay hydrated, and wear solid sneakers. And if you feel dizzy, short of breath, or have pain, stop and check in with your doctor.

Is it safe to walk during pregnancy?

Yes, it’s safe to walk during pregnancy. In fact, if your condition is considered low-risk, getting regular exercise while expecting is an excellent way to maintain overall health. As for gauging how much walking is safe in any trimester, you can use the recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as a good guideline:

Pregnant and postpartum women should strive to complete about 30 minutes of exercise a day for five days a week, such as brisk walking, swimming, yoga, or cycling on a stationary bike. And if you were an avid runner before you conceived, you can continue to hit the road with this more intense program as long as your doctor gives you the okay.

If you’ve got more workout questions, the What to Expect app is your trusted source for expert advice and tips from a supportive Community.

What are the benefits of walking during pregnancy?

The benefits of exercise during pregnancy are plentiful! Here’s why it’s important to walk during pregnancy for good health, both now and in the postpartum period:

Reduced risk of complications. Doing regular, moderate activity can lower your risk of both gestational diabetes and preeclampsia .

A boosted mood. When you work out, your body releases feel-good endorphins, potentially easing any stress or anxiety you may feel.

Less back pain and constipation. Want less lower back and pelvic discomfort ? Walking can help. You’ll also ease a case of constipation if you keep on walking (or swimming or stretching).

Enhanced overall fitness. A stronger heart and blood vessels, plus more stamina and better fitness, are your reward for those sweat sessions.

Better sleep. Working out can improve sleep quality and help you wake up feeling refreshed.

Healthy weight gain. Steadily adding the recommended pounds for your particular pregnancy is important — and regular exercise (like walking!) can help you do it.

Faster post-birth recovery. A strong, healthy body is an asset during labor, of course, and once your baby arrives you may also enjoy a quicker postpartum recovery.

Can you walk too much during pregnancy?

You can certainly overdo any physical activity during pregnancy, whether it’s hyper-extending your joints in a prenatal yoga class or pushing yourself too hard in the lap pool. Even walking too much in pregnancy can incur potential risks, such as shortness of breath, strain, and pain.

When you’re exercising, you should be able to carry on a conversation — but if you can’t, then you’re working too hard. Walking for hours at a time can also yield uncomfortable side effects like blisters or sore muscles.

Be sure to pace yourself and periodically gauge how you are feeling. It’s fine to shorten your stroll or do some light stretching in place of your regular routine — and skip a workout when your body calls for it (you’re in charge!).

What to Expect Community parent shortcourttt is modifying her workouts as her pregnancy progresses. “I’ll prioritize walking more and cut back on my strength training days because walking feels better for my body and energy levels,” she says.

How to walk safely during pregnancy

No matter how far along you are, always listen to your body when you're walking for exercise in pregnancy . Here’s what you need to know at each stage along the way:

First trimester

As you start walking in the first trimester, keep a water bottle handy for hydration, wear sturdy sneakers, and don layers of clothing to shed as you warm up. Go slowly and split your workouts into shorter ones, or build up from a few minutes a day until you’re ready for a full half hour.

Second trimester

Don’t forget to warm up first as well as cool down, such as walking at a slower pace or trying simple stretches. But refrain from lying on your back to stretch your quads. This position puts pressure on the vena cava, an important vein that carries blood to your heart from the lower body parts.

Third trimester

When walking during your third trimester, know that your burgeoning belly can affect your balance. As your pregnancy progresses, watch for signs of dizziness and clumsiness due to any overexertion or fatigue, and ease up on your walking workout as needed.

When to talk to your doctor

Seek immediate help if you experience any uterine contractions or you feel fluid leaking from your vagina. But don’t ignore other warning signs that you’re working too hard. Symptoms that require a call to the doctor include:

Dizziness

Feeling faint

Pain in your chest

Headache

Muscle weakness

Calf pain or swelling

As workouts go, walking is a great exercise when you’re pregnant. You can pop outside any time, whether you’re taking a break from home life or getting some fresh air during your lunch break at work.

Start off slowly if you’re new to exercise, and then work up to longer outings. And don't hesitate to check in with your doctor if something feels off or you have a question about exercising while pregnant.