Want a Good Laugh? Moms Share 17 Hilarious (and Slightly Cringey) Pregnancy Moments

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Most embarrassing pregnancy moments

Pregnancy: oh, the joy, the tears ... and the embarrassment. Here, 17 moms share their most mortifying pregnancy moments.

Pregnancy comes with its fair share of crazy symptoms . Some of them are amazing ( hello, gorgeous hair !). Some of them you will look forward to never having again (sorry, morning sickness). And some of them are, well, just awkward.

And that's not to mention all the other (shall we say) cringey pregnancy memories you and your baby bump are bound to make together along the way.

These What to Expect Community moms-to-be had the best reactions to the ups and downs that are a normal part of growing a beautiful new baby: They had a good laugh, knowing they’re not alone and it’s only temporary.

Read on as 17 moms share their most hilarious and embarrassing pregnancy moments.

Key Takeaways

Pregnancy = awkwardness. Yup, embarrassing moments are par for the course when you’re expecting (think farts, tumbles, spills, and more).

Lean into the humor. If you don’t laugh about it, you just might cry, so try to see the funny side of these pregnancy mishaps.

Everyone goes through it. You are definitely not the only pregnant mama who’s had these mortifying moments — share your stories and you’ll feel a whole lot better.

1. Can’t a pregnant mama catch a break?

“After a long week at work, I had to make a trip to Costco. My feet were so swollen and tired that I opted to take one of those electric carts (totally embarrassing). When I was trying to grab a veggie tray, my cart bumped the display and an avalanche of veggies came pouring down all over me. I was mortified!” — purpura1

2. Not just another day at the office

“I was 30 weeks pregnant at work and thought I was experiencing contractions. My coworkers called the ambulance, and I had to be shuffled to labor and delivery. It turns out I was having pains due to constipation …one of those moments when you put your palm to your face.” — dorkydorkette

3. Heads up!

“I’m a fourth-grade teacher and today when I was walking between the kids’ desks, I totally smacked a boy in the back of the head with my belly.” — ex1tedm0m

4. Bumping it forward

“I was in an elevator and it got crowded, and the director got on and somehow my bump rubbed her booty (she's really tall and had on heels!). There was an awkward glance, and there has been every time she sees me!” — MrsDRob

Looking for more pregnancy laughs? Download the What to Expect app for a Community of moms who’ve seen it all, plus find expert tips and comforting advice.

5. A tight fit

“I squeezed in between my car and another car in a parking lot and got wedged between the mirrors.” — Firsttimemummyaus

6. Now that’s true love

"The other day I said to my husband, 'Is there anything sadder than a pregnant woman putting on pants?' His reply? 'Yeah, honey, there is. I just watched you put on underwear.' I had to laugh!" — ABD6677

7. It’s nice to meet you, Mrs. Clumsy

“I’m 24 weeks pregnant , and my husband and I just moved. We are trying to make new couple friends. Tonight a couple invited us to go on a walk, so we joined them with our dogs. We were standing in a circle talking. I stepped back, rolled my ankle and TOPPLED over!!! I am so clumsy now!” — ellekrand

What to Expect Community parent bri24det admits to clumsiness too. “I’m constantly spilling things and making more work for myself and bending over or squatting is the last thing I want to do!”

8. Oh, the shame

“I farted at work! Ugh, I’m so embarrassed! I thought it’d be silent, but nope. It was like, ‘Blurp, hello world!’ When I realized that other people must have heard it, I had to text my boyfriend, best friends, and sisters. They all laughed, of course, but said to just own it and excuse myself next time. At least I can pull the pregnancy card!” — moonmama2be

9. Hormonal holiday

“I cried when my mom and stepdad got me dishes for Christmas. I was upset because I liked my dishes. I started to bawl my eyes out and sobbed, ‘I am so offended right now!’ I have no idea where it came from…Needless to say, I actually do like the dishes they gave me. I just don’t know why, but it felt like they killed my cat or something.” — B3ccabutt

10. The joy of pregnancy sex

“Mid-act, I accidentally farted. I couldn’t stop laughing. Thankfully my significant other and I are extremely comfortable with each other. We both laid there laughing for a good five minutes. Safe to say, it ruined the moment but made for a good story.” — Firsttimemomma3

11. Just when you need to rest those feet …

“I sat down and popped a screw out of the chair. That’s how chairs get murdered.” — betsyws

12. For better, for worse

“Constipation leads me to very smelly farts. My husband makes fun of me all the time. He opens the windows and asks for help!” — emclean85

13. Bathroom break

“I broke the toilet seat! I always lean to the left to wipe, which is ridiculously inconvenient because it’s sooooo hard for me to reach, and the toilet seat cracked in half! And I'm not even that heavy!” — May2016Boy

14. Chain reaction

“I was in the middle of a grocery store, and they were handing out samples of egg rolls. I popped one in my mouth and apparently some crumb went down the wrong pipe or something. It sent me into a coughing frenzy and I peed myself — a lot.” — mhaugh2016

15. Genius move

“I was on a four-plus-hour road trip with only my two young boys, a 2- and 1-year-old. I pulled off the highway at a rest stop because I had to go so badly, but they were both sound asleep… So I used one of their diapers to sit on and just peed in my driver’s seat. It was so bittersweet… Yay, pregnancy problems!” — mo3angels

16. Playful payback

“My husband and I were taking our dog out for a walk, and I started making fun of his outfit. I laughed so hard I peed myself. The worst part was that I was wearing a dress so it came down my legs and I couldn’t stop laughing. It was gross, but hilarious!” — karenlizeht

17. Let's dance

“I coughed and peed myself while we were on vacation. I got up off the couch before it went anywhere and my husband was sitting right next to me. I had to pass in front of him to get to my luggage, and he reached up and grabbed my butt. I did a weird dance thing to get away from him, swatted his hand, and yelped. He had no idea what was going on until I told him I had peed myself….Of all the times to get frisky!” — LittleHouseInTheHills

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

Updates history

December 15, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

21 Moms Share the Most Ridiculous Reasons They Cried When They Were Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Moms Are Sharing Their Craziest Pregnancy Symptoms, and Some of Them Are Truly Wild Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Laughing, Crying, Cleaning the Window Sills? 11 Pregnancy Emotions You May Have When You're Expecting Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

10 Funny Pregnancy Announcements That Are Sure to Amuse Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

7 Photos Every Pregnant Mom Needs — Because You'll Regret Not Taking Them Later Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

15 Moms on What Labor Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Surprise Pregnancy Announcements to Drop Your Unexpected Baby News Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The Best Quotes About Twins and Multiples — From Laugh-Out-Loud Funny to Super Sweet Fact Checked by Lisa Lombardi, Contributing Writer/Editor

Stuck on What to Say? 50 Pregnancy Announcement Captions for Every Kind of Reveal Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

12 Cute Pregnancy Announcements to Celebrate Your Bundle of Joy Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Hope, Heartbreak … Then Joy: The Emotional Moments IVF Moms Will Never Forget Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window