Warning Signs of Postpartum Complications You Shouldn't Ignore

Formatting changes, a check on text, fact-checked, and medically reviewed for accuracy.

postpartum warning signs and tips, woman in hospital holding newborn baby

From fever or bad headache to extremely heavy bleeding, these are the postpartum symptoms you shouldn't ignore — they could be warning signs of a more serious condition.

There’s a lot going on in those first few hazy days and weeks after giving birth: You’re recovering from childbirth, caring for your newborn around the clock, and trying to figure out this whole new-parent thing, all while functioning on very little sleep. But during this time, it's critical to also be aware of your own body, and that includes looking out for any symptoms of possible postpartum complications.

The first six weeks after having a baby, also known as the 4th trimester , are a major recovery period that come with a range of postpartum symptoms such as heavy bleeding , perineal pain , and body aches.

These symptoms are completely normal (and don’t worry, you will feel better), but there are others that could be signs of a more serious condition. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusPostpartum CareSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusPostpartum CareSee All Sources

Here are the postpartum complications and warning signs all new moms should be aware of, plus steps you can take to reduce your risk.

Key Takeaways

Some postpartum symptoms are normal, such as vaginal bleeding, perineal pain, and body aches. But there are other symptoms you should never ignore — though rare, they could suggest you have a serious health problem such as postpartum hemorrhage, DVT, or a heart condition.

such as vaginal bleeding, perineal pain, and body aches. But there are other symptoms you should never ignore — though rare, they could suggest you have a serious health problem such as postpartum hemorrhage, DVT, or a heart condition.

Let your doctor know ASAP if you experience symptoms like very heavy bleeding (soaking through more than one pad in an hour), a red or swollen leg that’s warm or painful, extreme swelling in the hands or face, a headache that doesn’t go away or throbs and feels one-sided, vision changes, dizziness or fainting, an incision that isn’t healing, a fever of 100.4 Fahrenheit or higher, or severe nausea or vomiting.

symptoms like very heavy bleeding (soaking through more than one pad in an hour), a red or swollen leg that’s warm or painful, extreme swelling in the hands or face, a headache that doesn’t go away or throbs and feels one-sided, vision changes, dizziness or fainting, an incision that isn’t healing, a fever of 100.4 Fahrenheit or higher, or severe nausea or vomiting.

Other symptoms warrant an immediate 911 call. That includes chest pain or a fast heartbeat, trouble breathing, shortness of breath, a seizure, or thoughts of harming yourself or your baby.

That includes chest pain or a fast heartbeat, trouble breathing, shortness of breath, a seizure, or thoughts of harming yourself or your baby.

Red-flag postpartum symptoms to watch out for

It’s completely normal to feel wiped out or straight-up uncomfortable in the days and weeks after giving birth, and you should expect some postpartum bleeding (known as lochia), whether you gave birth vaginally or had a C-section.

But other symptoms warrant a call to your doctor, since they could be signs of dangerous postpartum complications like postpartum hemorrhage, deep vein thrombosis, or even heart problems. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicPostpartum Complications: What You Need to KnowSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicPostpartum Complications: What You Need to KnowSee All Sources

How can you differentiate between normal postpartum recovery symptoms and something more serious? Pay attention to these warning signs. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionSigns and Symptoms of Urgent Maternal Warnings SignsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionSigns and Symptoms of Urgent Maternal Warnings SignsSee All Sources

Contact your health care provider as soon as possible if you experience:

Very heavy bleeding, like soaking through more than one pad in an hour or noticing tissue or large blood clots that are bigger than an egg

A red or swollen leg that feels warm or painful when you touch it

Extreme swelling in your hands or face

A bad headache that doesn’t get better after taking medication, that affects your vision, that throbs and feels one-sided above your ear, or that starts suddenly with severe pain

Changes in your vision, such as blurry vision, blind spots, or flashes of light

Dizziness or fainting, either ongoing or that comes and goes

A fever of 100.4 Fahrenheit or higher

An incision that isn’t healing

Severe nausea or vomiting

Call 911 immediately if you experience:

Chest pain or a fast heartbeat

Trouble breathing or shortness of breath

Seizures

Thoughts about harming yourself or your baby

Most common postpartum complications

It’s important to reach out to your doctor if you notice any of the symptoms above because all can be signs of a postpartum health problem that may be life-threatening. Three of the most common postpartum complications to be aware of are postpartum heart conditions, postpartum hemorrhage, or deep vein thrombosis (DVT).

Heart problems

Maternal heart disease and related conditions are considered a leading cause of death in pregnant women and new moms, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsPregnancy and Heart DiseaseSee All Sources [4] These conditions can include peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM), a rare form of heart failure that appears in the first five to six months after delivery or during the last month of pregnancy, as well as postpartum preeclampsia, high blood pressure that crops up after you’ve had your baby.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsPregnancy and Heart DiseaseSee All Sources

“I ended up getting postpartum preeclampsia about two days after being home,” says What to Expect Community user Britt5757. “My symptoms were high blood pressure and a headache that would not go away.”

You may be more likely to develop a postpartum heart condition if you have certain risk factors, such as being over 30, being non-Hispanic Black, being pregnant with twins or multiples, having had high blood pressure before or during pregnancy, having gestational diabetes or obstructive sleep apnea , being obese, or having a history of smoking or maternal cocaine abuse. But other times, these health problems can develop even if you have no risk factors at all.

Postpartum hemorrhage

It’s normal to experience postpartum vaginal bleeding. Lochia is typically dark red in color for up to 10 days after giving birth. After that, it transitions into lighter bleeding or spotting that can last for a few weeks.

But heavier bleeding that doesn’t slow or stop, as well as passing large clots bigger than an egg, may signal that you’re experiencing postpartum hemorrhage. This rare but serious condition affects about 1 in 100 new moms, Trusted SourceStanford MedicinePostpartum HemorrhageSee All Sources [5] and in addition to heavy bleeding, may also be accompanied by signs of a blood pressure drop (blurry vision, chills, fast heartbeat), nausea, and pale skin. Trusted SourceMarch of DimesPostpartum HemorrhageSee All Sources [6]

Postpartum Hemorrhage

Trusted SourceMarch of DimesPostpartum HemorrhageSee All Sources

“I hemorrhaged after delivering my first, requiring emergency surgery and transfusions and a longer hospital stay,” says What to Expect Community user snock91. “It was really scary.”

New moms may be more likely to hemorrhage after giving birth if they’ve experienced prior pregnancy complications (like uterine inversion, uterine rupture, hydramnios, placenta previa, or placental abruption), have a retained placenta, an unrepaired vaginal or cervical laceration, a bleeding disorder such as Von Willebrand’s Syndrome (which occurs when blood doesn’t clot as it should), or have taken drugs or herbs that interfere with blood clotting, like aspirin, ibuprofen, ginkgo biloba, or large doses of vitamin E.

But, again, it’s also very possible to experience this complication if you don’t have any of these risk factors.

Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)

Deep vein thrombosis (or DVT for short) is a type of blood clot that can lead to a serious condition known as pulmonary embolism (PE). Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusDeep Vein ThrombosisSee All Sources [7] These conditions are more common in pregnant women and new moms, though still rare overall — they occur in about 2 in every 1,000 pregnancies. You may experience tenderness, warmth, or a heavy feeling in your leg (like a bad pulled muscle), or chest pain and unexplained shortness of breath if the blood clot has moved to your lungs.

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusDeep Vein ThrombosisSee All Sources

“I developed a fairly sizable blood clot (DVT) from my pelvis down to the back of my knee, at about 6 to 7 weeks postpartum,” recalls What to Expect Community user Sarahchis.

Some DVT risk factors include having a family or personal history of venous thromboembolism or severe varicose veins ; having preeclampsia, high blood pressure, inflammatory bowel disease, or other vascular diseases; or having postpartum hemorrhage or a blood transfusion.

New moms may also be more likely to develop DVT if they’re older than 35, have had a C-section, were taking birth control pills, or were on strict bed rest. Other new moms can have DVT without any of these risk factors, however.

Postpartum checkups: When they are and how your OB can help spot red flags

Attending all of your postpartum checkups is an important part of taking care of yourself after you’ve given birth. According to ACOG’s latest postpartum care guidelines, women should see their doctors for their first postpartum checkup within three weeks of giving birth and undergo a comprehensive exam within 12 weeks postpartum. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsOptimizing Postpartum CareSee All Sources [8]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsOptimizing Postpartum CareSee All Sources

Of course, these recommendations are for routine visits. ACOG also says that women and their doctors should have additional check-ins as needed.

Your doctor might suggest coming in sooner or more frequently if you have a specific health risk. And, of course, you should reach out to your practitioner right away if you have any of the red-flag symptoms above, as well as if you have any other concerns or if something simply doesn’t feel right.

Unfortunately, there’s no surefire way to avoid postpartum complications. But there are steps you can take to minimize your risk and protect your health, including:

Be proactive. Discuss your health history with your OB/GYN during your pregnancy and come up with a plan for managing any potential problems that may arise based on your risk factors.

Stay on top of postpartum visits. Make your three-week and 12-week postpartum checkups a priority and be sure to schedule and attend any other appointments your doctor recommends.

Stay in touch with your doctor. If you notice any unusual postpartum symptoms, speak up! Your health could depend on it.

Postpartum Complications FAQs

When do most postpartum complications happen?

Postpartum complications can happen at any time, including up to a year or more after childbirth, but the first six weeks following birth are a major recovery period. During this time, it’s normal to feel exhausted or experience some pain and bleeding, but you should contact your doctor right away if you have any concerning symptoms.

What postpartum symptoms should not be ignored?

If you experience very heavy bleeding, a bad headache, a red or swollen leg, severe swelling in your hands or face, severe nausea, a fever, or an incision that isn't healing, contact your doctor as soon as possible. If you have chest pain, trouble breathing or a seizure, call 911 immediately.

What are the most serious postpartum complications?

Some serious postpartum complications include postpartum hemorrhage, blood clots (DVT), postpartum preeclampsia, and heart problems, including peripartum cardiomyopathy.

When should I be worried postpartum?

Between postpartum bleeding and sleep deprivation, it's understandable if you're wondering whether your postpartum symptoms are normal. You should seek medical care if you experience warning signs like very heavy bleeding, a bad headache, a red or swollen leg, severe swelling in your hands or face, chest pain, severe nausea, trouble breathing, a seizure, or a fever. It is also perfectly okay to reach out to your medical provider or seek care if you have a gut feeling that something is wrong. And it’s absolutely critical to reach out to your provider right away if you ever have thoughts of harming yourself or your baby.