Is It Normal to Have Watery Discharge During Pregnancy?

watery discharge during pregnancy, pregnant woman cradling bare baby bump

Noticing a milky-white or clear watery discharge during your pregnancy? You're not alone. Here's what it means, why you're seeing it and what to do.

Morning sickness, fatigue and those achy, achy feet: You knew pregnancy was going to come with a whole host of common symptoms. But is watery vaginal discharge par for the course too?

You can breathe a sigh of relief, because clear or white watery discharge during pregnancy is completely normal. Not only is it rarely a cause for concern — it’s actually a sign that your body is working hard to keep you and your baby healthy.

Here’s the lowdown on watery discharge during pregnancy and when you need to bring it up with your doctor.

Key Takeaways

Watery discharge during pregnancy is normal and often increases as pregnancy progresses, helping maintain healthy bacteria in the birth canal and protect against infection.

Leukorrhea (watery discharge) can range from clear to milky-white in color and has a mild odor, helping your body clear out dead cells and maintain a healthy environment.

Excessive watery discharge could mean that your water broke. If that's the case, you'll likely have a steady trickle or gush of light-yellowish fluid, which is different from the milky, mucus-like consistency of normal pregnancy discharge.

What is watery discharge during pregnancy?

During pregnancy, your vagina secretes a thin, milky-white discharge called leukorrhea. It’s a lot like the discharge you might have between periods, only heavier.

Leukorrhea usually consists of sloughed-off dead cells and tissue. And the further along into your pregnancy you get, the more watery discharge you'll likely have.

What does watery discharge during pregnancy mean?

Watery discharge is a completely normal part of pregnancy, and it typically gets heavier as your pregnancy progresses. In fact, very heavy discharge towards the end of your third trimester could indicate that your body is preparing to go into labor .

When you’re expecting, higher levels of the pregnancy hormone estrogen cause more blood to flow to your pelvic area. That increased blood flow stimulates the body’s mucous membranes, which in turn causes the extra discharge.

But watery discharge during pregnancy is not just a meaningless symptom. Leukorrhea clears out dead cells in the vagina, which helps maintain healthy bacteria in the birth canal and protect you and your baby from infection.

What does watery discharge look like?

You might feel it in your underwear, but visually, leukorrhea isn’t all that noticeable. It tends to have:

A thin or mucus-like texture

A clear or milky-white color

A mild odor (or no odor at all)

Causes of watery discharge during pregnancy

So why exactly does watery discharge make an increasingly noticeable appearance when you're pregnant? There are two main reasons it could be happening, depending on where you are in your pregnancy:

Your body is responding to pregnancy-related changes

Leukorrhea is your body's way of clearing dead cells out of the birth canal to promote optimal bacteria levels and keep infections at bay. Basically, it protects you and your baby and helps keep you both healthy.

Your water broke

Clear fluid isn’t always leukorrhea, however. It could also be amniotic fluid — the liquid that nourishes and safeguards your baby in the amniotic sac. Amniotic fluid looks a little different than leukorrhea, though. It’s watery and straw-colored (like pale urine), instead of whitish and mucus-like in consistency. And it usually trickles out continuously once it starts.

Are clear watery discharge and white watery discharge normal during pregnancy?

Yes, both clear watery discharge and white watery discharge are totally normal, and will likely get heavier as you get farther along in your pregnancy. It’s fine to wear a panty liner or pad, if you’d like. But steer clear of tampons, since they can introduce unwanted germs into the vagina.

Even if the discharge feels sticky or is bothering you, a daily shower or bath is all you need to keep yourself clean. Avoid douching, since it can disrupt the balance of bacteria in your vagina and up the risk of infection.

Is excessive watery discharge a sign that your water broke or you’re leaking amniotic fluid?

If it turns out to be amniotic fluid, excessive watery discharge can be a sign that your water broke or you're leaking amniotic fluid during your pregnancy.

Thankfully, telling the difference between amniotic fluid and leukorrhea is usually pretty easy. When the discharge is amniotic fluid, it feels like a steady trickle or gush. It also has more of a light yellowish tint than a white one and a thinner consistency than that of leukorrhea.

If you do think you're leaking amniotic fluid prematurely , call your doctor right away to be checked out. And if it seems to be your water breaking close to your due date, also get in touch with your practitioner.

Even if your water doesn’t break (and for most women, it doesn’t!), changes to your discharge could indicate that labor isn’t far off. Leukorrhea tends to get heavier in the days or hours leading up to labor. And instead of being clear or milky, you might notice that it’s pink or slightly bloody .

Curious about what’s normal and what’s not when it comes to discharge during pregnancy? The What to Expect app helps you spot what’s normal — and when to call your OB/GYN.

When to call the doctor

Discharge that’s thin, clear or milky is a normal, healthy part of pregnancy. But you should call your doctor if you notice any changes from your usual discharge including:

A deep yellow or green color

A bad smell

A thick or lumpy consistency

Burning or irritation, which can be signs of infection

A pinkish or brownish color or streaks of blood, which could be a sign of labor later in pregnancy or a sign of implantation bleeding early on

A pale-urine color and consistency, which could mean your water broke or you're leaking amniotic fluid

Watery discharge is a common pregnancy symptom and is rarely cause for concern. So just pay attention to what’s normal for you and watch for any changes. If your discharge starts to look or smell different, or if you suspect that it might be your water breaking, let your doctor know.

Frequently Asked Questions

Yes. Increased vaginal discharge during pregnancy is normal - it's the result of hormonal changes. In fact, as your pregnancy progresses, your vaginal discharge can get heavier.

When should I be concerned about watery discharge during pregnancy?

If your vaginal discharge has a strong odor; dark yellow or green color; or is accompanied by itching, burning, pain or discomfort, call your doctor or midwife. These symptoms could mean that you have a medical issue such as a yeast infection . If you have a continuous trickle of pale fluid, call your healthcare provider immediately. This can be a sign that your water broke.

What can I do to manage watery discharge during pregnancy?

If your vaginal discharge is bothering you, try wearing panty liners. Taking a daily shower or bath can also help you keep things fresh. Avoid using tampons or douching, which can introduce bacteria and increase your risk of infection.