What Happens If You Have Low Amniotic Fluid During Pregnancy

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

low amniotic fluid, fish in fish bowl

A silent condition that your practitioner will be able to detect, low amniotic fluid, or oligohydramnios, can usually be controlled.

You may feel like you chug water all day long, but even with lots of liquid it’s still possible to develop oligohydramnios, or low amniotic fluid. While you may not be able to tell, your doctor will notice it at a prenatal visit. Most mamas deliver healthy babes with low fluid, but you’ll need to be seen regularly in case any complications arise from this condition.

If your pregnancy has flown past your due date, you’re probably very ready for your baby to make his big debut. And your baby may be, too — especially if you have low amniotic fluid, or oligohydramnios. Here’s what you need to know about this relatively common pregnancy condition, including causes and treatments.

Key Takeaways

There are no signs of low amniotic fluid. You won’t feel much at all, but your doctor will notice for sure (don’t skip any of your prenatal appointments!).

Low fluid is mostly low risk. There’s a chance of complications related to the umbilical cord and the baby’s growth, but many times the birth is a healthy one.

Follow the plan. Your doctor will check you regularly and urge lots of hydration, rest, and, possibly, an earlier delivery than planned for the safest outcome.

What does it mean when you have low amniotic fluid during pregnancy?

Oligohydramnios is a condition during pregnancy where there’s lower-than-expected amniotic fluid surrounding a baby for his gestational age.

Throughout pregnancy, your amniotic fluid cushions your baby and allows him to grow and move. It also keeps your baby’s body from compressing the umbilical cord against the uterine wall. Sometimes, amniotic fluid levels can signal how well your baby’s urinary system is working, since a baby excretes urine into the amniotic fluid.

What are the symptoms of low amniotic fluid when you’re pregnant?

Actually, there aren’t obvious symptoms of low amniotic fluid in expecting moms — which is why it’s so important to make sure you hit all of your scheduled prenatal checkups . If you have low amniotic fluid, your doctor may note:

Your uterus measures smaller than anticipated for your baby's gestational age

You’re not gaining enough pregnancy weight

Your baby’s heart rate goes down for several seconds suddenly before returning to normal

You have a decreased amount of amniotic fluid, which is detected via ultrasound

Occasionally, you may notice:

A significant decrease in fetal activity

Fluid leaking from your vagina

Feeling a little “wait, is this normal?” You’re not alone. The What to Expect app can help you keep tabs on pregnancy symptoms, track baby’s weekly development and get expert-backed guidance right when those middle-of-the-night questions pop up.

What causes low amniotic fluid during pregnancy?

There are a few things that may cause low amniotic fluid, such as your water breaking from a puncture in the amniotic sac after amniocentesis or from a spontaneous fluid leak at any point during pregnancy that’s so small it may go unnoticed.

More rarely, oligohydramnios is linked to:

Problems with baby's kidneys or urinary tract, since low amniotic fluid levels could signal a baby might not be peeing as much as expected

Poor fetal growth

Placental abruption (the early separation of the placenta, which provides baby with nutrients and oxygen, from the uterine wall during pregnancy)

Chronic high blood pressure or preexisting diabetes in Mom

Certain medications, including those that manage high blood pressure

Birth defects

Premature rupture of membranes (PROM)

Who's most at risk and how common is it?

Those at risk include women whose pregnancies are post-term (i.e., those who are 42 weeks pregnant ). An estimated 4% of pregnant women are diagnosed with oligohydramnios, and that rate rises to 12% among overdue women since amniotic fluid levels tend to decrease late in pregnancy.

When does it usually happen?

Low amniotic fluid usually develops in the latter part of the third trimester , though it can happen earlier in pregnancy.

What effect does it have on the baby?

Most women diagnosed with low amniotic fluid in the third trimester will have a completely normal pregnancy. If there are very low levels of amniotic fluid for your baby to float around in, there is a slight risk of intrauterine growth restriction and umbilical cord constriction during birth. You may also be more likely to have a C-section .

If your doctor detects low amniotic fluid in the first or second trimesters, the risks are greater and may include miscarriage, premature birth , birth defects, or stillbirth .

Are there remedies for low amniotic fluid?

No remedies have been proven to raise low amniotic fluid in the long term. But if you are diagnosed with oligohydramnios, there are steps you can take to boost your amniotic fluid levels in the short-term. Your doctor may recommend:

Getting a lot of rest and possibly less physical activity.

Drinking plenty of water. What to Expect Community parent catlyu recently learned her fluid was low. “Today (Thursday) they told me I had low amniotic fluid. Monday it was normal. The doctor wants me to hydrate and go back in tomorrow to check again.”

Closely monitoring of your amniotic fluid levels , which may include nonstress testing or biophysical profile .

An early or scheduled delivery if low amniotic fluid endangers the well-being of your baby, especially if you’re at least 36 weeks pregnant.

A transfusion of saline solution (salt water) into the uterine cavity using a catheter placed in the cervix to replace lost or low levels of amniotic fluid. This is known as an amnioinfusion and is typically done during labor.

Fetal surgery , if low amniotic fluid is linked to a problem with your baby’s urinary tract and surgery can correct it.

Can you prevent low amniotic fluid?

While there’s no way to prevent oligohydramnios, it’s important to work with your doctor to manage your medications and any conditions linked to low amniotic fluid, including diabetes and high blood pressure. Regular checkups allow your practitioner to measure your abdomen and make sure there’s enough amniotic fluid for your baby to develop properly.

If your doctor is concerned that your amniotic fluids might be low, they may recommend an ultrasound to measure the volume of fluid in the amniotic sac.

Low amniotic fluid can be a serious condition, which is why it’s essential to keep up with your prenatal appointments. The good news is that most women who are diagnosed with low amniotic fluid have perfectly healthy pregnancies.