I Live Thousands of Miles Away from My Village — and Sometimes It's Really Hard

Parenting when you live far away from your family

"It takes a village" is one of those proverbs that, over time, has been diluted to a hollow idiom—or even a punchline.

"It takes a village," I remember saying apologetically to a bouncer a decade ago, as I helped a friend out of a bar, each of her arms slung over the shoulders of a slightly less inebriated twenty-something. "It takes a village," I once grunted across an overstuffed sofa to my roommates as we attempted to haul the upholstered monstrosity to the fifth floor.

More recently, I uttered the phrase through laughter, but with genuine appreciation, as another mom helped me wrench my son from a bucket swing, where his fat toddler feet had gotten stuck in the weirdly shaped leg holes.

As much as I’ve used the retort for comedic effect, I’ve also come to realize as a parent that having an actual village to help raise my child would be nothing short of revolutionary. While we have plenty of family and friends in our lives, not many of them live nearby.

Like a lot of millennials, my husband and I had nomadic young adult lives. I bounced from Ohio to Indiana to Philadelphia to Chicago to New York before settling into Los Angeles, where we live now. Meanwhile, my family resides in the midwest, my in-laws are in the pacific northwest, and thanks to the aforementioned nomadic twenties, my friends are scattered across the country. Before having a kid, the distance didn’t affect me that much. But now, it feels especially acute.

Most of the time, our village of two is more than sufficient for raising our only child. Our mornings are choreographed down to the minute, with us volleying him back and forth as we tick items off our morning to-do list. We tap each other in and out on the weekends, so we each get time to ourselves. We know how to expertly double-team diaper blowouts (I provide a distraction, while my husband gets the pleasure of serving as the clean-up crew). And yet, sometimes it isn’t enough.

Like when my son sprained his ankle right before my husband went out of town, leaving me to navigate multiple doctor’s appointments and x-rays solo (trust me, keeping a toddler still long enough to take an x-ray is not a one-person job). Or the long weekend during which both my husband and I came down with an epic stomach bug. I would have given anything to be able to hand-off my then-infant to someone else—anyone else! Instead I was trying to hold in puke during 2 a.m. feedings. Or—on a more fun note—when we got invited to a couples-only getaway. I sometimes fantasize about having family within drop-your-kid-off-for-a-whole-weekend distance.

Beyond the free-child care aspect of having family close by (though this particular benefit truly cannot be overstated), there’s the sentimental aspect. I grew up with a big extended family, who lived, at most, a three-hour drive away. My grandparents played an integral role in my upbringing, and I regularly saw aunts, uncles, and cousins. Sometimes I worry I’m depriving my son of the rewarding experiences I had as a kid, like overnights at Grandma and Grandpa’s. Or having cousins that double as playmates. Or surprise visits from aunts who come bearing sugary treats right before bedtime (okay, as a parent, maybe I am glad I don’t have to deal with the latter perk).

Unfortunately, this isn’t a parenting problem with an easy fix—at least until I unearth a Portkey or scientists figure out teleportation (get on that, scientists!). But as with all parenting conundrums, we do the best we can.

In the absence of an IRL village, I’m thankful technology affords us ways to stay in touch. We FaceTime regularly (meaning, I chase my one-year-old around with my phone in hand as my mom fills me in on local gossip). I liberally share pictures and videos over social media (at this rate, Mark Zuckerberg will be able to map my son’s entire genome before he’s 18). And email threads, text chains, and Facebook groups made up of other like-minded parents round out my virtual network.

And I’m hopeful that one day we’ll also build an actual, in-the-flesh village where we live. One that may lack hereditary ties, but offers the support we could really use. Because, you know, it takes a village.

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

You Don't Have to Move to a Bigger Home When You Have a Baby Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Moms Reveal the Moves That Helped Them Make New Friends Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Why Toddlers Wander — and How to Keep Them Safe Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

I Was Worried About Having Another Kid — But I Didn't Need to Be By Nicole Fabian-Weber, Contributing Writer

Motherhood Almost Broke My Marriage — Here's What Actually Helped Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Losing Your Cool With Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Some Toddlers Are Shy — and How You Can Help Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

When My Babies Arrived, the Blissful Connection Didn't. Here's the Truth No One Talks About Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

The One Rule That Saved My Sanity During the Holidays With Kids: No Extended Family By Monica Bailey, Mom

I Didn’t Vaccinate Any of My 6 Children — Then I Changed My Mind Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

As a New Mom, My Son's Need for Contact Naps Almost Broke Me By Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

Labor Is Coming — But Who's Watching Big Sis? Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Manage Overeager In-Laws When Raising a Baby Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window