#BumpDay: July 15, 2026

On #BumpDay, we raise awareness and support so that every mom and baby gets the care they deserve — no matter where they live, what they can afford, or the color of their skin.

#BumpDay Resources

Protect yourself

Get resources for a safer pregnancy

What is #BumpDay? A message from Heidi Murkoff

You’ve heard it before, and it’s true: No one knows your body better than you do, especially when you’re pregnant or postpartum.

But what if nobody listened when you spoke up about your body — about a headache that just won’t quit, breathlessness or swelling, fetal movement that’s suddenly slowed down, debilitating anxiety. What if you knew something was wrong, but nobody believed you?

Sadly, that happens too often. Moms, especially moms who are Black, Native, or living in rural areas, aren’t believed, aren’t listened to. Three in 10 expectant moms say their practitioner doesn’t always listen to their concerns, according to a What to Expect study. Their concerns are brushed off as “normal,” dismissed as “dramatic,” even ignored completely. Complications that might have been quickly diagnosed and successfully treated — if only someone had listened — aren’t. And the preventable results can be tragic.

That’s not okay. And that’s why this #BumpDay we’re asking moms and those who love them to learn the warning signs that may signal a serious pregnancy or birth-related complication — and to be empowered to speak up when something doesn’t feel right. And we’re asking doctors, nurses, EMTs, and anyone else who cares for pregnant and new moms to listen. To respect, respond, trust, and believe what we know: Over 80% of maternal deaths are preventable … if only we listen.

Participate in #BumpDay

1. Share your story — or show your support. If you've ever spotted a pregnancy red flag and spoken up to get the care you needed, share your story on social media. Your voice could help another mom trust her instincts and get the support she deserves. You could also share a bump photo — yours, or a pic of someone you love — with this simple message: Every mom, everywhere deserves a safe pregnancy and postpartum period. Tag your post with #BumpDay and @whattoexpect. We will be reposting these stories on #BumpDay.

2. Demand action. Contact your congressional representatives and urge them to take action that supports safe pregnancy and postpartum experiences in honor of #BumpDay.

Protect yourself: Know the warning signs of these pregnancy-related health problems

Be aware of red flags that something could be wrong, and take action if you are experiencing symptoms.

Get resources for a safer pregnancy

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window