What Are Montgomery Tubercles? Learn Whether These Tiny Areola Bumps Are Normal

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

montgomery tubercles, woman wearing a bathrobe fastening her nursing bra

Notice some newly prominent bumps around your areolas? Turns out they’ll help with breastfeeding down the line.

If you’ve ever looked closely at your nipples, you’ve probably noticed some small bumps on the dark skin around your areolas. They may look somewhat strange, but they’re actually completely normal. They’re known as Montgomery tubercles or Montgomery glands, and they’re there for a reason: They help your baby breastfeed.

Key Takeaways

Montgomery tubercules are normal and helpful. They make oil that protects your nipples and may even help your newborn find the breast.

They often become more noticeable in early pregnancy and while nursing. They usually fade after you stop breastfeeding.

Care is simple: Hands off and keep the area clean. Don’t squeeze them; use gentle soap, wear breathable bras, and see your doctor if you notice pain, redness, or swelling.

What are Montgomery tubercles or Montgomery glands?

Montgomery tubercles are lubrication glands that produce oil and help keep your areolas and nipples soft while you breastfeed. Their name comes from Irish obstetrician William Fetherstone Montgomery, who first described them in 1837.

“I would see a few drops coming from mine from time to time, so not very often ... never thought about them much. It happened 8 years ago with my first and now again,” says What to Expect Community mom SeptGirl.

The oil these bumps produce has antibacterial properties — and maybe even a special scent. There’s some research suggesting your newborn may smell the oil, and use it to locate the nipple and latch on.

Montgomery tubercles shouldn’t cause you any pain, although they can hurt if they ever get infected .

What do Montgomery tubercles look like?

Montgomery tubercles look like small, raised bumps on your areolas. The number of bumps varies from person to person. Some women don’t have any, while others have more than 20. Sometimes they fill up with a waxy substance, so they can occasionally look like a pimple with a white or yellowish head.

When do Montgomery glands appear?

You actually always have Montgomery glands, but they often become much larger, darker, and more noticeable in early pregnancy.

In fact, this transformation can be one of the very first signs that you’re pregnant, even before a missed period, along with other breast changes such as more tender nipples. You can notice Montgomery tubercles even if you aren’t pregnant, so you’ll still need a home pregnancy test and confirmation from your doctor’s office to make sure a baby's on the way.

Their newly prominent appearance isn't permanent though. They’ll usually shrink back down to their original size once you choose to stop breastfeeding.

How to care for Montgomery tubercles

The best way to take care of these glands is to simply leave them alone. It may be tempting to squeeze them, especially if they have yellow or white heads, but resist the urge. It can introduce bacteria that may lead to infection.

You can wash Montgomery glands along with the rest of your nipple with soap and warm water, but avoid harsh cleansers. You don’t want to strip away the oil, which helps keep the area moist and free of germs.

If you're breastfeeding, you can manually express a few drops of milk after you nurse and rub them onto your nipples as that also has moisturizing and antimicrobial properties. Wear bras and bra pads made out of breathable material like cotton, which will help keep your glands dry and infection-free.

And if your nipples are sore and cracked from nursing, try rubbing in a little bit of lanolin. Just wipe them clean before feeding your baby.

Track your baby's feedings and get help with your postpartum recovery in the What to Expect app , where you'll find expert tips and can connect with other parents.

What to do if Montgomery glands get swollen, blocked or infected

Unfortunately, these glands can become infected, which is why it’s so important to take a hands-off approach and not squeeze or pick them.

If you notice signs of infection such as redness, pain, and swelling, see your doctor. Warm compresses and oral antibiotics can usually easily treat an infection and get the bumps back to normal.

“I would use hot compresses with epsom salt or take a warm bath with epsom salt and soak your breasts,” says What to Expect Community mom Devyne2527.

Rarely, though, these symptoms can indicate Paget’s disease of the breast, an uncommon type of breast cancer, so it’s important to get them checked out.

How to get rid of Montgomery glands

There’s no reason to get rid of your Montgomery glands because they help protect your nipples by moisturizing them and warding off infection.

While surgery, a laser, or an electrode can remove them, it’s not usually recommended. If you’re done with pregnancy and breastfeeding and the appearance of the glands really bothers you, speak with your doctor about your concerns.

Can you have Montgomery tubercles and not be pregnant?

Many women notice their tubercles during pregnancy. But hormonal imbalances, stress, or significant weight change can also make them look more noticeable. If you’re not pregnant, you can always talk to your doctor about getting your hormone levels checked.

Montgomery tubercles are a normal part of most women’s lives. You may not always love the way they look, but they provide a valuable benefit for you and your baby during pregnancy and nursing.

Your best bet is to leave these bumps alone and let them do their job. But if they begin to hurt, seem swollen, or have unusual redness, see your doctor to rule out an infection or another, potentially more serious condition.