What to Know About HPV During Pregnancy

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

If you've been diagnosed with genital warts, you may be wondering if there are any risks to consider when you’re pregnant.

If your doctor has diagnosed you with HPV (human papilloma virus), you're in crowded company. HPV is the most common sexually transmitted infection in the U.S., affecting about 79 million Americans, with an estimated 14 million newly infected every year.

It's so prevalent that almost every sexually active person who isn't vaccinated will become infected at some point. While there's no treatment for HPV itself, there are ways to prevent some of the complications that the virus causes.

Here's what you need to know about HPV if you're pregnant and have the infection.

Key Takeaways

HPV is common and rarely affects pregnancy. Genital warts may grow or bleed due to hormones, but they usually don’t pose risks to you or your baby.

Your provider may do follow-up testing. If you’ve had an abnormal Pap, your provider may repeat a Pap smear or do a colposcopy or biopsy — all considered safe while pregnant.

Passing HPV to your baby is very rare. Transmission during birth is unlikely, and the strains that cause warts aren’t the ones linked to cancer. The vaccine can be given after delivery.

What are the symptoms of HPV?

Because HPV rarely causes any symptoms, most people don't even know they have the infection. Other people, however, find out that they have HPV when they develop genital warts — flesh-colored bumps that can be flat or raised, like cauliflower.

Sometimes, these bumps can be large; other times, they can be so small that you can't see them. Although they usually appear anywhere in the genital or anal areas, rarely, they can appear in the mouth or throat.

Genital warts often go away on their own, but they can also be treated by a doctor.

Can HPV affect your pregnancy?

It's unlikely that HPV will affect your pregnancy in any major way, especially if you had genital warts in the past that went away or were treated. Still, if you have HPV and are pregnant, it’s natural to have questions. As What to Expect Community member sunnydays111 shared, “I’ve been positive for HPV for a few years now, getting my routine pap and colposcopy on time, and the results always say, ‘No abnormal cells.’ However, now that I’m pregnant, I’m extremely STRESSED.”

Occasionally, surging pregnancy hormones can cause genital warts to bleed or increase in size, making it hard to pee (not the kind of thing a pregnant woman with an overactive bladder wants to hear!).

While neither scenario poses any real threat to you or your baby, in rare instances, warts that lie inside the vaginal wall can grow large enough to obstruct the birth canal (and baby's pathway out) and make it less elastic.

In these cases, a C-section might be necessary, although it's more likely that your practitioner will opt to remove the warts, perhaps through freezing, electrical heat, or laser therapy.

Keep in mind that if you had an abnormal Pap smear before you became pregnant, your practitioner may decide to do another Pap smear or a colposcopy during your pregnancy. If the Pap smear or colposcopy is abnormal, your doctor might recommend a biopsy of your cervix (this can be done even during pregnancy, and poses very little risk to your baby).

Have more questions about your health when you're pregnant? Tap the What to Expect app for expert advice and tips from other parents.

Can you transmit HPV to your baby during childbirth?

The odds of transmitting HPV to your baby is also very low — and even then, most children (like most adults) clear the virus on their own. There is, however, an extremely rare chance (about 1 in 50,000), that your little one could develop laryngeal papillomatosis, a benign growth in the throat that can be removed by a specialist.

One final note: The strain of HPV that causes genital warts is not the same one that causes cancers. If you have a different form of HPV (and there are more than 100 types!), you should talk to your practitioner about getting regular Pap smears postpartum. But during your pregnancy and childbirth, you and your baby are at very little risk.

If you haven't already had the HPV vaccine, it isn't recommended during pregnancy. But talk to your doctor about whether you should be vaccinated after the baby is born (and before you start trying to get pregnant the next time, if that's in your future).

Good luck!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, About Genital HPV Infection , January 2025. Office on Women's Health, Genital Warts , October 2025. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, About Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) , March 2024. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, About HPV , July 2024. National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, Recurrent Respiratory Papillomatosis or Laryngeal Papillomatosis , November 2017.

Updates history

December 3, 2025

Editor: Lisa Lombardi/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs) During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Chickenpox and Shingles During and After Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Herpes and Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Hepatitis B During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Here Are the Vaccines You Need Before and During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Measles During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Itchy but Not Risky: What to Know About Yeast Infections in Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Toxoplasmosis During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Oluwatosin Goje, M.D.

Mumps During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

How to Handle a UTI During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Pap Smears During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

I Wish I Had Known How Much the Flu Sucks When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Protect Your Pregnancy: Know the Signs of Domestic Violence Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

4 Common Myths About Chickenpox By Thomas Clark, M.D., Contributing Writer

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window