What Are the Risks of Listeria During Pregnancy?

Updates to quotes, key takeaways, sources, copy, and formatting.

pregnant woman avoiding listeria

Here's how to protect yourself from this foodborne illness — and what to do if you think you may have been exposed to listeria while pregnant.

At your first prenatal visit, your health care provider likely talked with you about all the foods you should avoid during pregnancy — sushi, raw meat, deli meat and unpasteurized cheese — to prevent exposure to listeria .

That's because consuming this bacteria can sometimes make you sick, and that extremely unlikely possibility becomes more likely when you're expecting.

Fortunately, there are steps you can take to greatly reduce your risk. Here's how, along with what happens if you think you've been exposed to listeria during pregnancy.

What are listeria and listeriosis?

Listeriosis is an illness caused by eating foods contaminated with the listeria monocytogenes bacteria. Keep in mind that simply being exposed to listeria, however, doesn't mean you'll develop an infection. In fact, most women who are exposed to listeria will not develop a listeriosis infection.

How common is listeria exposure during pregnancy?

Though it can seem as though there is one foodborne-illness-related recall after another sometimes, the odds are still slim that you'll be exposed to listeria while you're pregnant.

However, while the odds of being infected with listeriosis are still very, very low, they are significantly higher (about 10 times) during pregnancy — as is the chance that it could cause problems while you're pregnant. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsListeria and PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsListeria and PregnancySee All Sources

"ANOTHER listeria outbreak??" laments What to Expect Community member A-Rose15567. "Has this always been happening and the news is now focusing on it ... or are the numbers actually going up? I’m tired of being afraid of my food."

"The chances are still incredibly low," replies firi2024, another What to Expect parent.

Listeria, unlike many other germs, enters the bloodstream directly and therefore can get to the baby quickly through the placenta . (Other food contaminants generally stay in the digestive tract.)

And an untreated infection can put baby at increased risk of more serious complications, including miscarriage, preterm labor, stillbirth, or meningitis in newborns. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionListeria (Listeriosis) Questions and AnswersSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionListeria (Listeriosis) Questions and AnswersSee All Sources

Listeriosis symptoms during pregnancy

Listeriosis can be hard to detect, partly because symptoms can develop up to two months after eating contaminated food and can vary from severe to mild. If you think you may have eaten food that contains listeria, watch for flu-like symptoms including:

Fever over 100.6 degrees Fahrenheit

Muscle pain

Backache

Headache

Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhea

Note that you may have fever only, or you might not have any symptoms at all. So it's important to contact your doctor even if you think what you're experiencing might be caused by something else.

What to do if you think you've been exposed to listeria during pregnancy

Many moms-to-be worry about possible exposure to listeria, especially after big food recalls. In many cases, a watch-and-wait approach for symptoms is all that's necessary. Doctors will usually recommend testing if you have symptoms like a fever or gastrointestinal troubles.

If you're experiencing symptoms and your doctor suspects a listeriosis infection, he or she may order some tests to check for the bacteria and monitor your baby's health. If you have been infected, you'll get a prescription for antibiotics.

Key Takeaways

Listeria is a foodborne bacteria that can cause listeriosis, which can make you sick and may be harmful while you're pregnant.

While the odds of being infected with listeriosis are very, very low, they are significantly higher (about 10 times) during pregnancy — as is the chance that the foodborne illness could cause problems while you're pregnant.

If you think you may have eaten food that contains listeria, watch for flu-like symptoms including fever, muscle aches, headache, back pain, and g astrointestinal symptoms like diarrhea.

How to protect yourself from listeria exposure during pregnancy

One of the best ways to prevent listeriosis is to avoid foods that are most likely to be contaminated. These include: Trusted SourceFoodSafety.govBacteria and VirusesSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceFoodSafety.govBacteria and VirusesSee All Sources

Hot dogs, lunch meats or cold cuts that are cold or heated lower than 165 degrees F

Refrigerated pâté and meat spreads

Refrigerated, smoked seafood (like smoked salmon)

Unpasteurized milk and soft cheeses (like feta, queso blanco, Brie and blue-veined cheeses)

Unpasteurized juices (if you're not sure whether a juice has been pasteurized, don't drink it)

Unwashed, raw produce

Alfalfa and other sprouts

A few more tips to stay safe from listeria during pregnancy:

Always wash produce (including those organic blueberries from the farmer's market) thoroughly in running tap water, even if you're planning to peel or cook it.

As a precaution, even ready-cooked meats should be heated to steaming before eating.

When eating out, watch for signs that the restaurant doesn't follow basic sanitation rules (and it should be pretty obvious): Perishable foods are kept at room temperature, the bathrooms are unclean, it's open season for flies, etc.

Unfortunately it's impossible to know for sure if the food you buy today will be recalled tomorrow — making it impossible to avoid listeria entirely.

That said, the risk of contracting the infection from day-to-day eating is extremely low, even if you are expecting. So try not to let worries about possible food contamination consume you.

Instead, spend your energy focusing on what you can do: Eat a balanced, healthy pregnancy diet to help support you and your growing baby.