What to Know About the Hepatitis B (HepB) Vaccine for Babies

Updates to copy, information, sourcing, formatting, and headlines, with a new medical review for accuracy.

baby at the doctor, hepatitis b vaccine for baby

Your baby will get a series of at least three doses of the HepB vaccine: at birth, at 1 to 2 months, and typically at 6 months but no later than 18 months.

The hepatitis B vaccine is one of the very first vaccines your baby will get before she leaves the hospital. This vaccine protects your newborn from a dangerous (but preventable!) liver infection and is given in multiple doses.

Here's everything parents need to know about the HepB vaccine and why it's so important.

What is hepatitis B?

Hepatitis B is a vaccine-preventable liver infection caused by the hepatitis B virus. It can be spread through contact with the blood or other body fluids of an infected person. This can happen through sexual contact, needle/drug use, or from mother to baby at birth.

Babies born to mothers with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) are at a high risk of infection if they aren't vaccinated at birth. Those infants who become chronically infected with HBV can get other potentially serious or even life-threatening illnesses such as cirrhosis (scarring of the liver), liver cancer, and liver failure.

"Hepatitis B is very contagious, and the chances of it becoming chronic HepB if you get it as an infant is high," says Gina Posner , M.D., a pediatrician at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "This can lead to liver cancer and failure in the future."

The good news is that the spread of the virus from a mother to her infant can be prevented through vaccination.

Key Takeaways

Hepatitis B is a contagious liver infection that can be either short- or long-term. It spreads through infected bodily fluids and can also be passed on to babies whose mothers have the virus. People who have chronic, or long-term, hepatitis B can go on to develop dangerous illnesses such as liver cancer and liver failure.

Luckily, hepatitis B is highly preventable. The HepB vaccine is safe, effective, and offers life-long protection. Infants born to mothers with the virus also have a high risk of infection if they aren't vaccinated at birth.

Children are usually given one dose of HepB within 24 hours of birth (or within 12 hours of birth for babies born to HBV-infected mothers), at 1 to 2 months old, and at 6 to 18 months old.

What is the hepatitis B vaccine?

The HepB vaccine is a multi-dose shot that protects against hepatitis B for life. It's safe and effective, and the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that all babies get the hepatitis B vaccine. Most people don’t have any side effects other than some soreness at the injection site.

"Vaccinating all newborns against hepatitis B effectively prevents transmission of the virus to newborns during childbirth, supports them to build immunity against potential childhood infections, and ensures long-term protection into adulthood from a virus that can cause serious liver disease and liver cancer," AAP President Susan J. Kressly, M.D., F.A.A.P., said in a statement.

Since the vaccine protects a person for life, giving your baby the shot at birth and completing the whole series means you'll never have to worry that your baby will become infected with the hepatitis B virus.

"Infants and children can be exposed to this virus by close caregivers who may not know they are infected," Dr. Kressly said. "Delaying the birth dose of the hepatitis B vaccine has no clear benefits and leaves children vulnerable to infection."

The hepatitis B vaccine only protects against hepatitis B, and is separate from the hepatitis A vaccine . There currently isn't a vaccine for hepatitis C.

Hepatitis B is very...

When should babies get the hepatitis B vaccine?

Doctors recommend that your child get all of the scheduled doses of the hepatitis B vaccine for best protection. Ask your pediatrician when your child should get the next vaccine. Typically, children get one dose at each of the following ages:

Within 24 hours of birth (or within 12 hours of birth for babies born to HBV-infected mothers)

1 to 2 months old

6 to 18 months old

Your child may get a fourth dose depending on the brand of vaccines the doctor uses or if your baby was underweight at birth. All children and teens up to 18 years of age who haven't yet gotten the vaccine should also be immunized.

Discuss any concerns about vaccination with your doctor. Your practitioner can explain the benefits and consequences of vaccination and hepatitis B, and even discuss its proven safety over time.

Want to get more questions about your baby's health answered? The What to Expect app has you covered, with expert-backed advice, tools to help navigate your journey, and a supportive Community of parents who get it.