Managing Mom Guilt

ways to deal with mom guilt

Got a case of mom guilt? You're not alone. If your feelings are overwhelming you, try these tactics to help get guilt under control.

While you wouldn’t trade your role as a parent for all the free time in the world, welcoming a baby into your life is a huge adjustment and can seemingly double your to-do list overnight. And when some of these items don’t get done (and they won’t), you may feel inadequate or guilty.

These feelings are normal, and all new parents experience them from time to time. But if your mom guilt is becoming overwhelming and you're struggling to cope with your guilty feelings, there are strategies that may help.

What is mom guilt?

Mom guilt — and dad guilt, too — is the feeling that you're not doing enough as a parent. It can appear at any time, but some common triggers may include going back to work after maternity or paternity leave, juggling household tasks with parenting responsibilities and dealing with unwanted opinions about your parenting choices.

Other moms may struggle to balance their role as a parent with their own needs, and might feel guilty for prioritizing self care or spending time away from their children.

While some guilt is normal, it becomes a problem when you spend too much time sweating the small stuff and lose the big-picture perspective (like how adorable your baby is and how it doesn’t matter if you didn’t get all the laundry folded). Unchecked guilt can even be dangerous, leading to unhealthy behaviors and depression.

How can you manage mom guilt?

If feelings of guilt seem to be taking over or you’re starting to resent your kids, take action. Here’s how to start:

Help yourself first. Flight attendants deliver wonderful parenting advice when they remind you to secure your oxygen mask first before assisting your kids with theirs. After all, if you can’t breathe, how can you possibly help anyone else? So give yourself a little air — get a pedicure or spend time with friends. Keep in mind that loving yourself is one of the best ways to love your children.

Share your responsibilities. If you have a partner, ask them if they can pitch in on chores that aren’t already on their list so you can carve out a little more “me” time. If you’re single, seek out a network of other moms who are on their own with whom you can share babysitting duties or an empathetic cup of coffee while your munchkins romp nearby. Downtime and friendship are both very beneficial for your mental health.

Surround yourself with supportive people — and shake off the rest. There’s nothing wrong with avoiding people — even relatives — who make you feel guilty or judged. If the naysayer is droning on again about your latest parenting failing, just find an excuse to leave the room. After a couple of times, the person should get the message.

Recognize irrational thoughts. A classic example of unhealthy mom guilt is returning to work and worrying incessantly that being away from your baby hurts her development. It doesn’t, and all that doubt only makes you less efficient at both jobs. Trust your caregiver or day-care provider and know that most children thrive and flourish even when both parents work full-time. The truth is, returning to work is harder on you than on your baby.

Avoid the bragging game. Parents are notorious for bragging about their kids, and it’s easy to get caught up in it. Resist the urge to engage, since making comparisons often leads to feelings of inadequacy and guilt. The next time some mom wants to compare how early your kids started talking or how long you breastfed your babies, politely change the subject. Remember, you and your child are unique — embrace the parent you are and the child you have.

Nurture your relationships. It’s not unusual for your other relationships, such as with your partner or friends, to take a backseat when most of your time is spent caring for your little one. But spending time with your significant other helps you maintain a strong emotional connection. Plus, children learn to value relationships by watching your example. If you can’t manage a weekly date night, at least set aside some “couple time” daily — even if it’s just a 10-minute catch-up or cuddle.

Talk to a professional. If guilt continues to plague your days and prevents you from enjoying your life, you may benefit from talk therapy with a mental health professional. You can also engage with fellow moms online in a community like WhatToExpect.com.

Jill Wojslaw is a Seattle native and mother of two. You can follow her blog at goodnightmush.wordpress.com where she gives you a glimpse into her daily life, raising two young girls in the Pacific Northwest through honest story telling and beautiful photos.

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd Edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect, Postpartum Depression , April 2021. Mayo Clinic, Postpartum Depression , September 2018. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Postpartum Depression , 2020. American Academy of Pediatrics, A Special Message to New Dads , June 2015. KidsHealth From Nemours, Bonding With Your Baby , June 2018. American Psychological Association, Balancing Kids and Careers , October 2013.

Your Next Read

The 4 Signs of Maternal Burnout and How to Recover Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

18 Self-Care Ideas for Moms That Aren't Just 'Take a Shower' Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler Fact Checked by Jill Malter

Motherhood Almost Broke My Marriage — Here's What Actually Helped Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Manage Overeager In-Laws When Raising a Baby Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Moms Reveal the Moves That Helped Them Make New Friends Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Losing Your Cool With Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do if You're Feeling "Touched Out" Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Cope With Baby Shower Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Shari Lusskin, M.D.

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

Dealing With Childbirth Fear? Here's How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

13 Times Moms Were Devastated by a Gender Reveal Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window