What to Know About Your Toddler's Car Seat: Get the Latest Safety Tips and Guidelines

Updates with new federal car seat guidelines, and updates to formatting, copy, headlines, and sources.

toddler in a car seat

Once your baby becomes a squirmy toddler, safely securing him for a ride can be a bit trickier. Here's what you need to know about toddler car seat safety.

Gone are the days of running to the store with a sweet snoozing infant strapped in his car seat . Now you’ve got a still sweet but not-quite-so-submissive toddler who’s raring to get out of his car seat and isn’t shy about letting you know. Which can make driving stressful — even on a trip to the corner store for a gallon of milk.

Read on for tips to help protect your most precious cargo whenever you’re on the road.

Key Takeaways

Keep your toddler rear-facing as long as possible. Young children are safest in a rear-facing car seat. Don’t turn the seat forward until your child reaches the height or weight limit listed in the car seat manual.

Avoid bulky clothing in the car seat. Puffy jackets and snowsuits can prevent the harness from fitting securely. Dress your toddler in thin layers, and place a blanket over the harness if needed for warmth.

Be aware of your toddler’s surroundings in and around the car. Use child locks, keep car keys out of reach, and never leave your child alone in or around a vehicle. Always check the car before walking away, and don’t let children play near parked cars or in driveways.

Types of car seats for toddlers

While you can choose your tot’s clothes based on what looks cute to you, when you choose a car seat, it’s not about looks — it’s about safety. You’ll want to consider what works best for your family and your car.

Consider these three options, all of which should have a five-point harness that attaches at the shoulders, hips and between the legs: Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCar Seats: Information for FamiliesSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCar Seats: Information for FamiliesSee All Sources

Rear-facing only infant car seat . Have your child stay in a rear-facing infant seat until he’s the highest weight or height recommended by the car seat manufacturer. Check the seat’s manual to verify when it’s time to move on from this option.

Convertible seat. What’s convenient about convertible car seats is that they can be easily switched from rear-facing to forward-facing mode for older children. Although they are bulkier than infant seats and do not come with carrying handles or separate bases , they can be used for a longer period of time. Many convertible seats have high rear-facing weight limits and can hold up to 40 to 50 pounds (and in forward-facing mode typically have a weight limit of 65 pounds), making them more ideal for bigger babies and toddlers.

All-in-one (3-in-1). All-in-one seats are similar to convertible car seats, but they can be transformed from a rear-facing car seat to a forward-facing car seat and then a booster seat. Because they're bigger than the other two varieties, all-in-one car seats might not fit comfortably in all cars (and the only way to know if it fits in yours is to give installation a try).

When should your toddler switch to a forward-facing car seat?

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) no longer suggests using age 2 as a measure for when you should flip your child's car seat. They now recommend keeping your child in the rear-facing position for as long as possible, until they've hit their seat's height or weight limit for the rear-facing position. Kids should move to a new seat when they reach either limit, height or weight: Don't wait until your child outgrows both limits.

they've hit their seat's height or weight limit for the rear-facing position. Kids should move to a new seat when they reach either limit, height or weight: Don't wait until your child outgrows both limits.

A rear-facing seat is a safer place for babies and toddlers — your child's head, neck and spine are better supported in case of a crash. So check your car seat manual to verify weight/height limits, and your vehicle's manual when it's time for re-installation instructions.

In light of 2025 changes to car seat guidelines, car seat manufacturers have to comply with new federal safety regulations as of June 30, 2025, and beyond. These new standards set a minimum child weight limit of 26.5 pounds for forward-facing car seats. Trusted SourceNational Highway Traffic Safety Administration Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards; FMVSS No. 213, "Child Restraint Systems," FMVSS No. 213a, "Child Restraint Systems - Side Impact Protection," and FMVSS No. 213b, "Child Restraint Systems" - Response to Petitions for ReconsiderationSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Highway Traffic Safety Administration Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards; FMVSS No. 213, "Child Restraint Systems," FMVSS No. 213a, "Child Restraint Systems - Side Impact Protection," and FMVSS No. 213b, "Child Restraint Systems" - Response to Petitions for ReconsiderationSee All Sources

If your car seat is not expired and the minimum weight limit for use in forward-facing mode is different, it’s still safe to use the seat.

My daughter is 5 and is 40 inches and 40 lbs. She’s been forward-facing with the 5-point harness. I was thinking about upgrading her to a booster seat, but I’m just confused about all the rules.

What to Expect Community mom kenzeelynn98

If you're not sure about when to change your child over to the next-level seat, no matter how old your little one is, you're not alone! Connect with other parents on the What to Expect app to vent, and find more articles and expert tips to help guide you.

Can toddlers use a booster car seat?

No, booster seats are not meant for toddlers. Your child should ride in a five-point harness car seat until he reaches the forward-facing car seat's upper height and weight limits (usually around at least 4 years old) — and only then is it safe to transition to a belt-positioning booster seat in the back seat. As always, be sure to check the manufacturer’s guidelines on your vehicle and car seat manuals.

Don’t want to buy another seat in two years? You can opt for an “all-in-one” seat now that transitions from forward-facing car seat to a booster seat for his pre-K years and beyond. Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety AdministrationCar Seats and Booster SeatsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety AdministrationCar Seats and Booster SeatsSee All Sources

Keep in mind that your car’s regular seat belts are meant to work alone only when a child weighs about 80 pounds and is 4 feet 9 inches tall. And kids should always ride in the back seat until they're at least 13 years old.

And since the federal guidelines have changed in 2025, know that booster seats manufactured after June 30, 2025, have a minimum weight limit of 40 pounds. (If your booster is not expired and specifies a different minimum child weight, it’s still safe to use.)

"My daughter is 5 and is 40 inches and 40 lbs. She’s been forward-facing with the 5-point harness," says What to Expect Community mom kenzeelynn98. "I was thinking about upgrading her to a booster seat, but I’m just confused about all the rules." (Her daughter would be okay in a booster seat, since the current weight limit is 40 pounds.)

Toddler car safety tips

No matter what type of car seat you choose, remember to follow these car seat safety tips for your tot:

Review car seat safety guidelines. Even the right car seat can’t do its job if your toddler’s not strapped in just right. So although you’re probably a pro at fastening all the harnesses and latches, take time to review the basic car seat safety tips , especially if you’re buying a new model. Give your vehicle’s and the car seat’s manuals a close and thorough read. Remember, the safest place is often in the middle of the back seat, away from passenger-side airbags and side impact crashes (though it is safe to install car seats in any position in the back seat where you get a good fit). And make sure that once the seat is installed, you can’t move it more than an inch from side to side and front to back when you grasp the car seat at the belt path (where it's actually attached to the car). Don't check for tightness anywhere else on the seat; the top of the seat is designed to move significantly to distribute crash forces.

Get a new seat professionally inspected. Bought a new car seat for your child? Get the installation re-checked by your local police or fire station if they have certified Child Passenger Safety Technicians (CPSTs). You can also find a certified car-seat inspector technician in your area (you can also call 866-SEAT-CHECK).

Adjust the harness to fit your child. Harness straps should be in the slots that are at or just below your child’s shoulders when they're riding rear-facing, and at or just above your child's shoulders when riding front-facing. The middle of the chest clip should be at the level of the bottom of your child’s armpits.

Avoid bulky winter clothing. For the safest ride, harness straps must remain tight on your child's shoulders — and bulky winter jackets and snowsuits add an extra layer between your child and protection. So never strap your child in wearing a jacket or snowsuit; instead lay the coat (or a blanket) over the buckled harness straps. Or consider the car seat while selecting his outfit — a light, thin sweater will keep him toasty in the car without interfering with the safety straps.

Be a good role model. Make sure everyone in the car obeys the buckle-up rule (especially you) — after all, the best way to teach good habits to kids is to practice them yourself.

Keep little fingers and arms safe. Making windows go up and down with a push of a button is oh-so-tempting for busy little fingers but dangerous if that window closes on them. To keep your curious toddler safe, control windows from the driver’s seat, keeping them locked, if possible. When you do need to raise them, always check to make sure hands (or arms or heads) aren’t anywhere near. You can nip the temptation to touch the buttons by giving your child something to keep his hands busy, like a just-for-the-car book or toy. Want to be sure that no fingers will get caught in the car door? Before you shut the door (and after you’ve strapped him in his seat) ask your toddler to show you how tightly he can hug himself.

Don't leave your tot in the car. Not even for a minute: Cars can cool down — and heat up — fast. How fast? Twenty degrees in 10 minutes — which can be alarming when the temperature soars from 90 degrees to 110. It’s especially dangerous for kids younger than 4, since their bodies absorb more heat and increase in temperature faster than adults’ bodies do. So don’t take a chance leaving your little one in the car alone, no matter what the weather. Want to avoid accidentally leaving your little one in the car (yes, it happens — especially when kids are asleep and a parent is distracted or stressed)? Always put your purse or briefcase in the back seat so you’ll have to check there anyway before you get out of the car. And make a habit of looking in the front and back of the car before walking away — just in case.

Use car seats for travel only. Car seats aren’t intended for other uses outside the car — especially unsupervised sleeping . So while it’s perfectly safe for your toddler to snooze in his seat when he’s properly buckled in for a ride to the supermarket, leaving him otherwise unattended in a car seat poses big risks, including death from strangulation or suffocation.

Take extra care with the trunk. Toddlers love to tuck themselves into small spaces, and that makes the trunk of a car a tempting place to explore. So teach your toddler another important rule of car safety: The trunk is absolutely off-limits. Don’t rely on your words alone (it’ll be awhile before your tot absorbs safety lessons). Keep your trunk and car doors locked, store keys out of reach and keep the rear fold-down seats locked upright to prevent your tot from climbing into the trunk from inside the car. Never put your toddler in the trunk even for a moment (while you load the groceries, for instance). You can show an older toddler or preschooler what to do if he does get trapped in the trunk, so point out the emergency handle in the trunk and practice using it (without putting your child in the trunk).

Pay attention to parked cars. Just because a car is parked doesn’t mean it’s safe: Drivers may not notice a child, say, drawing with chalk in the driveway or running up to say hello. So don’t let your toddler play in the driveway (and keep his toys in a safer, less-tempting place). Also remind the drivers in your family about these toddler car safety tips: Always walk around the car before moving it, back up slowly, pay attention to the mirrors and keep vehicles locked at all times, even when parked in the garage or driveway.