What It Means if You Have an Enlarged Placenta and Why It’s Usually No Cause for Concern

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Two peach-colored balloons on blue and orange background

What does it mean if your practitioner tells you that your placenta is bigger than normal?

If your practitioner told you that you have an enlarged placenta, you might have what those in the medical profession like to call placentomegaly: a placenta that's grown disproportionately bigger than normal. That means the placenta is either thicker than it should be or weighs more than your doctor thinks it should (or both).

The placenta is the pancake-shaped organ in the uterus that serves as the baby's lifeline for nutrition, oxygen, and waste removal. It's usually one-sixth of the baby's weight and has a thickness that corresponds roughly to the baby's gestational age. For example, a fetus that's 20 weeks along would be nurtured by a placenta about 20 millimeters thick. At 24 weeks, the placenta is around 24 millimeters thick, and so on.

Key Takeaways:

An enlarged placenta isn’t usually a reason to panic. The word is big (placentomegaly), but most of the time it doesn’t cause problems.

Some conditions play a role. A larger placenta may be linked to hypertension, anemia, or diabetes — but your doctor will monitor these and the health of your baby.

Your baby’s growth matters most. Even if your placenta measures big, steady fetal development is the important goal, so keep up your regular appointments to be sure everything’s right on track.

The sizes of placentas, however, vary widely from pregnant woman to pregnant woman. A better-nourished mom-to-be tends to produce a bigger, more productive placenta (but still within normal range) than that of an undernourished mom-to-be.

Although an enlarged placenta is not tremendously common, it's also not very rare. A few factors that can result in an enlarged placenta include smoking, certain infections in the uterus, and some maternal medical conditions, such as anemia , hypertension , or diabetes .

Download the What to Expect app for more week-by-week developments, expert advice, and support from parents-to-be just like you.

The good news is that often an enlarged placenta means nothing more than, well, a larger-than-expected placenta. And unless your practitioner is concerned about it, there's little reason to worry.

The best gauge of a baby's health is development at a steady pace, and your doctor will certainly keep close tabs on that.

Good luck!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. What To Expect.com, What Is the Placenta — and How Does It Help Your Baby Grow? , October 2025. What To Expect.com, What Does It Mean to Have Placenta Previa? , April 2025. The Placenta: From Development to Disease , Wiley-Blackwell, 2011. American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology , Stereologic Examination of Placentas From Mothers Who Smoke During Pregnancy , March 2002. Radiological Society of North America, Placental Imaging: Normal Appearance With Review of Pathologic Findings , May 2017.

Updates history

October 28, 2025

Editors: Jennifer Kelly Geddes/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

What Does It Mean to Have an Anterior Placenta During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

What Is the Placenta — and How Does It Help Your Baby Grow? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Is Your Baby Measuring Big? Why Size Estimates Aren't Always Spot-On Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

What Does It Mean to Have Placenta Previa? Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Placenta Accreta Medically Reviewed by Sarah Obican, M.D.

What Is a Retained Placenta? Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Why Some Babies Are Just Born Big Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Everyone Has an Opinion About Your Bump — Here's Why They're (Probably) Wrong Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Here's What Happens When You Deliver the Placenta Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Should You Eat Your Placenta? Why Some Moms Swear by It and What the Experts Say Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Yes, Your Feet Really Are Getting Bigger: Why 75% of Pregnant Women Experience Swelling Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Placental Abruption During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Butt, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Can Your Placenta Give You a Sneak Peek into Your Baby's Gender? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Polyhydramnios (Hydramnios) During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Still Pregnant? Here’s What It Means to Be Overdue Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window