What to Do if You Get Salmonella Poisoning During Pregnancy

Updates to quotes, key takeaways, sources, copy, and formatting.

chickens and woman's hand touching eggs, salmonella during pregnancy

Think you might have food poisoning because of salmonella and worried about how it will affect your pregnancy and baby? Here's how to tell and what to do.

Now that you're eating for two, you're likely aware of the foods to avoid during pregnancy . Much of the reason for cutting out unpasteurized or undercooked foods is to safeguard against foodborne illnesses like salmonella, especially when you're expecting.

Salmonella bacteria cause about 1.35 million infections in the United States each year. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionSalmonella Infection (Salmonellosis)See All Sources [1] And sometimes, it can seem as though there's a new foodborne-illness-related recall every other week.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionSalmonella Infection (Salmonellosis)See All Sources

"Getting exhausted by all the salmonella outbreaks. Anyone else?" asks What to Expect Community member LittleOne2025. "Just found out my state is affected by a recall of cucumbers."

Luckily, the risk of getting salmonella is largely avoidable, and even if you do get sick, it's unlikely that your baby is in any danger. Even still, it's good to be prepared just in case.

What are the symptoms of salmonella?

Salmonella during pregnancy is, for the most part, no different than getting salmonella any other time. No matter whether you're pregnant or not, the symptoms aren't pleasant. They often resemble the stomach flu, and can include:

Abdominal pain

Diarrhea

Fever and chills

Nausea and vomiting

Dehydration

Headaches

Muscle pains

Blood in the stool

The incubation period for salmonella infection can be anywhere between six hours and six days. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSalmonella infectionSee All Sources [2]

Salmonella infection

How do you get salmonella poisoning?

You're most likely to be exposed to salmonella as a result of eating undercooked proteins like poultry, eggs, meat or fish or consuming raw dairy or juices.

You can also get it by touching animals that are infected — including reptiles like lizards, turtles and snakes that can carry the bacteria on their skin and livestock like chickens, geese and ducks that are most commonly infected.

Human and animal poop also opens the door to exposure. Wash your hands whenever you come into contact with any of these animals. Trusted SourceNational Library of Medicine, Medline PlusSalmonella InfectionsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Library of Medicine, Medline PlusSalmonella InfectionsSee All Sources

Is salmonella dangerous for pregnant women?

According to experts, the risks of salmonella to expectant moms are minimal, especially compared to listeria, which is particularly problematic during pregnancy. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionPeople at Increased Risk for Listeria InfectionSee All Sources [4] Salmonella, on the other hand, usually just runs its course and isn't of any specific concern to pregnant women.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionPeople at Increased Risk for Listeria InfectionSee All Sources

"There’s no reason to freak out unless you get symptoms of salmonella," one What to Expect Community parent valsma says to another mom concerned about something she ate in a restaurant. "Even then, just contact your provider."

But in some cases, when expectant women become really sick and the infection gets into the bloodstream, it can cause sepsis, which is a life-threatening blood infection. And while there are reported cases of preterm delivery and miscarriages as a result of the illness, those are exceedingly rare.

But salmonella may make you temporarily sick and seriously uncomfortable. The largest risk factor is dehydration, which can lead to preterm delivery, low amniotic fluid and birth defects. So it's important to keep drinking fluids .

A good rule of thumb if you're vomiting or experiencing diarrhea is to wait an hour or so and then take just one small sip of water every 10 minutes for an hour. If you can keep that down, you can gradually increase your fluid intake over the next few hours until you're able to drink water without throwing up again. Trusted SourceNational Library of Medicine, Medline PlusDiarrheaSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceNational Library of Medicine, Medline PlusDiarrheaSee All Sources

In most cases, salmonella has little or no impact on your baby-to-be. Your baby is really well insulated from illness in your tummy, even if you feel terrible.

Very rarely, salmonella can cross the placenta and infect the fetus. It's most likely to occur if the mom is still sick with the infection when she gives birth. If a baby is exposed during delivery, then he or she may contract the infection. Babies who become ill with salmonella at birth need immediate treatment because of their vulnerable immune systems.

Key Takeaways

Though it may seem as though there are a lot of foodborne-illness-related recalls, the risk of getting salmonella is fairly low and largely avoidable. Even if you do get sick, it's unlikely that your baby is in any danger.

Symptoms of salmonella poisoning can mimic those of a stomach bug, and may include vomiting, nausea, diarrhea, tummy pain, fever, chills, and headache, among others.

Talk to your doctor if you are concerned that you may have salmonella poisoning. Salmonella usually runs its course and isn't of any specific concern to pregnant women, though you'll want to make sure you don't get dehydrated.

What are the treatments for salmonella?

If you think you've been exposed to salmonella, a simple stool sample can test for it. As uncomfortable as it is, though, salmonella is an illness you typically have to ride out without treatment. But a few tips can make it more tolerable:

Stay hydrated

This is likely the most important advice for moms-to-be. Diarrhea and vomiting can dehydrate you faster than you might expect. That's why it's important to have water or an electrolyte beverage like Pedialyte close at hand. Sip it when you can, even if you don't feel like it. This helps the illness run its course faster and it keeps you from putting yourself or your baby in any danger as a result of dehydration.

Seek medical attention

If you feel lightheaded, faint, are vomiting frequently or haven't been able to keep fluids down for several hours, it's time to get help. Go to the hospital or urgent care where you can get intravenous therapy (IV) to replenish fluids, or make an appointment with your doctor if he or she can see you immediately (or soon after). In some more urgent cases, antibiotics can be prescribed to treat serious infections.

Salmonella prevention tips during pregnancy

Fortunately, you can reduce your risk of getting salmonella when you're pregnant by taking a few simple steps:

Thoroughly cook your meats. Specifically, don't eat raw or undercooked poultry, fish or meat. Fresh beef, veal, lamb steaks, roasts and chops, as well as fresh pork and ham, should be cooked to at least 145 degrees; ground beef, pork, veal and lamb should be cooked to at least 160 degrees, and poultry should be cooked to at least 165 degrees.

Avoid runny egg yolks. That means foods like homemade hollandaise sauce, cookie dough and Caesar dressing are also off-limits during pregnancy because they contain raw eggs.

Don't hesitate to throw it out. If food packaging doesn't seem secure or that can didn't quite pop when you opened it, it's not worth taking a chance. Toss it rather than eating from it just to be safe.

Don't pet animals like chickens, geese and ducks or reptiles like snakes, turtles and lizards with your bare hands. Even fish tank water can make you sick. Also avoid animal feces that could be contaminated.

Avoid foods that may come in contact with animal poop. These include raw mushrooms and sprouts (like radish, mung bean and clover).

Skip the unpasteurized foods. Steer clear of cheeses, milk or juices that have not been pasteurized. Cheeses like imported brie, blue and queso are the most likely not to be pasteurized, but check the label if you're not sure. Soft cheeses marked as pasteurized are okay.

Wash your hands often with warm soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If you do touch the animals listed above, be sure you wash your hands immediately afterwards. While preparing raw foods in the kitchen, it's also important to wash your hands thoroughly before and after you cook them.

Wear gloves. Especially if you have a cut on your hand, be sure to suit up in disposable gloves while you're making food.

Wash dishcloths and sponges often. Wash sponges in the dishwasher each night in the highest temperature cycle. Periodically dampen sponges and microwave them for one minute to kill bacteria.

Make sure you disinfect cooking surfaces after using them. And don't cross-contaminate cutting boards, either. If you're using a cutting board to slice raw chicken, keep raw fruits and vegetables (or anything that you're not planning on cooking) away from that surface.

Wash all raw fruits and vegetables. Water can remove quite a bit, but a produce spray is even more effective.

Avoid visiting places (foreign or at home) that don't use basic sanitation practices. If a restaurant makes you uncomfortable, follow your gut.

Between the aches and pains and general nausea of morning sickness, getting salmonella poisoning isn't any fun during pregnancy. Fortunately, it's not likely to hurt you or your baby. By taking the proper food safety and other precautions, you should be in the clear.

But if you do think you might have gotten infected, don't hesitate to contact your health care provider to find out for sure. If you are diagnosed as having food poisoning from salmonella, you and your baby will get through it just fine as long as you stay hydrated and take care of yourself while you're recovering.