What Does It Mean if Your Baby Hiccups in the Womb?

Light copy updates, updates to sources, fact-checked for accuracy.

Colorful rainbow balls bouncing on a rainbow spring against a pastel purple background

Ooh — what was that you just felt deep in your belly? Yup, your baby-on-board can actually hiccup in utero!

Babies can hiccup in the womb starting from around the middle or end of the second trimester, likely due to practice breathing that can cause diaphragm twitches. It can feel like a rhythmic pulsing in one spot that feels different from baby's other movements. Fetal hiccups are nothing to worry about — in fact, they're usually a good sign!

These hiccups are completely normal and harmless, though your belly might feel like a regular disco sometimes with all of the kicking and rolling going on in there. Read on to learn more about baby hiccups in utero, including what causes them and how to tell the difference between hiccups and fetal movements.

Key Takeaways

Babies can hiccup in the womb from around weeks 17 to 27, likely triggered by practice breathing that causes the diaphragm to twitch and the vocal cords to contract.

You'll recognise fetal hiccups as a rhythmic, forceful pulsing in one spot — unlike kicks and rolls, which move around the belly.

Fetal hiccups are normal and harmless , but reach out to your practitioner if you ever notice an overall decrease in fetal movement, particularly in the third trimester.

Can babies hiccup in the womb?

Yes, your developing baby can hiccup in utero. Although the exact cause is unknown, some experts believe it may have to do with your little one doing practice breaths.

During these breaths, the muscle in your developing baby's diaphragm, which is located just below the lungs, can sometimes twitch. It's that jerking motion that can cause the vocal cords to contract, allowing a tiny “hic” to emerge. Trusted SourceUT Southwestern Medical CenterFetal Hiccups Won%u2019t Harm Your Baby %u2013 They%u2019re Totally Normal!See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceUT Southwestern Medical CenterFetal Hiccups Won%u2019t Harm Your Baby %u2013 They%u2019re Totally Normal!See All Sources

Are fetal hiccups normal?

Rest assured that it's very common for your growing baby to hiccup and is nothing to be concerned about.

When your little one emits a “hic” in your belly, it doesn’t bother her. In fact, when you feel the sensation of her hiccupping in your bump, it’s probably more worrisome to you than it is to her.

When might you notice fetal hiccups?

Fetal hiccups tend to be noticeable toward the middle or end of the second trimester. Hiccupping in utero can start from about week 17 to week 27. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicFetal Development: The 2nd TrimesterSee All Sources [2] Your baby's lungs are continuing to develop at this point in pregnancy, so the likelihood that you’ll feel hiccupping in your belly increases.

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicFetal Development: The 2nd TrimesterSee All Sources

"I’m 36 weeks and have been feeling [hiccups] daily for a while now," says What to Expect Community mom babymama1132.

"My little guy gets hiccups at least once a day," adds MamaBarnOwl. "Hiccups are cute when I’m awake, but annoying when I’m trying to sleep!"

Curious about what’s happening inside your bump each week? Download the What to Expect app for personalized updates on your baby’s growth — plus what all those funny flutters and rhythms really mean.

How can you tell if your baby is hiccupping?

If your baby on board hiccups, her whole body reacts to each one. You can usually tell this is happening if you notice a somewhat forceful rhythmic pattern that lasts a few minutes before subsiding (you might feel a jerking motion or pulsing).

As for the difference between hiccups and other types of fetal movement , such as kicking? Fetal punches and rolls can be felt all over the belly, while hiccups tend to stay in one spot.

When should you call your doctor about fetal hiccups?

Although they can be a little distracting to a mom-to-be, try not to worry about fetal hiccups, as they're usually short-lived and completely harmless. But always make a call if you notice a decrease in the number of baby movements you usually feel.

That's especially important as you approach the end of your pregnancy: In the third trimester, your practitioner will ask you to count your baby's movements if you think there is decreased fetal movement. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicKick CountsSee All Sources [3] To do this, set aside some quiet time and pay attention to the rolls, punches, and kicks you feel (though hiccups don't count as movement in this case). Feeling 10 movements of any kind in an hour or less is considered normal, though sometimes it can take a bit longer.

When you think about it, fetal hiccups are sort of adorable! Try to relax when they occur and know that these common motions are very normal. And before you know it, your newborn will be hiccuping in your arms.