What to Do if Your Baby Hates the Bath

baby in bath

Rub-a-dub-dub — your little landlubber wants nothing to do with the tub. Here's why and how to say bye-bye to those baby bathtime blues.

Instead of happily splashing in the water, your baby wails whenever it’s time to take the plunge. What gives?

Well, there are many possible reasons for your water woes. Your little one may be letting you know (loudly!) that she’s cold. Or she may hate getting her tiny face wet or her hair shampooed. Then there’s the move to the big tub. Some tots have a hard time making the transition. But hang in there. We’ve got a boatload of tips to make your baby bathtime a fun time for all.

Check the temperature

Because babies get cold easily, make sure the room is toasty (75 to 80 degrees Fahrenheit is ideal). If you’re in the bathroom, you can steam up the room by running the shower before your baby’s bathtime. And have everything ready (supplies gathered, tub filled) before you undress your tot.

Get all hands on deck

How to slip your slippery little fish into the tub without startling her? With her head resting on your arm and your palm under her bottom, hold her arm securely with your other hand. Then gently slide your baby into the tub, feet first.

Even when she’s able to sit up , keep one hand on her at all times. A sudden dip underwater won’t harm her, but it’ll give her a scare. (Review these baby bath safety tips to keep down the fright factor for both of you.)

Try toys, toys, toys

Need we say more? Distraction is a great baby bathtime strategy. Rubber ducky and other floating toys are sure to delight.

But there’s no need to go overboard: Various plastic containers work well too. (To prevent mold from collecting on those playthings, dry toys between baths in a mesh bag and clean periodically.) If your baby is tiring of her toys, check out these other ways to show her some bathtime fun .

Ease into the big tub

Just because your baby is physically ready (she’s sitting without any support), doesn’t mean she’s emotionally ready to graduate. Take baby steps like these:

A few days before you upgrade, put her infant tub in the empty big tub and bathe her as usual.

If she seems interested, let your baby play with toys in the tub without water. (For safety reasons, lay a dry towel on the bottom of the tub and always stay by her side.)

Consider bathing with your baby until she’s used to the big tub. (Do remember to keep the bath temperature adjusted to her comfort level.)

Don’t make waves

Splashing is a big part of your baby’s bathtime fun. If she’s game, show her how to splash or do a little light splashing next to her.

But for many infants, the joy comes from being the splasher, not the splashee. So, follow her lead when it comes to splashing back.

Save the shampoo for last

Now that you’re in the big tub, wash your baby’s hair at the end of the bath (when she’s had her fun and is more relaxed). To make rinsing less traumatic, try using a spray hose (if your tub has one) or a shampoo visor (sold in baby stores and online).

Delay draining the tub

Ready to head ashore? Wait until your baby is out of the tub before you pull the plug. The sound of water rushing down the drain may frighten her.

Try, try again

Don’t worry if your little one doesn’t take the bait right away. Feel free to schedule bathtime just three times per week as long as you clean well during diaper changes . Be patient, and before you know it, your baby’s bathtime will become a treasured part of her day.