What Does Brown Discharge During Pregnancy Mean?

brown discharge during pregnancy is usually nothing to worry about

Experiencing brown discharge during pregnancy can be disconcerting. But in many cases it is no cause for concern.

A thin, clear or white vaginal discharge (known in the obstetrics business as leukorrhea ) is a normal part of having female parts. Healthy discharge comes in a variety of colors, though changes are usually signs something’s going on inside.

And when you’re expecting, all those pregnancy hormones make your discharge heavier and thicker.

But one of the biggest worries for pregnant women is brown discharge, probably because the color is so close to blood. The good news is, in the vast majority of cases, some brown discharge is just part of being a woman.

Key Takeaways

Brown discharge during pregnancy is usually just old blood making its way out and is often totally normal, especially after sex or a pelvic exam.

If you're almost at the end of your pregnancy, it could also be a sign that labor is near.

While it's usually nothing to worry about, let your doctor know about any spotting that turns bright red, comes with cramps, or feels off, just to be safe.

What is brown discharge during pregnancy?

As many women guess (and possibly fear, if they’re pregnant), brown discharge is discharge tinged with old blood.

For whatever reason, some blood in your uterus took longer to come out — and as it gets older, it turns brown. That means you end up with either brown spotting or a brownish-colored discharge.

Is brown discharge during pregnancy normal?

The good news is, brown discharge during pregnancy is usually normal and very likely does not mean something is wrong with you or your baby. In most cases, it’s completely harmless.

Curious about what’s normal and what’s not when it comes to discharge during pregnancy? Get personalized guidance and reassurance on the What to Expect app .

What causes brown discharge during pregnancy?

The most common cause for brown discharge is irritation. The surge of hormones and increased blood flow throughout your body during pregnancy makes the cervix super sensitive, and sex during pregnancy or a pelvic exam can aggravate it. That results in a bit of brown discharge or light spotting.

If you’re nearing the end of your pregnancy, brown discharge could also be a sign that labor is near . A couple of weeks to a few days before you give birth, you’ll lose your mucous plug (a glob of mucus that seals off the opening of the cervix during pregnancy).

And in the days just before labor, you’ll likely see "bloody show," or discharge tinged pink or brown with blood, which means your baby’s arrival is imminent. If you suspect you’re experiencing bloody show, call your health care provider immediately.

Complications associated with brown discharge during pregnancy

Whether you’re pregnant or not, in very rare cases brown discharge can be a sign of more serious issues — an impending miscarriage , ectopic pregnancy , problems with the placenta or a sign of an infection of the cervix or uterus. These conditions are usually accompanied by other symptoms.

If at any time the discharge turns into bright red spotting or bleeding , becomes gray in color, or if you experience abdominal cramping or tenderness, rapid uterine contractions or back pain, contact your doctor immediately.

What can you do if you have brown discharge during pregnancy?

If you notice brown discharge occasionally after sex, it’s more than likely normal — so make a note of it and use a panty liner for a day or two.

However if you notice a brown- or blood-tinged discharge after sex more than a few times a month (or for longer than a couple of weeks), or, if at any time the discharge is itchy, has a pungent odor or is accompanied by cramping, contact your doctor, as these could be signs of an infection or another more serious condition.

To be safe, experts recommend that pregnant women contact their health care providers any time they experience bleeding or spotting.

While it is more than likely not a sign that something’s wrong, it’s always best to err on the side of caution and let your doctor or midwife determine the next steps. He or she may do an ultrasound and pelvic exam to ensure everything’s okay (i.e. that baby is developing normally and there are no signs of infection).

If your health care provider does find any signs of a problem, he or she can take steps to treat you in a way that you both feel is best for you and your baby.

Treatments might include giving you an antibiotic or other medication to clear up an infection, recommending bed rest , or inducing labor , if it’s an emergency.

Frequently Asked Questions

What causes brown discharge at the end of pregnancy?

As your cervix dilates at the end of pregnancy, you may see some brown spotting. You could have brownish, mucus-like discharge if you lose your mucus plug. And you might have bloody show, which is a pink or brown discharge that signals that labor is about to start.

What cause brown discharge in early pregnancy?

Around the time that you would expect your period, you may experience implantation bleeding , which is usually pink or brown spotting. Brown discharge can also be caused by irritation of the cervix during sex. In most cases, brown discharge is normal, but give your doctor a call for any new bleeding or spotting during pregnancy.

Does brown discharge mean you're having a miscarriage?

Brown discharge is almost always normal, but in rare cases can signal a miscarriage or other complications. If your brown discharge becomes bright-red bleeding, you experience cramping or have other new symptoms, call your doctor immediately.

Why am I having brown discharge?

Brown discharge is a combination of vaginal fluid and old blood. In most cases during pregnancy, this is caused by irritation to the vagina or cervix, especially during sex. If you're concerned, give your doctor a call.