Is Better Skin Hiding in Your Grocery Cart? What Dermatologists Want Pregnant Moms to Eat (and Skip)

Here's what you should be eating for beautiful skin during pregnancy and the foods to avoid.

People say you are what you eat. But what does that really mean? Can a good diet save you from pesky skin problems like acne and eczema ?

What to Expect founder Heidi Murkoff and her daughter and second-time mom-to-be Emma Bing ask Los Angeles dermatologist, What to Expect Medical Review Board member, and author of Feed Your Face Dr. Jessica Wu if the key to beautiful skin (and a healthy baby) is sitting on your plate.

Key Takeaways

Yes, food matters. Want to ease eczema, acne, and dryness? By eating well, you can nourish your skin and support your baby-on-board too.

Target those nutrients. Derm docs say protein can help with elasticity, omega-3s ease acne, and probiotics can improve dryness (who knew?).

Skip sugar and processed foods. Inflammation is behind lots of pregnancy skin conditions, so watch out for hidden sugars in sauces, dressings, and snacks.

Can a healthy diet be linked to a healthier-looking complexion?

Yes! Your diet is everything. Dr. Wu says the right foods can help alleviate everything from acne and eczema to melasma and dry skin . Even stretch marks! The bonus? The foods that are good for your skin are also good for your baby.

What foods are good for my skin?

For melasma, Dr. Wu stresses getting enough folate and zinc . Wondering how to get them? Try beans and nuts.

To avoid stretch marks, Dr Wu. says that foods high in protein are key. Foods like grass-fed beef and high-protein veggies can help strengthen the elastic fibers in your skin that make it stretchier and harder for stretch marks to develop. Protein is also important for your baby’s brain development.

If you’re looking to tackle acne and rashes, you need some omega-3s. Dr. Wu’s favorite place to find them: walnuts, chia seeds, fish, and grass-fed beef (which is also high in zinc). As a bonus, omega-3s are great for babies.

Want eczema and dry skin to be gone? Probiotics can do the trick, according to Dr. Wu. So grab some Greek yogurt or pickles to help clear up those dry patches and satisfy your cravings. And if you need more of an excuse, probiotics can also help your baby and your breast milk.

What to Expect Community parent Emma12350 has battled dry skin during pregnancy and says, “This goes without saying, but make sure you're hydrating from the inside too! Water, water water. And, avoid taking SUPER hot showers.”

What are some foods to avoid during pregnancy?

Dr. Wu's number one “no-no” is sugar. And she's not talking about fruit or natural sugars. She means to stay away from sugary foods and secret sugars like that sneaky high-fructose corn syrup and added sugars in things including sauces and even salad dressings. She also recommends avoiding processed food.

Why does Wu suggest ditching the candy bars? They're delicious, but they cause higher blood sugar, which in turn can lead to inflammation.

Find more savvy advice and expert tips on the What to Expect app so you can eat well and keep your glow on too, every week during pregnancy.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The Hidden Skin Care Ingredients That Aren't Safe for Expectant Moms Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Can Leave Your Skin Feeling Parched Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Oily Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Skin Changes During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Makes Your Skin Sensitive — and What Actually Helps Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Pregnancy Acne: Why It Happens and Safe Ways to Treat It Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Dark Patches on Your Face? Here’s What a Dermatologist Says About Pregnancy Melasma Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Should I Use Sunscreen When I'm Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is Acne a Sign of Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Pregnancy Superfoods: Building Your Baby Bite by Bite Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Is it Safe to Get A Facial When You're Pregnant or Trying to Conceive? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Postpartum Skin Care Guide Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

6 Stretch Mark Creams Moms-to-Be Can’t Stop Buying (and Derms Approve, Too) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window