Is It Safe to Buy Used Baby Gear?

Minor copy and formatting changes.

buying baby gear new or used

Buying used baby gear or accepting hand-me-downs from friends and family can save money — but not everything is safe to use twice. Here’s what you can reuse or buy secondhand, and what you should buy new.

From strollers and cribs to clothes and diapers, the amount of stuff your little one requires can add up quickly. In an effort to cut costs, many parents-to-be scour the internet for used baby gear and welcome hand-me-downs — and we do mean many. According to a What to Expect survey, 66 percent of new or expecting moms report buying secondhand baby gear. This money-saving technique is especially common among Gen Z: 76 percent of Gen Z respondents say they've purchased secondhand baby gear, compared to 63 percent of Millennial and 55 percent of Gen X respondents.

Although it's totally fine to buy some used products, not every product is safe to buy secondhand. For example, the American Academy of Pediatrics advises against used car seats because they could be expired or missing parts. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCar Seats: Information for FamiliesSee All Sources [1] Despite this guidance, 19 percent of moms surveyed have purchased a used car seat.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCar Seats: Information for FamiliesSee All Sources

So when can you safely save on a secondhand item? Here's which items you can buy used and which you should get new.

Baby gear you can consider reusing or buying secondhand

Bathtub

Baby bathtubs are fine to buy used as long as you check to be sure there's no mold or mildew. Babies grow out of these faster than you can say "rubber ducky," so you should be able to save money on one that was barely used. Just avoid bath rings or inflatable tubs that fit in the bath, as they can be dangerous.

Changing table

You can definitely save money by purchasing a gently used changing table . Just choose one with a safety strap, and watch out for chipping paint and missing parts. If you're short on space, you can also buy a changing pad and will turn any surface into a temporary changing station.

Cloth diapers

A little-known reason cloth diapers can be budget-friendly is that they have a good resale value when you're through with them. So if you happen to go the reusable route, buying old inserts and diaper covers is not only affordable, it can be perfectly hygienic too. A few washes, or one if your washing machine has a "sanitize" cycle, gets rid of any buildup.

Clothes

Buying new baby clothes can be as fun as shopping the racks for yourself! But before you scoop up every adorable item you see, a tip: Your little one will gain 1 pound and lengthen by 1 inch each month on average. It's definitely smart to ask for hand-me-downs or shop resale sites (especially with dressy or holiday clothes and shoes).

Check your finds for drawstrings, loose buttons or ties, which could be choking or entanglement hazards, and ensure sleepwear is flame-resistant.

High chair

Voluntary safety standards require a high chair to have a three-point harness with a crotch restraint to prevent a child from climbing out, as well as a fixed crotch post so he can't slide out. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionCPSC Approves New Federal Safety Standard for High ChairsSee All Sources [2] If these two features are accounted for, a hand-me-down high chair is fine. Avoid high chairs with arms that lift the tray over the baby's head.

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionCPSC Approves New Federal Safety Standard for High ChairsSee All Sources

Toys

It's impossible to predict what your baby will enjoy, so go easy on your wallet and test out secondhand playthings and board books before you buy all new toys. Look out for loose hardware or chipping paint, and leave behind anything with small parts that could be choking hazards . Simple toys with few or no moving parts, like blocks, rattles and stacking cups, are consistently safe bets.

Baby gear to buy new

Baby carrier

Strap-on carriers and slings are notorious for recalls, so buy new to ensure that you're carrying your baby safely — and even then, check that straps, snaps and other closures work as intended. Check out our roundup of the best baby carriers .

Breast pump

Secondhand breast pumps are everywhere, and yes, new pumps are pricey. But a used consumer-grade pump (if it isn't your own, of course) has the potential for cross-contamination. Trusted SourceFood and Drug AdministrationBuying and Renting a Breast PumpSee All Sources [3] The risk just isn't worth it. Plus, since the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), you're likely eligible for a free breast pump through insurance. If you're looking to buy a new breast pump, here are some of the best breast pumps for breastfeeding moms.

Trusted SourceFood and Drug AdministrationBuying and Renting a Breast PumpSee All Sources

Car seat

While a car seat can be pricey, this is money well spent. Safety standards for car seats change frequently, and materials — even of the most expensive models — degrade over time. What's more, many parents don't realize that car seats also have expiration dates . Also, a seat's past history can prevent it from fully protecting your child in an accident. So play it safe and buy new. If you must accept a used car seat, ask these questions:

How old is it? You'll find a car seat's expiration date in the owner's manual and on the seat's label; most are made to last six years. If you can't find it or if it's expired, move along.

Do you trust the seller? You can often reuse a car seat after a minor fender bender. But any collision that involved injuries, deployed air bags or towing of the vehicle is a huge red flag, so confirm that it has not been in a crash before accepting it.

Has it been recalled? Check the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration website or the manufacturer's website to find out.

Take a look at our lists for the best convertible car seats .

Crib

Federal regulations changed in 2011, prohibiting manufacturers from producing drop-side cribs, which can be dangerous for babies and even deadly. You may see them at yard sales, but pass them by. If you can't afford a new crib, a new portable crib — which is less expensive but just as safe as a full-size one — is preferable. Everyone will get a better night's sleep. Here are some of the best cribs for baby's nursery.

Mattress

For sanitary reasons, it's best to avoid reusing crib mattresses too — it's guaranteed another baby has peed, pooped and spit up in them, and they can become contaminated with bacteria and mold. Older mattresses sometimes contain chemicals that are best avoided (phthalates, BPA). Plus, mattresses get softer with use, and it’s best to always use a firm mattress to help prevent SIDS . Check out the best crib mattress options for your little one.

Playard

Newer playard models more likely adhere to safety standards that went into effect in 2013, which reduced the risk of entrapment and strangulation. Here are the best playards and pack 'n plays we recommend.

Stroller

Strollers have evolved a lot through the years, making some considerably safer and more turnkey. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Choose a Safe Baby StrollerSee All Sources [4] In fact, new standards went into effect in 2015. Considering this is usually the workhorse in your stable of baby gear, ante up for one of the latest models. These are the best strollers, according to parents.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Choose a Safe Baby StrollerSee All Sources

Safety tips when buying used baby products

Before you buy any used baby gear, ask these questions:

What's the model number? Checking for recalls is job one. For the latest recall information, visit Recalls.gov .

Is it in good condition? Make sure the item is not damaged or missing any parts.

Does it come with the instruction manual? You need it to see when the item was made and to ensure proper usage. You can also frequently find instruction manuals online if you know the model number and when it was made.

Where to find used baby gear

As you set out on your quest to score gentle used baby gear, you might be wondering where to start. Here are some of the top-recommended places to find used baby gear, according to community moms.

Family and friends : You might be surprised by how many of your own family and friends are looking to get rid of baby gear that they no longer need. Before checking online or local marketplaces, text some of your family and friends who you think might have baby gear that they no longer use.

Rebelstork : It's hard to know just from looking at their website that Rebelstork is not an actual retailer, but rather a company that helps facilitate the re-selling and re-buying of all sorts of baby gear.

thredUP : If you're looking to update your baby’s wardrobe without breaking the bank, try thredUP, an online consignment store that facilitates the buying and selling of second-hand clothes that show no signs of wear and tear. Everything is organized by category, which streamlines the shopping experience; you can even sort by size, brand, color and material.

Toycycle : You can expect your baby to go through toys just as fast as she goes through clothes, especially in that first year, which is why it can be helpful to shop second-hand. Toycycle offers just that—it's an online marketplace that recycles gently used toys (as well as clothing and other types of baby gear) and organizes them by category and brand.

Mercari : This app makes it easy to find second-hand (or sometimes new!) products across all categories. It has a ton of baby gear, including clothes, swings and even toys, and makes it easy to buy and sell thanks to an excellent algorithm and search function. The only downside is that Mercari takes a cut of each sale.

Amazon Warehouse : Through Amazon Warehouse you can find a range of used, pre-owned or opened (but unused) baby items — toys, high chairs and even diapers — at a discounted price. Amazon checks the product's functionality, physical condition, and packaging damage before awarding it a "grade" and listing it for sale, so you know the type of quality you're getting. Keep in mind not every item on Amazon is available on Amazon Warehouse, since it's based on returns and exchanges.

Methodology

The Everyday Health Group Pregnancy and Parenting October monthly poll was conducted October 28-29, 2022 polling 401 U.S. women ages 18-45 who are pregnant or have at least one child 0-5 years old. Specific questions from the poll focused on assessing the secondhand baby item buying habits of moms for What to Expect.