What’s So Great About Lululemon’s Belt Bag? An Honest Review From a Mom of 3

Lululemon Belt Bag Review

Tired of lugging around a diaper bag, I decided to give Lululemon's popular belt bag a try.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

What Is It? Lululemon Everywhere Belt Bag

Why I Love It: This lightweight belt bag is surprisingly spacious, making it perfect for stashing snacks, sunscreen and more when you're out with the kids.

How Much Is It? $38

Where to Buy It : Lululemon

Chances are, you’ve seen someone rocking a Lululemon Everywhere Belt Bag at the playground or in your Mommy and Me class. Despite watching this accessory grow in popularity over the years and hearing rave reviews from friends, I was hesitant to jump on the trend. Didn’t fanny packs go out of style in the '90s? How could this compact bag possibly hold everything I need as a mom of three?

Eventually, though, I no longer needed the massive space my diaper bag provided and decided to give Lululemon's popular belt bag a try. Worst-case scenario, it wouldn’t work for me, and I could just pass it on to one of my kids. That was a few years ago, and now this elevated fanny pack has become a wardrobe staple. It carries everything I need to get through errands or outings with the kids — without ever weighing me down.

If you've been on the fence about adding the belt bag to your cart, here are a few reasons why it’s worth purchasing.

The Pros

Spaciousness

I’ve owned some similarly sized bags before and could never fit everything I needed. The Everywhere Belt Bag, however, stores all my essentials — phone, wallet, keys, stick sunscreen, lip gloss, hand sanitizer, and random hair ties — with ease. This makes sense, given the bag boasts a 1-liter volume and measures 7.5 inches long, 2 inches deep and 5 inches tall.

Plus, zippers and pockets keep the bag from becoming a disorganized mess.

Lululemon Belt Bag

The outer zip pocket is especially useful for stashing my car keys, so I don’t have to dig around to find them. There are also a couple of smaller interior compartments where I tend to keep things like gum and credit cards when I'm not carrying a wallet. Yet, no matter how much stuff in it, the belt bag remains shockingly lightweight. And for lighter loads, I hardly feel it at all.

In an ideal world, it would also fit a small pack of baby wipes or a diaper or two. But in those instances, it might make more sense just to bring a backpack.

Versatility

Whether I’m running errands, at the playground, or out for date night, this bag is my go-to. Not only is it great on its own, but it also prevents my other bags from becoming bottomless pits. For instance, I can see it perfectly accompanying a giant tote or beach bag, keeping your small essentials safe and easily accessible.

Lululemon Belt Bag

That's why I never travel without it: It's an easily accessible, smaller bag that keeps my carry-on a little more orderly. (Have you ever tried fishing for your ID with a child in tow?) Thanks to the easy-to-adjust straps, the bag can be worn as a fanny pack or a crossbody, which has definitely come in handy in these instances.

Durability

Made of sturdy, water-resistant nylon, the Lululemon Everywhere Belt Bag is as durable as advertised. I’ve carelessly tossed mine on the ground, spilled water on it, and have even had kids accidentally trample over it, and it still looks fantastic. (Pro mom tip: the black color definitely hides any wear and tear.)

Similarly, the straps haven’t frayed and are still easy to manipulate.

Color Options

I definitely know more than a few friends who own it in multiple colors to coordinate with various outfits, and I can’t say I haven’t been tempted myself. While I find that black goes with everything, there are also bright pastels and earthy hues to choose from. The style comes in a miniature size and a slightly roomier 2-liter version , too.

Lululemon Everywhere Belt Bag

Considerations

I haven’t found too many downsides, but there is one thing you should keep in mind before you buy: the cost. The $38 price tag might be steep for some, especially given the number of many more affordable no-name brand belt bags out there. However, considering the durable material and the bag's versatility, I think it basically pays for itself.

The good news? You can often find the Everywhere Belt Bag hiding out in Lululemon’s "We Made Too Much" section. During certain holidays, like the upcoming Labor Day weekend , the brand fills this section with some of its more popular items at a lower price. I’ve seen the bag available in select colorways for as low as $29.

Is the Lululemon Everywhere Belt Bag Worth It?

For me, the Lululemon Everywhere Belt Bag is well worth $38. It’s incredibly versatile and lightweight while holding all the essentials — and then some. The durable, water-repellant design ensures the bag will last for years, which is great because once you start using it, you'll never want to take it off.

Your Next Read

15 Products That Leave Moms Saying 'TikTok Made Me Buy It' Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Is the Artipoppe Zeitgeist Baby Carrier Worth the Steep Price Tag? One Mom's Candid Opinion By Kelsey Haywood Lucas

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Is the Doona Car Seat & Stroller Worth the $550 Price Tag? Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

I Chose the Nuna Travel System Over the Doona — Here’s Why I’d Do It Again By Elizabeth Buxton, Director of Commerce Content Strategy

Is the Stokke Tripp Trapp Worth It? One Mom's Honest Review Fact Checked by Robin Hilmantel, Editorial Director, Special Projects

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window