What Happens If You Fall While Pregnant?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Falling while pregnant, banana peel on blue background

Taking a tumble when you're pregnant can be scary. Find out what happens afterward, when to call your doctor, and how to prevent it.

While falling during pregnancy can certainly be scary — and painful — it's rare that your baby will be harmed. Your uterus, which is lined with strong muscles and cushioned by amniotic fluid, can cushion most blows. Still, let your practitioner know if you've fallen, since a fall can cause complications like placental abruption.

Here's more about what can happen if you fall while pregnant, as well as some ways to prevent accidental falls in the first place.

Key Takeaways

Most falls during pregnancy won't harm your baby. Your uterus, amniotic fluid, and surrounding muscles help cushion and protect your baby from most minor bumps and falls.

Call your health care provider after any fall during pregnancy. Seek immediate medical care if you have symptoms like vaginal bleeding, contractions, abdominal pain, or decreased fetal movement.

Pregnancy can make you more prone to slips and stumbles. Changes in balance, loosening joints, and fatigue can increase your risk of falling, but taking precautions like wearing supportive shoes and moving carefully can help keep you safe.

Feeling dizzy since you've been pregnant? Track your symptoms in the My Journal tool on the What to Expect app .

What happens if you fall while pregnant?

Falls aren't uncommon during pregnancy, and chances are both you and your baby will be just fine. Throughout pregnancy, your body is designed to help protect your growing baby. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicI'm Pregnant and Recently Fell. Should I Be Worried?See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicI'm Pregnant and Recently Fell. Should I Be Worried?See All Sources

Your baby is cushioned by shock-absorbing amniotic fluid, a strong muscular uterus, and sturdy membranes, all of which help absorb impact. In most cases, it would take a severe accident for a fall to seriously affect your baby.

But in rare cases, a fall during pregnancy can lead to complications including contractions , leaking amniotic fluid , or placental abruption (when the placenta separates from the wall of the uterus), which is a medical emergency.

"I fell at 36 weeks and planted right on my belly," says What to Expect Community mom MyAprilandAugustBabies. "My belly was so huge it looked like I was bouncing on my stomach on a yoga ball. We went to the hospital right away and everything was fine. The doctor told me that the baby is like in a balloon filled with water and they're really safe, though they need to check for something happening to the placenta."

Should I go to the ER if I fall?

Head to the emergency room right away if your fall was severe or you're experiencing concerning symptoms, such as:

Vaginal bleeding

Abdominal pain

Uterine contractions

Decreased fetal movement

Otherwise, contact your health care practitioner after a fall so they can help determine whether you or your baby should be checked out. In some cases — especially later in pregnancy or if there was direct trauma to your abdomen — your practitioner may want to examine you.

Depending on the nature of the fall and how far along you are, your practitioner may recommend fetal heart rate monitoring or an ultrasound to make sure everything looks okay.

If you're Rh-negative and experience bleeding, you may also need a RhoGAM shot to prevent your body from producing antibodies against your baby's blood cells.

"I slipped at 27 weeks, caught myself but still hit my knee and shin on concrete," says Community mom hopepetty. "I started bleeding 24 hours later and ended up in the hospital for nine days with partial placental abruption. It was really scary!"

Why am I prone to falling?

There are a lot of reasons why pregnancy — particularly the third trimester — may trip you up, including: Trusted SourceThe Journal of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal MedicineRisk Factors for Accidental Falls During Pregnancy - A Systematic Literature ReviewSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceThe Journal of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal MedicineRisk Factors for Accidental Falls During Pregnancy - A Systematic Literature ReviewSee All Sources

Shift in your center of gravity . As your belly grows, your center of gravity shifts forward, making it harder for you to stay upright, especially on uneven surfaces like a sidewalk curb.

Loosened joints . The closer you get to delivery, the looser your joints become due to the pregnancy hormone relaxin . This hormone helps loosen the joints and connective tissues in your pelvis in preparation for labor and delivery . But until then, your loose joints can also make you unstable on your feet and more likely to fall.

Fatigue . You may be exhausted, uncomfortable, dizzy , preoccupied, or forgetful — all of which can increase your risk of a fall.

"I actually fell a lot starting around 28 weeks when I really started to show," says Community mom MeemToCEM. "It was strange, like I had no idea where my body was in space!"

How can I prevent falling while pregnant?

Sometimes a fall can't be prevented. But by taking a few precautions and adopting new habits, you might be able to avoid falling while pregnant. Here are some smart tips to try:

Choose supportive, low-heeled shoes. Flat shoes, sneakers, or low wedges are safer choices than tippy heels. But watch out for flip-flops, which are flat but can be unstable for walking.

Remove or tape down tripping hazards. To prevent falls at home, remove or tape down loose throw rugs (or attach a no-slip pad underneath) and keep toys, books, and magazines off the floor.

Use the railings. It seems obvious, but make a habit of always holding the rail for extra support as you walk up and down stairs. It would also be a good idea to install bathtub and shower bars so that you have something to hold onto as you get into and out of the bath.

Move carefully. There's no need to speed-walk when you're expecting! Take your time when walking , especially on stairs, wet surfaces, or uneven ground.

Stick to even surfaces whenever possible. Sidewalks are your best bet for walking rather than uneven surfaces like grass or bumpy trails in the woods.

Skip heavy loads. Don't be a hero by carrying that huge laundry basket. Instead, share the work with family members whenever you can.

Choose stationary cycling over outdoor biking. If you love to cycle, stick to indoor cycling since your growing middle can challenge your balance, making it riskier to ride a standard bike outside.

Keep your energy up. Keep healthy snacks and a small water bottle in your purse or desk so you head off any dizziness caused by low blood sugar or thirst . Have you been feeling fatigued? Make sure to take lots of breaks during the day to rest and revive.

A fall during pregnancy can feel frightening, but in most cases your body is well equipped to protect your growing baby. Just be sure to tell your practitioner about the fall, and seek immediate medical care if you experience concerning symptoms like bleeding, contractions, abdominal pain, or decreased fetal movement.