What Should I Expect Physically After a Pregnancy Loss?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

postpartum recovery after pregnancy loss, symptoms after miscarriage, heart of butterflies with some flying away

Pregnancy loss can bring a wave of emotions — but your body is healing too. Here’s what symptoms are common after a miscarriage, D&C, or stillbirth, how long recovery may take, and when to call your doctor.

Pregnancy loss can be heartbreaking no matter when it happens. Whether you have an early miscarriage , experience the tragedy of a stillbirth , or have to make the gut-wrenching decision to terminate your pregnancy for medical reasons (if abortion is legal in your state), your emotions are likely at the forefront.

Still, it can help to have a sense of what your body may go through physically and how long it may take to heal. While it can take weeks, months, or even longer to process your emotions after a pregnancy loss, your body will likely recover more quickly.

How long physical recovery takes largely depends on how far along your pregnancy was. If you had a miscarriage , for example, you'll usually have fewer symptoms and a quicker recovery than if you experienced a stillbirth. Here's what to expect.

Key Takeaways

Physical symptoms after pregnancy loss can vary. After an early miscarriage, you might have period-like bleeding and mild cramping for a few days, followed by spotting for a few weeks. Losses later in pregnancy can come with more typical postpartum symptoms like heavier bleeding, fatigue, and breast engorgement.

Your body will usually recover faster than your emotions. Bleeding and cramping after an early loss typically ease within days or weeks, and your period often returns within four to six weeks. Recovery after a later pregnancy loss can take longer physically, with postpartum symptoms sometimes lasting up to six weeks.

Know the signs that mean it’s time to call your doctor. Heavy or prolonged bleeding, fever, foul-smelling discharge, severe pain, or other concerning symptoms could signal an infection or complication. If something doesn’t feel right, it’s always best to check in with your provider.

What will my recovery be like after a miscarriage?

After a miscarriage, you may experience:

Period-like bleeding and mild cramping for a few days

Spotting for a few weeks as the contents of the uterus continue to be expelled

Return of your period in about four to six weeks — a sign that your body is physically capable of pregnancy again, if and when you feel like you’re ready to give it another try

"I was about 8 weeks, and I bled for six days," says What to Expect Community member marathonmama22. "The sixth was very light spotting, and the heaviest were days one through three."

To reduce the risk of infection, avoid sex and don’t put anything in your vagina (including tampons) for about two weeks.

What will my recovery be like after a dilation and curettage (D&C)?

A dilation and curettage (D&C) is a minor surgical procedure sometimes used to remove remaining tissue from the uterus after a miscarriage. It can also be used in the medical termination of a pregnancy.

In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled there is no constitutional right to abortion, meaning states now determine whether abortion is legal within their borders. Depending on where you live, you may not have the option to medically terminate a pregnancy.

Most women start to feel physically back to normal within a few days of a D&C. In addition to the drowsiness or nausea you may experience for a few hours after anesthesia, you may have:

Mild cramping for a few days

Light bleeding for a few days

Diarrhea for few days

Return of your period within about four to six weeks (though it may come earlier or later)

"I had a D&C on September 16 and got my period on October 12," says Community member Teteia. "My period brought me some closure. We'll try again this month."

It's important to avoid sex, tampons, or putting anything into the vagina for a full week after the procedure to reduce the risk of infection.

What will my recovery be like after a vaginal stillbirth?

The recovery timeline for later pregnancy losses is longer. Though it can be hard to think about, the physical process of a vaginal stillbirth is usually similar to that of a vaginal live birth. You may experience:

Heavy bleeding for a few days that gradually tapers off over about six weeks, changing from red to pink to brown and eventually a yellowish-white discharge

Body aches and fatigue or a few days

Breast engorgement or tenderness for a week or two

Perineal discomfort for three to six weeks, though it may take longer if you had a tear or an episiotomy

Abdominal cramping for up to six weeks as your uterus shrinks back to its normal size (these cramps should gradually decrease over time)

Other typical postpartum symptoms

Return of period sometime between six and 12 weeks, though it may appear as soon as four weeks or as late as 24 weeks

If you’re going through a loss, know that you’re not alone. The What to Expect app connects you with expert guidance and a community of parents who understand — so you can find both information and support when you need it most.

When to call your doctor

After pregnancy loss, it's understandable to focus mainly on the emotional side of recovery. But it's also important to watch for signs of complications.

Call your doctor if you experience any of the following:

After a miscarriage

Bleeding that lasts longer than seven days

Foul-smelling discharge

Fever

Chills

Abdominal pain

After a D&C

Heavy bleeding that lasts longer than your usual period

Foul-smelling discharge

Fever

Chills

Severe abdominal pain

After a vaginal stillbirth

Any potential postpartum warning signs including:

Very heavy bleeding or large clots

Redness or swelling in your leg

Severe headache

Fever

Chest pain

Trouble breathing

Seizures

Dealing with a pregnancy loss can be incredibly difficult. But understanding the physical symptoms your body may go through — and how long recovery might take — can help you know what to expect.

Give yourself the time and space you need to heal. Gradually, your body will recover, and you'll start to feel like yourself again.