What Your 10- to 12-Month-Old's Sleep Schedule Probably Looks Like Right Now

Light copy changes and updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

10-month-old sleep schedule baby in crib

How much should your baby be sleeping at 10, 11, and 12 months, and how can you cope with speed bumps that might arise? Here are all of your sleep questions, answered.

Can you believe your 10-month-old has almost reached her first birthday? As your baby approaches toddlerhood, you might notice that her sleep patterns are changing yet again. In particular, she may fight naps or bedtime more than before.

That might leave you wondering if it's time for a change in her sleep schedule as well as what you should be doing to handle her mounting sleep protests.

Here's a look at what's normal when it comes to sleep for older babies, including a sample schedule to figure out whether you're on the right track. Plus, the best way to cope if your 10-month-old is having a tough time in the sleep department.

Key Takeaways

Most 10- to 12-month-olds need to sleep between 12 and 16 hours total (10 to 12 hours overnight, plus two naps). At this age, your baby likely thrives on a consistent schedule.

Common sleep disruptions at this stage can be due to developmental milestones, separation anxiety, or teething. The 8- to 10-month sleep regression can also happen right about now, leading to bedtime resistance or night waking.

To encourage your baby's sleep schedule, maintain a calming bedtime routine, consider introducing a comfort object, stick to two naps, and limit total daytime sleep to no more than four hours. You can also think about sleep training for self-soothing.

How much should a 10-month-old sleep?

At 10 months (and 11 and 12 months too), your baby's sleep needs are probably pretty similar to what they were at 9 months. Your little one is likely snoozing for about 14 hours a day, although anywhere from 12 to 16 hours is within the realm of normal. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursSleep and Your 8- to 12-Month-OldSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursSleep and Your 8- to 12-Month-OldSee All Sources

She's probably logging 10 to 12 hours of sleep at night along with two naps, each lasting somewhere between one and two hours.

Sample sleep schedule for a 10-month-old

The exact timing for bedtime and naps varies from baby to baby. But when it comes to sleep schedules , your 10-month-old has probably fallen into a fairly predictable pattern.

Babies this age usually wake on the early side, take a morning and an afternoon nap, and go to bed between 7 p.m. and 8 p.m., getting 10 to 12 hours of sleep during the night. At 11 and 12 months, they will likely follow similar schedules. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources

Here's an example of what your 10-month-old's sleep schedule might look like:

7:00 a.m.: Awake

9:30 a.m.: Nap

11:00 a.m.: Awake

2:30 p.m.: Nap

4:00 p.m.: Awake

7:00 p.m.: Bedtime routine

7:30 p.m.: Bedtime

What is the 10-month-old sleep regression?

At this point on your parenting journey, you're probably all too familiar with sleep regressions — those temporary disruptions to your baby's sleep routine. When she's going through a regression, your baby likely struggles to fall asleep or wakes more often during the night.

Many babies experience the first sleep regression around 4 months , and they often crop up again at 6 months and between 8 and 10 months .

"My son is almost 11 months old. For the last several weeks he’s been waking up constantly," says What to Expect Community user ninsbabe. "Prior to this he was awake what I felt was a normal amount throughout the night and I was able to get a restful enough sleep by getting a few consecutive hours."

Here's why: Sleep regressions tend to strike when your baby is passing through a big developmental phase or mastering a new skill. These advances can lead to restlessness, which can make it harder for her to snooze soundly.

And developmentally, the 8- to 10-month period has a lot going on. At 10 months, some babies are still getting the hang of crawling , pulling up or saying their first words .

"It DOES get better," says What to Expect Community user mojosmomma. "The 9/10 month sleep regression lasted a really long time for us. It’s was hard. ... It ended a few days after she officially learned to walk, so I think it had something to do with that."

What's more, separation anxiety may also appear around this time. As your baby's memory improves and her sense of self matures, she's more likely to feel upset when you're not around — including at bedtime and during the night.

Can you sleep train a 10-month-old?

If you haven't already sleep trained your baby and she continues to struggle to fall asleep or often wakes during the night, it might be worth trying this month.

Most pediatricians give parents the green light to sleep train between 4 and 6 months, but you can start later too. Trusted SourceUniversity of Chicago MedicineA Parent%u2019s Guide to Sleep Training Infants and toddlersSee All Sources [3] Just keep in mind that sleep training at 10 months might be a little more challenging. With her sharper memory and increased attachment to you, your 10-month-old will likely have a harder time giving up those middle-of-the-night snacks and snuggles that she's grown used to.

Trusted SourceUniversity of Chicago MedicineA Parent%u2019s Guide to Sleep Training Infants and toddlersSee All Sources

That's not to say sleep training can't work. It can, and many parents say these methods help their babies learn how to self-soothe — it just might take longer for your 10-, 11- or 12-month-old to get the hang of her new nighttime routine.

In the meantime, your best course of action is to stick with your baby's bedtime routine and whichever form of sleep training you choose, whether it's cry it out (CIO), Ferber , or one of the other sleep training methods . The more consistent you are, the sooner she'll come to accept the change.

10-month-old sleep tips

At 10 months, much of the same sleep advice that you've likely already been following still applies. But if a sleep regression or separation anxiety seems to be causing your little one's sleep snafus, you now have some additional tools in your toolbox to help her cope.

Keep a bedtime routine. By now, you probably know that you should establish a calm, predictable groove to help your baby wind down at the end of the day. A bath, final feeding, story or a song and plenty of snuggles all work. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBrush, Book, Bed: How to Structure Your Child%u2019s Nighttime RoutineSee All Sources [4]

Introduce a lovey. If you suspect separation anxiety is affecting your little one's sleep, try offering a transitional object like a favorite small, snuggly item. (Avoid big blankets at least until your child's first birthday .) Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources [5] Cuddling something cozy and familiar might make it easier for her to fall asleep without you.

Be consistent in how you offer comfort. If your baby cries, it's fine to go in and calmly reassure her. Just stick with the same approach every time — use the same words, and try not to resort to picking her up to rock, feed, or play with her. Your goal is to offer a little less comfort each night, not form new habits that could potentially make it even harder for her to fall asleep without you.

Resist the urge to drop the morning nap. While some 10-month-olds start to fight their morning nap, the vast majority still need two snooze sessions per day. Dropping the morning nap at this age usually results in an overtired baby , which can make it even harder for her to settle down and sleep well. If your baby absolutely refuses to nap in the morning, try bumping her afternoon nap up and aiming for a slightly earlier bedtime.

But don't let your baby nap too much either. Too much daytime dozing might mean your baby isn't as tired at night, so consider capping naps at four hours total per day.

Encourage crib naps. Your baby will sleep more soundly in her crib than she would in her stroller, and making crib naps part of her routine will help her sleep better at night. Of course, occasional on-the-go naps are inevitable, but try not to make it a habit.

10-month-old sleep problems

Though you could do without them, sleep-related speed bumps are part of babyhood — especially around the 8- to 10-month mark.

These days, it's perfectly normal to experience temporary sleep disruptions. A few possible problems that might arise this month:

Separation anxiety or other developmental milestones. Mastering crawling, pulling up, saying first words or just wanting to be near you all the time can trigger a sleep regression. Be consistent with your baby's bedtime routine (and consider sleep training, if you haven't already).

Teething. As you probably know by now, a sprouting tooth can be uncomfortable — and the painful process may interrupt baby's sleep. Offer teething rings , and if they don't seem to help, ask your pediatrician about infant acetaminophen. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsWhen Does Teething Start?See All Sources [6]

Waking up at the crack of dawn. Most babies are early risers, but if your 10-month-old regularly wakes before 6 a.m., you may need to tweak her schedule. Try putting her to bed a little earlier or later, or encouraging more daytime sleep.

Trouble falling asleep on her own. If your 10-month-old is used to being rocked or fed to sleep, she might struggle when you decide to stop. Again, if you haven't tried it yet, sleep training may help her learn how to self-soothe.

Sleep speed bumps aren't uncommon in older babies, who may be getting their first taste of separation anxiety or passing through some major physical developmental milestones.

Is your 10- to 12-month-old's sleep still inconsistent? The What to Expect app has tips for navigating regressions and implementing a solid routine, plus a community of parents who have navigated similar issues.

While you can't make your 10-month-old's sleep disruptions disappear instantly (wouldn't that be nice?), continuing to encourage good sleep habits can help you both get through a rough patch sooner rather than later.

More sleep schedules for babies: