What to Write in a Baby Birth Announcement

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

birth announcement

Your bundle of joy is finally here, and you can't wait to spread the big news! These birth announcement tips will make sharing baby's arrival easy.

In a world where you can tweet about every contraction and text loved ones photos of your newborn shortly after she arrives, your friends and family probably won't have to wait long to learn of your baby's debut. Even so, many new parents like to share their exciting news with a formal baby birth announcement.

There are a few benefits to sending out a birth announcement . For one, it can be a beautiful keepsake your family will treasure long after your little one's birthday. Loved ones who are a little less tech-savvy may particularly appreciate a hard copy, and the announcement will likely adorn your friends' refrigerators for months to come.

“Whenever I get them from friends and family in the mail, I hang them on my fridge. I still have ones up from like now 8 year-olds,” says What to Expect Community mom melbell2024.

Of course, it's certainly not required to send a formal birth announcement — these days, many families prefer to simply share their news on social media. And if you like the idea of a birth announcement but are feeling overwhelmed by the thought of addressing and mailing dozens of cards, you might find it easier to send a digital announcement.

Whether you choose an engraved note, hand-printed postcard, or simple email, here are some pointers on birth announcements, from what information to include to when to send them.

Key Takeaways

Birth announcements are optional — but they make a sweet keepsake. Share by snail mail or go digital, whatever fits your new-parent bandwidth.

Stick to the basics. Include baby’s name, sex, and birth date, plus optional details like weight/length, parent and sibling names, and a photo — but skip any mention of the registry.

Send when you can, ideally within three to six months. Mail to family, friends, and coworkers if you’d like, but no need to include folks who didn’t know you were pregnant in the first place.

What should you write in a baby birth announcement?

The goal of a birth announcement is to share key information about your new baby with loved ones. If you're not sure what to write, use the following as a template:

Baby's full name. Most parents share their child's first, middle, and last name.

Baby's sex. Did you have a boy or girl?

Baby's date of birth. When was your baby born? Most parents share the day, month, and year, and some opt to include time of birth.

Baby's weight and length. This is optional, but feel free to include these details if you'd like.

Baby's birth time and place. These are fun facts, but they're not essential if you're short on space.

Your family's names. Don't forget to include the names of the (very!) proud parents and any siblings.

Baby's photo. Whether or not to include a photo of your newborn is entirely up to you, but some parents use birth announcements as an opportunity to share a sweet snapshot of their little one or growing family.

Sample birth announcement wording:

We joyfully welcome Taylor Anne Smith January 1, 2025 7 lb., 5 oz. 19 inches Proud parents Gloria and John Smith Big sister Sara Jane

As for what a birth announcement should not include? There are no formal rules, though if you have a baby registry , you probably don't want to mention it here, since the purpose is to announce your child's birth rather than ask for gifts.

Finally, don't stress out about writing personal notes on every birth announcement — it's not necessary or expected, especially since you're a busy new parent. That said, you definitely can if you want to (and you have the energy!).

“I write a personal note on the back when I send it out, thanking each person for their specific baby gift they gave,” says What to Expect Community mom hello-cupcake.

From birth plan basics to newborn care must-knows, the What to Expect app is your all-in-one prep guide. Get it now, and feel ready for day one.

When should you send a baby birth announcement?

Chances are, you've already shared some information and photos of your newborn via text, email, or social media, so you may not be breaking news with your birth announcement.

But if you're planning to send one out, most experts recommend getting your cards in the mail before your little one hits the 6-month mark. Of course, sooner is better if possible — some parents send them when baby is around 3 months old (you'll be surprised how quickly that milestone comes up!).

Who should you send baby birth announcements to?

Good news deserves to be spread far and wide, but this isn't quite a "more the merrier" case. Family members (including the extended bunch), friends, and coworkers (if you'd like) should make the mailing list.

“For my first baby, we did a social media post announcing her birth a couple days after she was born. We did a mail announcement for the older family members because they love getting and sending cards for everything,” says What to Expect Community mom Mamatotwo97.

But as for anyone who didn't know you were pregnant in the first place? Feel free to save the stamp.