What Is the Yolk Sac? What to Know About This Early Pregnancy Milestone

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

yolk sac, paper craft of broken egg with a heart-shaped yolk

That tiny circle on your early ultrasound is called the yolk sac. Here’s why it’s an encouraging early sign and what to know if you don’t see it yet.

After a pregnancy test comes back positive, an ultrasound around six weeks after your last period can provide the next clue about how things are progressing. While you won’t be able to see much yet, there’s a good chance that you’ll spot a 3- to 5-millimeter circle — about the size of a pencil eraser — on the screen.

This is the yolk sac, and it's an important early sign that your pregnancy is developing the way it should in its early stages.

Key Takeaways

The yolk sac is an early sign that your pregnancy is developing. Seen on ultrasound as a tiny circle about the size of a pencil eraser, the yolk sac forms early in pregnancy and provides nutrients and produces red blood cells for the embryo until the placenta takes over.

It’s usually visible on an ultrasound between weeks 6 and 9. Before that, you might only see the gestational sac. If your pregnancy is earlier than that when you have your ultrasound, it may simply be too soon for the yolk sac to appear.

Not seeing a yolk sac right away doesn’t always mean something is wrong. Your provider will often repeat the ultrasound in a week or two to get a clearer picture. And even if an early pregnancy doesn’t develop as expected, many people go on to have healthy pregnancies in the future.

What is the yolk sac?

The yolk sac is part of the gestational sac, the protective covering that surrounds a developing baby and contains the amniotic fluid. It appears about a week or two after the embryo implants in the uterus (around week 4 ), and it disappears near the end of the first trimester .

During that time, the yolk sac provides all the nutrients a little embryo needs. It also produces red blood cells until the placenta fully forms and takes over.

When should you see the yolk sac on an ultrasound?

You'll usually see the yolk sac during your first ultrasound, typically between week 6 and week 9 of pregnancy.

"I went at 5 weeks, 3 days, and there was nothing to be seen," says What to Expect Community mom aims337. "Went back at 6 weeks, 5 days, and there was a little babe in there!"

The gestational sac can appear even earlier, around week 4 or week 5 . It looks like a round structure in your uterus that’s 2 to 3 millimeters in diameter, and it increases by about a millimeter each day early in pregnancy.

About a week later, the yolk sac has grown enough to appear on an ultrasound. It appears as a small, round, dark structure with a bright rim measuring only a few millimeters across. Like the gestational sac, it continues to grow over the next few weeks. By the 10-week mark, the yolk sac typically measures about 6 millimeters.

What if there’s no yolk sac during a 6-week ultrasound?

If the yolk sac isn’t visible at your 6-week ultrasound, you may feel worried or confused. But it’s also possible that you got your dates wrong and your pregnancy isn’t as far along as you thought.

This is especially common if you have less-than-regular menstrual cycles. In this case, your practitioner will likely ask you to come back in a week or two for another ultrasound to see what’s going on. Often, the yolk sac will be visible by then.

"I went in thinking I was 9 weeks — turned out I was only 6 weeks," says Community mom Aayrani01. "You can't really see much ... But I had a rescan and baby did grow, measured 8 weeks 3 days ... so it can definitely be that you ovulated much later than you thought."

"I went in and was supposed to be further along than I was," says Community member jessietho. "They just rebooked me for a scan the following week, and there was a little yolk sac! I know it's very scary and anxiety-inducing — every day feels like forever when you have to wait!"

Sometimes, however, a technician may see a yolk sac that doesn’t look typical. This can indicate a possible problem with the pregnancy and may indicate a miscarriage — though it doesn't affect your chances of having a healthy pregnancy in the future. Signs may include:

An irregular shape (such as wrinkled or indented walls)

Calcifications in the yolk sac that make it harder to see through

A yolk sac that’s smaller than 2 millimeters or greater than 5 millimeters

A yolk sac that appears to be moving within the gestational sac

Have questions about what you’re seeing on your early ultrasound? The What to Expect app can help you track milestones, understand what’s normal, and connect with other parents going through the same stage.

Does an empty gestational sac mean miscarriage?

If the gestational sac is still empty at a follow-up appointment, it may be what’s known as a blighted ovum , or anembryonic pregnancy. This type of miscarriage occurs when an embryo never develops or stops developing very early on. The most likely cause is a chromosomal abnormality, and the odds of having a healthy pregnancy in the future are still very good.

Most of the time, an anembryonic pregnancy occurs so early on that you wouldn’t even know about it unless you were closely tracking your cycle, which many hopeful moms-to-be do.

You can still experience pregnancy symptoms with a blighted ovum — including sore breasts , nausea, and vomiting. That's because the early embryo continues producing the pregnancy hormone human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) until it stops developing.

With a blighted ovum, a doctor will often recommend waiting a couple of weeks to see if your body naturally recognizes that the pregnancy isn’t developing. If it does, you may experience bleeding similar to a heavy period. If that doesn’t happen, a provider may prescribe medication to induce bleeding or recommend a brief surgical procedure (called a dilation and curettage , or D&C) to empty the uterus.

The yolk sac is an encouraging early sign and an important indicator of pregnancy health. If you see it, it’s reassurance that all is well and your little nugget is starting to develop as expected. But even if it's absent or irregular, the odds are still good that you’ll successfully conceive again and give birth to a healthy baby.