What to Expect's Pregnancy & Baby App

What to Expect Pregnancy and Baby App, woman in jeans looking at the app on her phone

Download for iPhone | Android

What to Expect , the world’s best known, most trusted pregnancy and parenting brand, offers a pregnancy and baby app that guides you through your pregnancy and parenthood journey day-by-day and week-by-week.

The What to Expect pregnancy and baby tracker app is produced by our team of award-winning journalists, writers, editors, physicians and other pregnancy and parenting health experts, including the brand's founder Heidi Murkoff herself.

Here are just a few of the key features and highlights of the What to Expect pregnancy and parenting app:

A week-by-week pregnancy tracker that details your baby's development based on your due date and helps you understand your changing body

A baby tracker that lets you time and track your baby’s feedings and log diaper changes, sleep routines, tummy time, solid foods, and your own notes

Community “birth month” groups based on your due date, so you can connect with other moms and moms-to-be at the same stage to get advice and support.

Special community groups based on locations, interests, health status and medical conditions, parenting styles, and more!

Personalized baby registry checklist and registry builder to help you build and share your registry with friends and family

Different baby size comparisons for each week of your pregnancy, including our ever-popular fruits for both singletons and twins, and other fun ones to choose from if you're just expecting one baby, including movie and TV props, nostalgia from the '80s and '90s, snacks, and sports

Our My Journal feature that lets you track your symptoms, weight, medications, appointments, kick counts, memories and more while trying to conceive, during pregnancy and into postpartum

Baby development week-by-week and month-by-month guides that include sleep schedules, milestones, feeding tips and more

Helpful daily tips tailored to where you are in your pregnancy, postpartum or parenting journey

Fun tools at your fingertips, like an ovulation calculator , due date calculator , Chinese gender predictor , pregnancy weight gain calculator and more!

Thousands of medically accurate articles, plus stories from real parents and parents-to-be, on every aspect of pregnancy and parenting, from the “trying to get pregnant” stage through the toddler years

Videos about what to expect during each week of pregnancy and each month of your baby’s first year, hosted by What to Expect founder Heidi Murkoff

Detailed baby product reviews and buying guides you can trust from our editorial team and experts

A month-by-month toddler guide highlighting development, growth, milestones, health, tips and more

Search tools to help you find fast, accurate answers to your questions about pregnancy, parenting and fertility

All the content on What to Expect is accurate, up-to-date and regularly reviewed by the What to Expect Medical Review Board and other pregnancy and parenting health experts. It is in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff.

The medical guidelines and recommendations on What to Expect come from highly respected expert organizations including the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as well as from peer-reviewed medical journals and other health and medical organizations.

Use our pregnancy and parenting app to help you have a happy, healthy pregnancy and a happy, healthy baby! We're here for you as you embark (or continue) on this exciting, life-changing journey.

Your Next Read

You're Going to Need to Track Your Baby’s Feedings, Diaper Changes, Sleep, and More. Here's How Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

I Tried the Tinder of Baby Name Apps and It Was Not What I Expected Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Pregnancy A to Z: A Complete Guide to Every Term Fact Checked by Karen Miles, Contributing Writer/Editor

8 Things to Keep in Mind When Choosing a Baby Name Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Do I Really Need All Those Prenatal Appointments? Medically Reviewed by Mark Payson, M.D.

The Ultimate Third Trimester Checklist: Everything to Do Before Your Baby’s Birthday Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Baby Registry Checklist: Exactly What to Put on a Baby Registry Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Pregnancy Weight Gain Calculator Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The 11-Step First Trimester Checklist That’ll Keep You Sane While Growing a Human Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

11 Questions Your OB/GYN Wishes You’d Ask When You Get Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Week-by-Week Pregnancy Guide for Dads and Partners Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window