What Is a Fertility Doula? How One Can Help You Get Pregnant

Updates to copy and formatting.

fertility doula

Not everyone will need the help of a fertility doula, but their services can be incredibly helpful and give you additional support as you navigate the TTC process.

Getting pregnant isn't always an easy or straightforward process. While there are many couples who conceive right away (or accidentally!), still many others spend months — or even years — on the preconception roller coaster. If you’re on this ride, a fertility doula may be helpful to support you during this time.

Key Takeaways

Fertility doulas are conception coaches. They can help you with ovulation timing, advise you on nutrition, and help you understand fertility options.

They offer emotional support. If you have difficulty getting pregnant, fertility doulas can help you manage normal feelings of stress and overwhelm.

Fertility doulas don’t provide medical care. They can’t diagnose or treat infertility, but they can help you navigate the medical system.

What is a fertility doula?

A doula is a trained professional who provides emotional, physical, and informational support to expecting parents. People usually associate doulas with labor. But a fertility doula can also offer invaluable support during the preconception period as you try to get pregnant.

What does a fertility doula do?

The same way birth doulas offer support and information during labor, a fertility doula can be similarly helpful if you’re trying to conceive. Services vary, but generally fertility doulas can help with the following:

Teaching you about the conception process. Fertility doulas can help you determine the optimal time to try to get pregnant and help you chart your ovulation , for example.

Health education. This might include counseling on nutrition to support fertility and what to expect during fertility treatments like in vitro fertilization (IVF).

Emotional support. Difficulty getting pregnant can be stressful. Fertility doulas are trained to help you process your emotions and make time for self care, as well as support you mentally as you juggle what can be a long process.

Navigating your options. If you’re struggling to get pregnant, there are a number of options available to you, from IVF to surrogacy . Fertility doulas can support you as you make decisions and help you navigate the medical system and even insurance as you try different strategies and treatments.

How can you decide if a fertility doula is right for you?

Fertility doulas provide additional support throughout the TTC process, and anyone who is trying to get pregnant may choose to work with one. But these professionals can be especially helpful if your journey to pregnancy has been challenging or is causing you stress, particularly if you are using assisted reproductive technologies like IVF.

When and how should you hire a fertility doula?

You can hire a fertility doula at any point in your journey for any reason. Some women with diagnoses that can affect fertility — polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), for example — may decide to hire a fertility doula as soon as they’re ready to begin trying to conceive. Others may wait until they’ve been trying on their own for a certain amount of time.

Trying to conceive? Track your cycles and pinpoint your fertile windows with the What to Expect app .

How much does a fertility doula cost?

Each doula sets their own rates for services. Usually, a doula will have a set rate for a menu of services that they sell as a package. Some fertility doulas offer hourly or monthly rates, while others do flat-rate packages.

Costs vary based on where you live and the doula you choose to work with. Generally, though, you can expect to pay $500 and up for a comprehensive package, with monthly rates around $200 to $500 a month.

Be sure to read your contract with the doula to understand everything that is included so you know what you’re paying for and what’s not included. (And know, too, that there are ways to make working with any type of doula more affordable if the upfront cost is prohibitive. For example, you can ask a potential doula whether they offer a need-based sliding scale option.)

Not everyone will need the help of a fertility doula. But if you do find yourself in search of one, their services can provide additional support as you navigate a tumultuous time.