Help Me, Heidi! My 2-Month-Old Wants Nothing to Do With His Dad

What to do when Baby prefers one parent over another

"My son is almost 2 months old, but he wants nothing to do with his daddy. He’s mama’s boy for sure. Is there anything we can do?" ~Katie

Part of me wants to say: Enjoy your mama’s-only boy while you can. After all, there will come a day (and trust me, that day that will come far sooner than you can imagine right now!) when you’ll wish he'd still fit in your lap…or be willing to sit there for more than a moment. But the other part of me knows how hard a baby-imposed mommy monopoly can be on both you and on Dad — you because you never get a break, and Dad because he feels unloved by the baby he waited so long to love on.

It’s a scenario that plays out with almost all newborns — especially with breastfed ones , but even with those who formula feed right from the start. Given a choice, choosy babies choose Mom.

And when you consider the initial biological edge brand-new moms have over brand-new dads, it’s no surprise. It’s your voice Baby knows best — having heard it far more clearly than any other sound during his uterine stay (Dad’s voice was muffled, yours was amplified). It’s your scent that Baby is most familiar with, and when it comes to the smell of your breast milk, most attracted to. Studies show that, from the womb, babies respond to their own mom’s voice differently than they do to other voices — their heartbeats accelerate, showing they’re more attentive, more alert, more in tune with the sound of Mom. And this is nothing to sniff at, either: Newborns can pick out their own mom’s breast milk from another mom’s with just a whiff. That familiarity (I know you!) brings a new bundle comfort in a strange new world. A preference for Mom at birth is also, most likely, designed to secure a baby’s survival — after all, as amazing as dads are, they don’t come with a built-in meal ticket…make that, two meal tickets.

Clearly, this Team Mom advantage is biology at work. What it isn’t: a reflection on Dad's parenting skills or his nurturing know-how any more than it is proof of a mom’s innate parenting prowess. The reality is that moms don’t have an exclusive on instincts or intuition. They don’t produce a special nurturing sauce that dads don’t (that is, besides breast milk). My husband, Erik, came on the parenting job with precisely the same experience as I had (zero), and ended up quickly showing more natural ability for caring for our first baby, Emma, than I did.

Sure, it’s hard convincing your husband of that now, especially when he feels like he’s on the outside looking in on your cozy twosome with Baby. But here’s what I know and believe (and what he needs to know and believe): There is nothing that a mom can do that a dad can’t do just as well, if not better, given the chance.

But — and it’s a big but — they have to be given the chance. Sometimes a dad doesn’t give himself the chance — he’s too intimidated by baby’s natural preference for mom and the benefits she comes with (those breasts, that most familiar scent, that most familiar voice).

Sometimes, moms shoo dads to the sidelines without even realizing it, monopolizing baby care (or even becoming hypercritical of a dad’s baby care efforts). That can make dad feel less-than-mom, which, in turn, makes him feel less confident and more tentative with baby — which even a newborn, with his eerily keen instincts, can easily pick up on. Now Dad’s feeling it, Baby’s feeling it, and a cycle has begun that prevents a father from developing his own parenting mojo — and ultimately keeps the two of them from making their own special love connection.

Either way, the truth is that as long as you’re in the room — really, in the house at all — it’ll be hard for them to make that connection. So leave them alone together for increasingly longer periods of time and let them do their thing — no moms allowed. When you’re together, make a conscious effort not to hover when he takes his turns with Baby — or to baby hog (as hard as it is to step away from your newborn). Also encourage them to do lots of skin-to-skin snuggling. Dads, like moms, release oxytocin (that bonding hormone) when they cuddle their newborns close. Another great way to boost that bond: baby-wearing. If your sling or carrier doesn’t fit your husband, consider investing in one that does.

In time, with patience, your mama’s boy will definitely be a daddy’s boy, too. In the meantime, remind him (and yourself!) that while little ones often pick favorites, today’s favorite isn’t always tomorrow’s. He may switch to Team Daddy in the months and years to come, then switch back to Team Mom, and then switch back again. It’s how they roll — and as parents, we just have to learn to roll with it!

Hugs,

Heidi

Help Me, Heidi! is a weekly advice column in which What to Expect creator Heidi Murkoff answers your most pressing pregnancy and parenting questions. She’s tackling the stuff you are desperate to know right now — so if you have a question, ask Heidi on Facebook and she might answer in an upcoming column. (Not sure if Heidi's answered one of your questions? Check out the rest of the columns here .)

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

The Parent-Baby Bond: What If It Doesn’t Happen Right Away? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Toddlers Sometimes Prefer One Parent Over the Other Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Soothe a Crying Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Practical Ways First-Time Dads Can Support Their Partner and Baby Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfed Baby Won't Take a Bottle By Heidi Murkoff

Help Me, Heidi! How Do I Get Baby to Latch After Bottle-Feeding? By Heidi Murkoff

As a New Mom, My Son's Need for Contact Naps Almost Broke Me By Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

When My Babies Arrived, the Blissful Connection Didn't. Here's the Truth No One Talks About Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

How to Promote a Baby’s Social and Emotional Development Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

What to Do and How to Cope When Your Preemie's in the NICU Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

11 Reasons Your Baby Won't Sleep and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfeeding Toddler Doesn't Want to Wean By Heidi Murkoff

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window