What’s the Average Labor Time for a Second Baby?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnant toddler

"I keep hearing that a woman's second baby comes faster than her first. Is this true? I want to give myself plenty of time to get to the hospital!"

There are no sure things when it comes to babies (and deliveries). But on average, second babies do pop out a little faster, all things being equal (which they aren't always).

Your body is more experienced the second time around — and certain abdominal and uterine muscles are, well, let's just say, a little laxer. This may have caused your bump to “pop” a bit earlier on in pregnancy. It also allows for a potentially faster passage and speedier process when it comes time for labor and delivery.

Key-Takeaways

Second labors usually move faster than first ones. Many women spend less time in early labor and less time pushing.

Contractions may intensify more quickly. Talk with your provider ahead of time about when to head to the hospital or birthing center.

Braxton Hicks contractions may feel stronger or show up earlier in a second pregnancy. That's normal, but let your practitioner know if you have any concerns.

The first stage of labor for a second baby

This time you can (probably) expect for the contractions to come closer together, and faster. So while you might have been advised by your practitioner during your first pregnancy to hang out at home until the contractions were five minutes apart, you might want to head out sooner this time, especially if the hospital is a trek.

You may also experience a false alarm: Your Braxton-Hicks or “false labor” contractions can differ in your second pregnancy. They may feel more noticeable or intense or appear earlier on in your pregnancy versus the first time around.

“I'm pregnant with baby #4, and from my 2nd baby onward, I had Braxton Hicks starting at 14 weeks! First was past 20 weeks I think,” says What to Expect Community mom mamastar777.

If it's the real deal, this first, latent phase of labor can take around 10 to 12 hours for repeat moms compared to about 20 hours for first-timers. Your cervix will start to dilate (open) and efface (thin) as you begin experiencing mild to moderate contractions that get stronger, longer, and closer together. Check with your practitioner for a good protocol for when to go to the hospital or birthing center.

The next phase of labor will also progress more quickly. Expect this active phase — when your cervix dilates from 3 or 4 centimeters to 8 or 9 centimeters — to last about two hours compared to an average of five hours for first-time mothers.

You'll probably dilate and efface more rapidly because your cervix is less rigid after having your first baby. This more pliant tissue will also make it easier for your newest little one to make his exit in the next stage.

Expecting baby number two? The What to Expect app can help you track this pregnancy with fresh eyes, connect with other second-time moms, and get personalized updates that match your journey.

The second stage of labor for a second baby

The second stage of labor (when you start pushing and deliver your baby) usually takes about one to three hours for first-time moms, but often less than an hour — and sometimes only a few minutes — for women who've had children before.

“Second labor was not as bad! Went quick: only 35 min pushing vs. my first that was 2 hours,” says What to Expect Community mom evranisk.

Because things typically go a little faster, you'll probably be allowed to push for up to two hours if you haven't had an epidural and three hours if you have, as getting an epidural can extend this stage. That's down from three or four hours as a first-time mom.

Here's another way this go-around will differ from the first: When baby number two does arrive, he'll probably weigh a bit more than baby number one.

Here's to getting to the hospital on time!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Labor Contractions: What Do Contractions Feel Like? , April 2024. WhatToExpect.com, What Are Braxton Hick Contractions and Are They the Same as False Labor? , January 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Listen Up, Second-Time Moms: 9 Ways Your Second Pregnancy May Surprise You , October 2025. WhatToExpect.com, What Are the Stages of Labor and How Long Does Labor Last? , September 2021. WhatToExpect.com, From Dilation to Delivery: Your Guide to Pushing Baby Out , September 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Should You Get an Epidural for Labor Pain? , January 2025. Cleveland Clinic, Stages of Labor , April 2025. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, MedlinePlus, Childbirth , June 2025. Mayo Clinic, Cervical Effacement and Dilation , 2025. Stanford Children’s Health, Overview of Labor , 2025. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, How to Tell When Labor Begins , November 2023. European Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology , Duration of Spontaneous Labour in ‘Low-Risk’ Women With ‘Normal’ Perinatal Outcomes: A Systematic Review , February 2018.

Updates history

October 10, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

From Dilation to Delivery: Your Guide to Pushing Baby Out Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

The 3 Stages of Labor: What Happens and When Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Listen Up, Second-Time Moms: 9 Ways Your Second Pregnancy May Surprise You Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

16 Signs of Labor — Here’s What to Expect When It’s Go-Time Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Is This It? How to Tell When It's Really Time to Go to the Hospital for Labor Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

9 Things I Wish I'd Known Before Giving Birth Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

What Do Labor Contractions Feel Like? How to Tell Them Apart From Braxton Hicks Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

Still Pregnant? Here’s What It Means to Be Overdue Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Having a Vaginal Birth Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

15 Moms on What Labor Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

'One Push and She Was Out' — One Mom Shares the Story of Her 15-Minute Labor By Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

Twins on the Way? Here’s When They’ll Likely Make Their Debut Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

How the Second Trimester Brings Relief, New Milestones, and Big-Time Baby Growth Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

From One Child to Two: 23 Secrets of Second-Time Parents Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Thinking About a Second Baby? Let’s Break It Down Medically Reviewed by Aaron Styer, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window