What Is the Linea Nigra? The Bump Line Explained

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

linea nigra

Noticed a dark line running down your belly? Here's why the linea nigra appears during pregnancy, when it shows up, and how long it typically lasts.

The linea nigra is the visible vertical line that runs down the center of your belly, through your belly button to your pubic area. Your linea nigra (Latin for "black line") is actually always there — it just gets darker when you're expecting, thanks to pregnancy hormones. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSkin Conditions During PregnancySee All Sources

Don’t expect the line to be perfectly straight, though. Some meander a bit, which is completely normal.

"Mine is like an S on my belly, definitely not straight," says What to Expect Community mom waedard.

"Mine is off the side of the bellybutton. It drives me nuts. Like why couldn't it just be centered?" says Community member amabrego.

Key Takeaways

The linea nigra is a harmless pregnancy change. This line running down your belly may look strange, but it's common during pregnancy, usually becoming noticeable around the second trimester.

Hormones and pigmentation are the cause. Increased pregnancy hormones cause hyperpigmentation throughout the body, which can make the linea nigra — along with areas like the face and areolas — appear darker.

It typically fades after birth. The linea nigra usually lightens within a few months postpartum, though for some it can take longer or never disappear completely.

When does the linea nigra show up?

The linea nigra usually becomes more noticeable in the second trimester (around week 23 of pregnancy), sometimes sooner.

"I'm 17 weeks and mine is just starting — FTM [first-time mom], so this feels exciting and makes it more real!" says Community member kristintintinn.

linea nigra pregnancy

What causes the linea nigra to appear during pregnancy?

Pregnancy hormones make the linea nigra more pronounced. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicLinea NigraSee All Sources [2] While you may have never noticed the faint line running vertically along your belly before, it darkens during pregnancy, making it hard to miss.

Linea Nigra

In fact, the skin all over your body becomes hyperpigmented, or darkened, during pregnancy. You might also notice darkening on your face (known as melasma, or the "mask of pregnancy" ), as well as darker areolas. The linea nigra may be more noticeable if you have dark skin.

As for why the line often darkens in pregnancy, some suggest that a more visible linea nigra may help newborns, who can’t yet see very clearly, find their way to the breast to nurse.

A fun old wives' tale (not backed by science): If the linea nigra runs only up to your navel, you're having a girl, but if it extends past your belly button toward your ribs, it's a boy.

"I had a line all the way up and both are girls," says Community mom slopez-24.

Want to compare notes with other pregnant moms? Check out the What to Expect app , where you can get expert advice, track your pregnancy journey, and connect with other moms in your birth month group.

What can I do about the linea nigra during pregnancy?

The linea nigra is harmless, but if it bothers you, these tips may help make it less noticeable:

Cover up . Too much sun exposure can intensify skin color changes during pregnancy, and it's not good for your skin anyway. Use sunscreen (at least SPF 30), and try to keep your tummy covered up as much as possible.

Eat well . A folic acid deficiency may be linked to hyperpigmentation, so make sure you're eating a healthy pregnancy diet with plenty of folate from leafy greens, fruits, and whole grains. And be sure to take your prenatal vitamin .

Can I prevent the linea nigra from appearing during pregnancy?

You can’t prevent the linea nigra from appearing, but you may be able to minimize darkening a bit by keeping your belly out of the sun. So skip the bikini, and slather your exposed skin in sunscreen .

When does the linea nigra go away?

The linea nigra will probably fade on its own a few months after your baby is born, though it may not completely disappear. In the meantime, try to embrace it as just one more thing that makes your growing bump unique.

"It took a couple months but went away completely," says Community mom brookmbooks. "I actually liked it 'cause it made it look like I had an ab line after my belly shrunk."

"I still have mine, but it's lighter," says Community mom kpbcmb. "Never fully went away from my first, even after 1.5 years."

"Mine takes nearly a year to disappear, which I really don't mind," says Community mom djbbmb. "I think it's cute!"