What Is a Pelvic Wand?

pelvic wands

If your pelvic floor physical therapist recommends a pelvic wand to improve symptoms of pelvic floor dysfunction, here's what you need to know about using this tool correctly.

Pregnancy and childbirth can do a number on your pelvic floor, the all-important set of muscles that resemble a hammock in your pelvis. The pelvic floor is responsible for a wide range of bodily functions, from supporting your pelvic organs (and your growing baby during pregnancy) to helping you hold in your pee and even orgasm. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicPelvic Floor MusclesSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicPelvic Floor MusclesSee All Sources

After delivery, it’s not uncommon to experience symptoms of pelvic floor dysfunction , which might include pelvic pain. That’s where a pelvic wand comes in: Depending on the symptoms you're experiencing, your pelvic floor physical therapist might suggest this tool to help.

Here’s what you should know about pelvic wands if your therapist recommends you try one. Most importantly, they can be incredibly helpful — and aren't as scary as you might think!

What is a pelvic wand?

A pelvic wand (also sometimes called a pelvic floor wand) is a tool for doing at-home soft tissue massage and trigger point release on the pelvic floor muscles. Because these muscles are located deep in your pelvis, a pelvic wand is designed to make it easier to massage this hard-to-reach area. Trusted SourceNational Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology InformationPelvic Floor DysfunctionSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology InformationPelvic Floor DysfunctionSee All Sources

Pelvic wands are made of medical-grade materials (like silicone) and are safe to insert into the vagina or rectum, where the layers of the pelvic floor can be accessed.

What symptoms can a pelvic wand possibly help with?

A pelvic wand can help you apply pressure to the muscles in and surrounding the pelvic floor, which can improve blood flow and can help relax them. Think of it like any other type of massager to ease tight, painful muscles.

Pelvic wands are sometimes recommended for people dealing with the following symptoms or conditions:

Pelvic pain, including painful sex. A pelvic wand can be used to help release trigger points that may be related to pain sensations in the pelvic floor.

Urinary incontinence. Although incontinence is often thought of as a weakness issue, an overly reactive or tense pelvic floor can also sometimes lead to leaking urine. Those suffering from urge incontinence (meaning a frequent urge to pee) may also benefit from a pelvic wand massage.

While these wands can be very helpful for the symptoms above, they're not for everyone. You shouldn't use one of these tools if:

You feel a "bulge" or pelvic pressure. These could be symptoms of pelvic organ prolapse , which should be assessed by a doctor.

You have an active yeast or urinary tract infection. A pelvic wand could irritate these infections, so speak to your practitioner first for treatment.

How do you use a pelvic wand?

Using a pelvic wand is pretty simple. How you use it will depend on the design of your particular wand and the directions from your pelvic floor physical therapist , but generally, you'll want to do the following:

Wash your hands. Clean hands help prevent infections.

Gently insert the end of the wand into your vagina, taking care to direct the wand to the tight spots you’d like to focus on. Use a personal lubrication product, if needed.

Apply gentle pressure while taking deep breaths and relaxing your pelvic floor muscles.

Hold in the target spot for anywhere from 6 seconds to up to 90 seconds, depending on what your pelvic floor physical therapist has recommended.

What should you know before using a pelvic wand?

Using a pelvic wand isn’t complicated once you get the hang of it, but for best results, you should be guided by a pelvic floor physical therapist before purchasing and using one.

Why? For one thing, pelvic floor issues are notoriously tricky. It's important to meet with a pelvic floor physical therapist first, since they can let you know whether tightness in the pelvic floor is the true cause of your symptoms.

What's more, if you’re already dealing with pelvic pain, you want to be sure you’re massaging the affected muscles and not causing additional strain. Depending on your symptoms, you may only need one or two sessions with your PT, and then you may be able to use the wand at home on your own going forward.

You’ll also want to be sure to wash your pelvic wand with gentle soap and water after each use to help prevent infection. And if pain gets worse or something just doesn’t feel right, always be sure to follow up with your doctor or physical therapist.

Sometimes using a pelvic wand can take a bit of practice, but for many it can be a powerful tool.