What Every Mom Needs to Know Before Bringing a Baby to a Sporting Event

Sporting event with baby

From tickets to family bathrooms, here's what one mom learned about taking her young kids to games.

By Bronwyn Fromm, as told to Maggie Getz.

For What to Expect’s “What I Wish I’d Known” series, moms and dads share the wisdom they’ve gained since first becoming parents.

When our boys were about 4 years old, they would make signs for their favorite players to bring to the stadium, hoping to get a wave or a few seconds on the Jumbotron. And I’ll never forget when we went to one game early to watch the Boston Red Sox warm up. One of the players threw a ball to our young daughter, and her face lit up! Our sons couldn’t believe she got a ball, and they didn’t. We’re still laughing and reminiscing about that memory years later.

From pro football to baseball, basketball, hockey, and even the minor leagues — you name it, our five kids have been there, cheering from the stands since they were in diapers. Taking our kids to these events we love has been one of the sweetest choices we’ve made as a family.

“Many families have traditions where whole families get together to attend these games, and that is important for supporting family ties and bonding,” says Tina Feeley , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician in Massachusetts and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . The only caveat to this is that she doesn't recommend sporting events for babies under 2 months — you don’t want them getting sick from the crowds that young.

So, now that we’re at the start of the college football and NFL seasons, we hope to take our kids to a Denver Broncos game (our current home team) this fall. I strongly believe with a bit of preparation — and releasing your expectations! — you, too, can bring your little one to a game this season. Here's what I've learned along the way.

Ticket policies vary

Whenever we had a baby in our arms or a toddler sitting on our laps, they were able to watch the game free of charge. At most NFL games, children under 18 months don’t need a ticket. MLB stadiums are a bit more generous and typically allow kids who are 3 or 4 years old and younger to sit on a parent’s lap for free.

Basketball and hockey arenas have a similar policy, usually letting kids 2 and under sit on mom or dad’s lap without their own ticket. Just be sure to check your team’s policy on their website before game day so you have a plan.

Headphones will save the day — and your baby’s ears.

I had always put headphones on my babies for concerts, but didn’t realize how important they are for football and other sporting events, until our youngest began tagging along to games.

The sound in a football stadium can reach 90 to 120 decibels, which is super loud and potentially painful even for an adult, says Dr. Feeley. “Babies' ears are often more sensitive to sound because they have smaller ear canals, so air moves faster in their ears and accentuates the sound,” she says. “Prolonged exposure to these ranges can cause hearing loss .” Noise-cancelling headphones are a must for babies throughout the entire game, she says.

We snagged some baby headphones on Amazon for super cheap (and I'll admit, they also came really fast, too, since mom brain had me searching for them the night before the game).

You may need to use a clear bag

Some venues have allowed me to bring in a diaper bag , but not all. If you’re attending an NFL game, you’ll only be able to bring a clear bag.

Although you won’t be able to carry quite as much stuff with you as when you have your diaper bag, a one-gallon clear plastic bag (like a Ziploc freezer bag) works well for toting diapers, wipes, a change of clothes, a baby bottle , and formula . The NFL also allows a small clutch purse in addition to your clear plastic bag, and I've been to stadiums where I could bring in a backpack — as long as it was clear. It all depends on the venue.

The bottom line? You’ll want to find out about your stadium’s bag policy on their website before you go.

If you have the opportunity to take your baby or kids to something fun, like watching your favorite team finally make it to the playoffs, I say, do it.

You'll have to be flexible with your baby’s schedule for the day

It’s perfectly acceptable to have a more relaxed schedule on game days. Just like on special holidays or when you’re traveling , your baby’s routine might be off. That's okay. Set realistic expectations, as in none, and consider the time of the game before you buy tickets. If it’s in the middle of your little one’s nap or well past bedtime, that could affect your experience.

We are normally pretty flexible and stay in the game as long as we want to, as long as the kiddos are doing okay, which is often the whole game. Then we just know our daughter might be more tired, but might have a great snooze during the car ride home.

Preparing for the weather is a must

Living in Colorado, we have to be ready for fluctuating temperatures, sun, and snow. We always, always, always bring layers.

Even if the sun is shining at the beginning of the game, your baby might need a jacket by the final quarter. When it's possible, we like to look for seats in the shade and make sure to apply sunscreen at any type of game. We also swear by hats for all kiddos, especially our littlest baby.

This probably goes without saying, but when you’re going to a game during the winter, dress for it! “The general rule of thumb is that your newborn or infant should wear one more layer than you are to be comfortable,” says Dr. Feeley. If you’re in a winter coat, then put your baby in a snowsuit with their head, hands, and feet covered, and extra layers underneath. “Make sure their body and extremities feel and stay warm,” she says. “If their extremities, lips, or nose are turning red or blue, make sure to get them to a warm area.”

Enlist the help of a baby carrier for your adventure

On game day, the baby carrier has been our true hero. You usually have to leave your baby’s car seat and stroller behind in the car (or at a designated checkpoint). But baby carriers — my favorite is the Ergobaby Omni — are a game-changer.

My husband and I both wore baby carriers when we took our twins, plus big brother and big sister, to a hockey game. We had our hands mostly free to help the other kids and even try some of the fun food at the arena. Another plus? Using a baby carrier can help protect your baby from the many germs that come when people touch your baby or get too close to them in a large crowd, says Dr. Feeley.

We’ve even had all of our babies fall asleep on us over the years, seemingly immune to all the noise and action around them. Baby carriers are truly the best!

If you’re breastfeeding, pack a cover

I always made sure to pack my trusty nursing cover for games when I was in my breastfeeding era. I loved the flexibility of breastfeeding with a cover and felt comfortable staying in my seat while using mine.

Some stadiums have nursing rooms or pods that are great if you and your baby want a bit more quiet and privacy. Check your team’s website to see if they offer this, and you'll also likely find a map of each room’s location in the stadium. Pro tip: you can always buy your seats close to one of these rooms if that's something you're looking for.

Here in Denver, all the professional sports venues have nursing suites and they are a perfect getaway if baby needs some mommy and me time. And if you’re bottle-feeding, not to worry! Most arenas allow you to bring in formula and pumping supplies, too. Remember to wash your hands or use hand sanitizer before feeding your baby while out and about at games, though, reminds Dr. Feeley.

Keep a changing pad and hand sanitizer on hand

At some point, your baby will definitely need to be changed — so look out for a family restroom near your seats. Most sports teams have them throughout the venue now, and they’re my go-to for when I need to use a changing table.

I like to lay down my own changing pad in case the table is less-than-clean, and hand sanitizer is great if it’s too hard to wash my hands while I’m holding the baby. My husband has always been with me at the games, so he’s a big help holding the baby when it’s my turn to use the restroom.

If you have a toddler, bring them to the bathroom (ideally the family one!) mid-game, rather than between quarters or innings. You won’t have to deal with lines or busy bathrooms if you leave during the action.

Everyone always says how fast the time with your children goes by, and as I look back on babyhood with my now-teenagers, I can tell you it really does. If you have the opportunity to take your baby or kids to something fun, like watching your favorite team finally make it to the playoffs, I say, do it. In my experience, you will be thankful for the memories for years to come.

Denver Broncos. Broncos and Official Healthcare Partner UCHealth Bring Nursing Suite to Stadium , August 2017. Ticketmaster, NFL Games for Kids , August 2025. Ticketmaster, Baseball Games for Kids , May 2025.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

What to Pack When Traveling With Baby Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Smart Tips for Getting Your Baby to Sleep Anywhere (Yep, Even on Vacation) Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

How to Soothe a Sensitive Baby Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Soothe a Crying Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Prepare for a Rainy Day Walk With Baby Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Your Ultimate Guide to Traveling While Breastfeeding Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

Overwhelmed by Baby Gear? Here's What You Really Need (and What You Don't) Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

11 Tips to Make Flying With a Toddler Go More Smoothly Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

I Survived 3 Weddings Newly Postpartum. Here Are My Hacks to Actually Enjoy the Night By Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Feeling Nervous About Parenthood? Practice, Not Perfection, Makes You a Mom Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Your No-Nonsense Hospital Bag Checklist: What to Pack and What to Skip Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

8 Ways to Prep for Your Baby's Arrival When You're a Single Mom Fact Checked by Kelly Salonica Staikopoulos

5 Printable Baby Shower Games That Will Keep Your Guests Entertained Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window