What Parents Need to Pack in an Emergency Go Bag

mom packing an emergency go bag for her family with essential supplies

Here's what to have on hand whether you're pregnant or caring for a baby or toddler.

No one wants to think about packing up and leaving home when they're pregnant or caring for little ones, but in the event of a natural disaster, having a go bag can buy you precious time and give you a sense of control over your situation. Storms and wildfires can develop with just a few days' notice, and researchers say that climate change is causing an increase in the frequency of extreme weather events. Trusted SourceU.S. Global Change Research ProgramFifth National Climate AssessmentSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceU.S. Global Change Research ProgramFifth National Climate AssessmentSee All Sources

"We encourage people to stay prepared all year long," says Dasha Castillo, a spokesperson for the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

Key takeaways

Your go bag should contain food, water, personal hygiene items and other emergency supplies

If you're pregnant or have an infant, you'll also need to pack items like nursing pads, diapers and other baby gear

Parents of toddlers and preschoolers should plan to bring toys and other comfort items

What everyone needs in a go bag

There are some items that every go bag should have: Trusted SourceFederal Emergency Management AgencyBuild a KitSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceFederal Emergency Management AgencyBuild a KitSee All Sources

Water (one gallon per person per day, for several days)

Several days worth of non-perishable food (plus a can opener, for any canned foods)

Pet food and extra water, if necessary

A complete change of clothes per person, plus sturdy shoes

Personal hygiene items

Phone chargers and charging banks

Prescription and over-the-counter medications

First aid kit

Battery-powered or hand-crank radio

Pen and paper

Batteries

Flashlight

Matches

Wrench or pliers (to turn off utilities)

Whistle (to signal for help)

Dust masks (in case of air pollution)

Soap and disinfectant wipes

Garbage bags

Plastic sheeting, scissors and duct tape (in case you need to shelter in place)

Blankets or sleeping bags for each adult and older child

Important documents: IDs, important medical records, insurance cards, bank account information and cash

What you need if you're pregnant

If you're pregnant, it is important that you pack your medical records and an emergency contact for your health care provider . Even if your due date isn't around the corner, you will likely need some of these documents for your next appointment (especially if you have to take it in a new location). Stress during pregnancy can also impact your health, and in extreme cases (emphasis on extreme), it can increase the risk of complications like preterm delivery .

If you get advance notice of extreme weather, the Administration for Children & Families (ACF) recommends checking in with your doctor and putting together a plan in case you need to go to a hospital where you are or where you might evacuate to.

Other items you may already have ready to go in your hospital bag , depending on how far along you are:

Pregnancy-safe over-the-counter medications

Maternity clothes

Diapers and baby wipes

Swaddle

Disposable nursing pads

Baby carrier

What you need if you have a baby

If your little one is already here, pack as much as you can for their nutrition and care. The ACF says breastfeeding can be especially beneficial during an emergency, as it requires less packing and protects your baby from drinking potentially contaminated water.

If you feed with formula , ready-to-feed formula in single-serving bottles or cans is the safest way to go, as it does not require water. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends packing single-use items whenever possible unless you're positive you will have access to soap and clean water after you evacuate.

Your go bag checklist may also include:

Breast pump kit with storage bags or containers

Manual breast pump (in the event of a power outage )

A small cooler (with ice packs ready to grab from your freezer) to keep milk cold

Disposable nursing pads

Ready-to-feed formula

Powdered formula (if preferred), along with measuring cups and bottled water for mixing

Bottles and nipples

Non-perishable baby food and snacks

Your fully-stocked diaper bag , with one large pack of diapers and wipes

Disposable cups, dishes, and utensils

Disposable bibs

Burp clothes

Pacifiers (at least two)

Extra blankets (at least two)

Baby carrier

Portable crib

A baby first aid kit with an infant thermometer and pain reliever

Cleaning supplies like dish soap and a baby bottle brush for any reusable items

Your baby's vaccination records and other important documents

What you need if you have a toddler or preschooler

If you have a toddler in tow, your go bag might still look a lot like it would with a baby — but with less room for formula, and more for snacks, toys and potty training supplies:

Your updated diaper bag, with diapers and wipes

Toys, books, coloring books and crayons

Comfort items, like a favorite blanket or stuffed animal

Non-perishable toddler food and snacks

Disposable cups, dishes and utensils

Cleaning supplies for any reusable items

Your toddler's vaccination records and other important documents

Medical alert bracelet or necklace (in case your child has a medical condition, like diabetes, or requires special attention)

When should you evacuate for a natural disaster?

FEMA recommends listening to your local officials when to evacuate, but it also has its own app where you can sign up for emergency alerts from the National Weather Service.

Making the call to evacuate can feel overwhelming, but having a plan in place beforehand makes it much easier. Talk to your partner and any older children ahead of time to establish where you might go in an emergency, how you'll get there and where to meet in the event that you become separated, Castillo advises.

"Sometimes you can even drive to the area, or practice walking to the area," says Castillo. "By doing that, the kids will remember that moment of, 'Hey, if there's an emergency, this is the evacuation route, or this is the nearest shelter.'"

Before a crisis hits, research which kinds of weather events are possible in your community, and what your options are. Is your home in a floodplain or a storm surge area? If you had to evacuate, where is the safest shelter or hotel — and if you have pets, do they accept animals?

There are some instances, such as an earthquake or the eye of a hurricane, where it is safer not to evacuate. In the event you need to hunker down at home, Castillo recommends picking an interior room, like a closet or bathroom, and staying away from windows and any other fragile items.

FAQ

How often should you replace items in a go bag?

Generally, FEMA recommends revisiting your go bag once a year to replace expired items as needed. But babies grow quickly, so it's a good rule of thumb to update any baby-centric items on a monthly basis. Be sure to check and replace any formula that is expiring soon, and keep canned foods in a cool, dry place. Bottled water should be replaced every six months.

What documents should you keep in a go bag?

Even if you're not pregnant, there are certain documents everyone should keep in a go bag, including: IDs, important medical records, insurance cards, bank account information and cash. Copies of these documents work fine in many emergency cases, and FEMA recommends saving digital versions or photos on your phone as well. If you're worried about an official document getting wet, plastic bags and containers (even empty, plastic water bottles) can protect rolled-up documents in a pinch.

Where should you keep your go bag?

FEMA recommends keeping an emergency kit in multiple locations — at home, at work and in your car — so you're ready to go no matter where you might be. Regardless of how many bags you pack, it's important that everyone in the family knows where they are and is able to reach them.