What Does Round Ligament Pain Feel Like?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Round ligament pain, flexible multi-colored coil on cylinder on white background

Feeling random sharp twinges in your lower belly that seem to appear out of nowhere? Here’s the scoop on round ligament pain, why it happens, and how to get relief.

If you're feeling sharp twinges or aches in your lower abdomen, especially when you move suddenly, you may be experiencing round ligament pain. It's a common but uncomfortable sensation that happens as your body stretches to accommodate your growing uterus. It's often temporary, and there are ways to ease your discomfort.

Here's how to recognize the symptoms, what can trigger the pain, and when to call your doctor.

Key Takeaways

Round ligament pain is a common and normal pregnancy symptom. Caused by the ligaments supporting your growing uterus stretching and softening, it most often begins around the second trimester.

Round ligament pain is often triggered by movement. The discomfort can feel sharp, stabbing, achy, or crampy and may happen when you stand up quickly, roll over in bed, cough, sneeze, or exercise.

Simple lifestyle changes can help ease round ligament pain. Resting, moving more slowly, wearing a belly band, and modifying workouts may provide relief, but severe pain or symptoms like bleeding, fever, or contractions should be checked by your doctor right away.

What is round ligament pain?

round ligament pain medical illustration

Round ligament pain is lower abdominal and groin discomfort that happens when the pelvic ligaments supporting your uterus start to soften and stretch. It's common, affecting up to 30% of pregnant women, most often during the first and second trimesters. Sudden movements can be a trigger for round ligament pain. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicRound Ligament PainSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicRound Ligament PainSee All Sources

"For me, it's painful, like a sharp pain, sometimes pulling, but it's the kind of pain that makes me stop for a minute when it's happening," says What to Expect Community mom Canadianmama98.

What does round ligament pain feel like?

Round ligament pain can feel different for different people. It may feel achy or crampy, sharp or stabbing. You might experience the sensations on one or both sides of the lower abdomen.

You'll probably notice the pain more often when you change positions suddenly, while walking or exercising, or when you cough, sneeze, or laugh. You might also feel round ligament pain when rolling over in bed or getting up from sitting or lying down.

"I've been feeling the round ligament pain whenever I sneeze, cough, blow my nose, or move too quickly," says Community mom JamieHairgrove.

From weird cramps to sudden belly pulls, pregnancy can come with plenty of surprise sensations. Download the What to Expect app to track symptoms, follow your baby’s growth, and feel a little more reassured through every twist, turn, and tiny kick.

What causes round ligament pain?

Your uterus is supported by thick bands of ligaments that run from the groin up the side of the abdomen. As your uterus expands, these supporting ligaments lengthen and thicken to accommodate the added weight you're carrying. That pull on the ligaments can cause sharp pains and dull aches in the lower abdomen.

Round ligament pain usually feels worse when you're moving around and is more common if you're carrying twins or multiples . Other causes of a sore lower tummy include increased blood volume (your body is making more blood to nurture your baby) and the buildup of your uterine lining.

When does round ligament pain start in pregnancy and how long does it last?

Round ligament pain can begin at the end of the first trimester , but most women tend to feel the telltale tugging and aching around week 14 . It may be brief or last for several hours, but it's often temporary, lasting just a few seconds at a time.

This pregnancy discomfort can continue into the second trimester , and it's not uncommon for it to persist until your baby arrives, though episodes usually come and go over the course of pregnancy rather than lasting continuously for weeks.

It usually stops after you give birth, when your hormone levels drop and your uterus, along with those stretched ligaments, returns to pre-pregnancy size.

How does round ligament pain differ from abdominal cramps?

Unfortunately, there's no definitive way to tell the difference between round ligament pain and stomach cramps during pregnancy, as both occur in the same area and can feel similar.

But in general, round ligament pain is more positional, meaning certain movements or positions make it better or worse. Stomach cramps, on the other hand, tend to persist regardless of movement and aren't usually quickly relieved by a shift in your position.

How can I manage round ligament pain?

You can take a few steps to help manage round ligament pain and ease discomfort. Trusted SourceKaiser PermanenteWhat You Should Know About Round Ligament PainSee All Sources [2] Here's how:

Trusted SourceKaiser PermanenteWhat You Should Know About Round Ligament PainSee All Sources

Kick up your feet. Taking it easy is always a good idea during pregnancy, especially if you're also dealing with swollen feet and ankles .

Wear a band. A belly band or belly belt worn below your bump can offer extra support and may help ease round ligament pain.

Avoid sudden movements. Quick position switches can trigger the pain, so try to get up slowly from sitting or lying down. "Since mine was mostly while sleeping, I tried to make sure I was very deliberate and careful with my movements if I was moving side to side," says Community mom erk5023. "No sudden movements or twists."

Try a pain reliever. A prescription medication usually isn't necessary for round ligament pain, but ask your doctor whether an over-the-counter option like acetaminophen is safe to use during your pregnancy.

Stretch before sneezing. Feel a coughing fit or big sneeze coming on? Try flexing your hips slightly before it happens. It may help reduce the strain on your ligaments.

Plan easier workouts. Consider lowering the intensity of your workouts if exercise seems to make your round ligament pain worse.

"I find sitting on a pregnancy/yoga ball helps in the moment," says Community mom MVBala.

When should I see a doctor about round ligament pain?

If resting in a comfortable position doesn't relieve your abdominal pain, or if your symptoms become severe, contact your doctor right away, especially if the pain is frequent or accompanied by other symptoms like fever , chills, spotting or bleeding , vaginal discharge , or lightheadedness .

Other telltale signs that you should contact your practitioner right away include nausea, vomiting, pain or burning when you urinate, low back pain or pelvic pressure, and having more than four contractions an hour, which could be a sign of labor .