Historically, flowers have symbolized new life and new beginnings. Here's how to incorporate your baby's birth flower into their life — and yours.

Throughout history, flowers have symbolized new life. “Flowers and their various life cycles — new blooms, new growth — automatically represent new beginnings," says Tiera George, owner of TG Floristry in Raleigh, North Carolina. “A flower is always a nice gift for a new baby; it's just a very fresh thing.” So it makes sense that each birth month is represented by a special flower with individualized meaning. And while most parents have already heard of zodiac signs and birthstones for each month of the year, you might be unfamiliar with this precious birth flower tradition. First popularized in the 1800s, birth flowers take symbolism to the next level. Trusted SourceThe Language of Flowers: A History (Victorian Literature and Culture Series)Beverly SeatonSee All Sources [1] Each month of the year is represented by a special flower (or two!) with its own meaning.

Trusted SourceThe Language of Flowers: A History (Victorian Literature and Culture Series)Beverly SeatonSee All Sources

So how can you celebrate your little one’s arrival with this unique tradition? Here’s how to use birth flowers to predict your little one’s personality, decorate their nursery, and more.

What are birth flowers?

The idea that flowers have spiritual and emotional meaning isn’t new. In Ancient Egypt, the blue lotus symbolized daily rebirth and rejuvenation, Trusted SourceMetropolitan Museum of ArtLotus Flower InlaySee All Sources [2] while forget-me-nots were a sign of love and remembrance in medieval Europe. Trusted SourceMetropolitan Museum of ArtWhen This You See, Remember MeSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceMetropolitan Museum of ArtLotus Flower InlaySee All Sources

Trusted SourceMetropolitan Museum of ArtWhen This You See, Remember MeSee All Sources

Poets, scholars and gardeners in Victorian Europe and the United States were inspired by this history and published a variety of literature on the topic, including The Language of Flowers: A History and the very famous collection, Fortuna Flora by Sarah Hale. Hale's book introduced the idea that each person has a birth month flower — aka a "flower of destiny" — that could reveal your future just like your star sign. Hale assigned specific flowers to each month based on what was in season at that time.

Nowadays, birth flowers are used to predict your little one’s personality traits and temperament and can even take on a new meaning as he grows and explores his world: “Birth flowers are also about understanding where you live, the ecosystem and what grows in your region," George says.

What are the birth flowers for each month?

Ready to explore your child’s birth flower and how you can use it to celebrate your little one? Or even find your own? Each month usually has at least one flower, sometimes two based on regional availability:

January birth flower: carnation and snowdrop

February birth flower: violet and primrose

March birth flower: daffodil and jonquil

April birth flower: daisy and sweet pea

May birth flower: lily of the valley and hawthorn

June birth flower: rose and honeysuckle

July birth flower: larkspur and water lily

August birth flower: gladiolus and poppy

September birth flower: aster and morning glory

October birth flower: marigold and cosmos

November birth flower: chrysanthemum

December birth flower: narcissus and holly

Fun things to do with birth flowers

There are so many ways to incorporate your little one’s birth flower into their first year.

“Birth flowers are a great theme for newborn photos, from decorating a headband for your baby to wear, including a flower arrangement or dressing the baby as their birth flower,” says Meredith Andrews of Meredith Ann Photography in Wilmington, North Carolina. With the help of a professional newborn photographer (and/or Pinterest), the sky’s the limit. “Then you can hang the photo in the nursery ,” Andrews explains.

Birth flowers can also turn just about anything into a meaningful, personalized baby gift (by the power of craft sites like Etsy and Spoonflower ). Here are some great ones:

Framed pictures of birth flowers to hang in the nursery

Floral onesies and other fun baby clothes

Throw blankets, swaddles or bath towels with a floral print or embroidery

Wooden toys or even an elegant baby brush painted with your little one’s bloom

Just remember, children are full of surprises — including showing up early when you’ve already planned your birth flower extravaganza — so proceed with caution when buying birth flower products before your little one is born!

Looking for more fun insights about your baby? Discover the astrological traits of your baby with our free Birth Chart Calculator .