Why the Rotavirus Vaccine Matters for Your Baby

Copy changes and updates to sourcing.

rotavirus vaccine, baby getting an oral vaccine

The rotavirus vaccine is a real hero when it comes to preventing severe illness. Here is everything you need to know about those tiny-but-mighty oral drops.

Stomach bugs are never fun — for parents or kids! — but you can potentially ward off one of the most common causes of GI illness: rotavirus. Here's more about this contagious disease, and how the vaccine can help protect your little one.

What is rotavirus?

Rotavirus disease is an intestinal virus that is extremely contagious, spreading easily among infants and young children. The virus can cause severe watery diarrhea, vomiting, fever, and abdominal pain. Children who get rotavirus disease can become dehydrated and may need to be hospitalized. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsRotavirusSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsRotavirusSee All Sources

Children are most likely to get rotavirus disease in the winter and spring; it tends to start in the Southwest in December and move to the Northeast by April to May, though kids can catch it at any time of the year.

Symptoms include severe watery diarrhea, vomiting, fever , and abdominal pain. The vomiting and diarrhea can last three to eight days. Adults with rotavirus tend to have milder symptoms, but little ones are more likely to experience a loss of appetite and dehydration, which can be especially dangerous for infants and young children.

"As a pediatrician, I’ve seen firsthand how quickly a simple stomach virus can turn into a life-threatening situation for a baby," says Florencia Segura , M.D., a pediatrician at Einstein Pediatrics in Vienna, Virginia, a fellow of the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "Rotavirus was the leading cause of severe diarrhea in young children, and before the vaccine, nearly every child had at least one infection by age 5, with thousands hospitalized each year."

This vaccine isn’t just preventing illness — it’s keeping babies out of hospitals, reducing stress for parents, and, in some cases, saving lives.

Florencia Segura, M.D.

What is the rotavirus vaccine?

There are two different rotavirus vaccines. Both are safe and effective, and are given by putting vaccine drops in an infant's mouth.

Your baby will get two (Rotarix) or three (RotaTeq) oral doses, depending on the type of rotavirus vaccine your doctor uses, at 2, 4, and potentially 6 months of age. Your child should get the first dose of rotavirus vaccine before 15 weeks of age and the last by 8 months. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsRecommended Child and Adolescent Immunization Schedule for Ages 18 Years or YoungerSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsRecommended Child and Adolescent Immunization Schedule for Ages 18 Years or YoungerSee All Sources

If your little one misses a dose or starts the series later, it's still worth getting the vaccine. Your pediatrician will recommend the right number of doses and the intervals between them depending on your baby's age.

"Dehydration might not sound like a big deal, but it definitely is a big deal in a baby,” says What to Expect Community user Alix78. "My oldest caught a bacterial infection at day care that was like rotavirus, and it was a nightmare! I wouldn’t want to risk putting a baby through those symptoms. Also, since it can be deadly on rare occasions, I wouldn’t want to risk it."

Infants diagnosed with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) or a history of intussusception (a serious intestinal condition) should not get the rotavirus vaccine.

Key Takeaways

Rotavirus is a highly contagious virus that can lead to severe diarrhea, vomiting, fever, and pain. It's particularly dangerous for babies and children, who are more likely to end up in the hospital.

The rotavirus vaccine is safe and effective, and it reduces the chance that your child will develop a rotavirus infection.

The vaccine is given as oral drops. Depending on the type your doctor uses, your child will get a dose at 2, 4, and potentially 6 months of age.

Why is the rotavirus vaccine important?

Before the rotavirus vaccine was available, nearly all children got at least one rotavirus disease infection by age 5 and the virus led to more than 500,000 doctor visits; 55,000 to 70,000 hospitalizations; and 20 to 60 deaths among young children each year in the U.S. Trusted SourceChildren's Hospital of PhiladelphiaRotavirus: The Disease & VaccinesSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceChildren's Hospital of PhiladelphiaRotavirus: The Disease & VaccinesSee All Sources

Even though children who get the rotavirus vaccine may still get the infection in the future, they’re much less likely to get sick from rotavirus.

"This vaccine isn’t just preventing illness — it's keeping babies out of hospitals, reducing stress for parents, and, in some cases, saving lives," adds Dr. Segura. "While good hygiene helps, rotavirus is stubborn to handwashing and clean water, making vaccination the best and only reliable way to protect our children."

Since the vaccine was introduced, hospitalizations and emergency visits for rotavirus disease have dropped dramatically.