What to Know About Dilation & Curettage (D&C) After a Miscarriage

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Woman talking with a doctor during a medical appointment

Here’s what to expect if your doctor says you have to undergo this procedure after a miscarriage or other loss.

If your pregnancy ends unexpectedly before 20 weeks and an ultrasound shows that fetal or placental tissue remains in your uterus, your doctor may recommend a dilation and curettage (D&C). This brief surgical procedure removes retained tissue, helps stop ongoing bleeding and discomfort, and supports your body's recovery.

Here's what to know about when a D&C is needed, what happens during the procedure, and what recovery is like.

Key Takeaways

A D&C may be recommended when pregnancy tissue remains in the uterus after a miscarriage. While some women naturally pass remaining tissue or use medication to help expel it, a D&C can remove retained tissue more quickly, helping to stop ongoing bleeding and discomfort.

D&Cs are generally safe, but they carry some risks. Potential complications include uterine scarring, uterine perforation, cervical tears, and infection. These complications are uncommon, and most can be treated successfully if they occur.

Recovery is usually straightforward, and future fertility is typically not affected. Most women go home the same day, experience only mild cramping and bleeding, and resume normal menstrual cycles within four to six weeks. Research suggests that most women can still achieve healthy pregnancies after a D&C.

Why would I need a D&C after miscarriage?

A D&C isn't always necessary after a miscarriage. If an ultrasound shows your uterus is empty, you can begin the process of healing emotionally and physically. But if the uterus hasn't emptied pregnancy tissue completely on its own, your doctor might recommend dilation and curettage, or a D&C. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsDilation and Curettage (D&C)See All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsDilation and Curettage (D&C)See All Sources

Retained tissue can cause ongoing pain and bleeding, and may delay the return of your normal menstrual cycle.

Not every woman who has an incomplete miscarriage needs a D&C. Sometimes the remaining products of conception will pass naturally within a week or two. Your doctor might also prescribe medicine that encourages your cervix to open and your uterus to contract so the lingering tissue can be expelled.

Some women choose to have a D&C because they prefer not to experience the bleeding, physical discomfort, and emotional distress that can accompany passing the tissue at home.

"It was helpful to not have to wait a long time for the physical aspect of miscarrying to be resolved," says What to Expect Community member mireton.

You may also need a D&C if you have a medical termination of a pregnancy , in which you choose to end it because of health risks for you or your baby.

What are the risks of a D&C?

Though the experience is anything but typical for you, D&Cs are routine procedures that are considered very safe. But just like any other surgical procedure, a D&C still comes with some possible risks, including:

Scarring

A small portion of women who undergo a D&C or other uterine surgery develop scarring (called Asherman syndrome) — inside the uterus or around the cervix. Trusted SourceYale MedicineAsherman's SyndromeSee All Sources [2] The risk is much lower when a D&C is performed for a first trimester pregnancy loss, as opposed to a loss later in pregnancy.

Asherman's Syndrome

If severe adhesions form, you may need to have an additional surgery to remove the scarring. Fortunately, treatment is often successful, and many women go on to have healthy pregnancies afterward.

Uterine perforations

This type of complication occurs when surgical instruments poke through the uterine lining, creating a hole or tear.

Uterine perforation isn't a common risk of a D&C, with rates of less than 1 to 5%, depending on the reason for the surgery. For early pregnancy loss, the rate is about 1%.

The good news is that most perforations heal on their own without additional treatment and don't affect future fertility. In a small number of instances, your surgeon could be concerned about an injury occurring inside the abdomen, and a diagnostic laparoscopy would be required for further exploration.

Cervical tears

Surgical instruments can cause tears in cervical tissue as tissue is manipulated to successfully complete the procedure. Applying simple pressure, placing topical medication that aids in blood clot formation, or using an absorbable stitch (that won't need to be removed) will stop the bleeding. It's highly unlikely that these tears will have any impact on future fertility or delivery.

Infection

As with other surgeries, it's possible to develop an infection after a D&C. A preventative dose of antibiotics is often given at the time of the procedure to help lower the risk of infection.

Should an infection happen, it's likely to occur within a week of the procedure and will be marked by unusual discharge, cramping, or fever. It's usually easy to treat with antibiotics, as long as you seek medical attention as soon as possible.

While all of the above risks are generally rare, some women may be at higher risk than others. Scarring, infections, and perforations are more likely to occur in D&Cs for pregnancy losses that occur later than 20 weeks' gestation.

Having a retroverted (or tilted) uterus — which around 1 in 5 women have — can make it trickier for your health care practitioner to perform the procedure and may increase some risk factors. But your doctor will be aware of this from your ultrasounds and will talk with you in advance about your risks.

Where and how is a D&C done?

A D&C may be done in a doctor's office or a hospital or surgery center, depending on your situation.

If your pregnancy was only a few weeks along and your cervix is already partially open, you'll likely have the procedure in your doctor's office. Your practitioner will administer local anesthetics — similar to the numbing agents your dentist uses before filling a cavity. You may also be given a pill to take ahead of time to help prevent pain.

But if your cervix is tightly closed or your pregnancy was farther along, your doctor may suggest having the procedure in a surgery center or hospital, where you'll be sedated under general anesthesia that's given intravenously.

The procedure typically takes 15 to 30 minutes. You'll begin in a position you're probably used to at your OB/GYN: flat on your back with your legs in stirrups.

After anesthesia is administered (usually through an IV), the procedure has two main steps:

Dilation. To access the uterus, your practitioner will place a speculum in your vagina and then slowly dilate (or open) your cervix, the boundary between the vagina and uterus. Your doctor will typically use a combination of numbing medication and small instruments to gradually open the cervix.

Curettage. Once your cervix is about a half inch dilated, your practitioner will use an instrument called a curette and a suction device to carefully clear your uterus. Sometimes this is performed under ultrasound guidance.

If you're concerned about the procedure or anxious about how it will go, talk to your practitioner about which setting will work best for you.

How should I prepare for a D&C?

Your provider will give you specific instructions based on the details of your procedure. But here are some general things to keep in mind to help you prepare for both before and after the surgery.

Follow your doctor's instructions about eating and drinking. You may need to avoid food or liquid for a certain number of hours beforehand if you're getting anesthesia.

Ask about prepping with a pain med. Taking an over-the-counter pain reliever such as ibuprofen (Advil) before the procedure can help ease some of the discomfort, especially if you're just getting a local numbing agent. Do make sure to get your doctor's go-ahead prior to taking any pain medications before surgery.

Arrange for a ride home. You'll need one if you were fully sedated for your surgery. But even if you were awake, you still might not feel up to driving yourself.

Bring some supplies. You'll have some discharge after the procedure, so have a pad ready to wear. Pack a snack and some water too — it's normal to feel a little lightheaded shortly after the surgery.

Plan to take it easy. You might feel worn out, both physically and emotionally, so clear your schedule to give yourself time to rest and recover.

"Wear something that feels like a hug," advises Community mom kgcf.

Is a D&C painful?

Dilation can cause cramping, and some pressure and discomfort are normal during curettage. But because you'll be under some form of anesthesia that — at a minimum — numbs your uterus, you likely won't feel a lot during a D&C.

The amount of discomfort you feel depends on factors like your pain tolerance and how much your cervix needs to be dilated. If you experience pain during the procedure, let your practitioner know so they can try to make you more comfortable.

"The D&C was quick and not painful," says Community mom breadluvr6. "I used a heating pad for that night and only took 400 mg of ibuprofen and was completely pain free the next day."

What is recovery like after a D&C?

When the D&C procedure is over, you should be able to go home after a few hours. It's common to experience mild cramping and light bleeding for the next few days. If you're uncomfortable, your doctor may recommend taking an over-the-counter pain reliever.

Because your cervix remains slightly open for a short time after the procedure, it's important to avoid sex, tampons, and douching, since they can all introduce bacteria into the uterus that can potentially cause infection. You may also need to skip baths and swimming for the time being, as well as exercise.

Ask your provider when it's safe to resume these activities. You may need to steer clear for a week or two.

Your usual menstrual cycle should return within four to six weeks. If you're planning on trying to get pregnant again , your doctor can help you determine the right time to start.

Know that after a D&C, you'll likely still be coming to terms with your lost pregnancy. Feeling sad, angry, alone, and even jealous of friends with babies are all normal responses.

Take time to grieve, and consider sharing your feelings with supportive and trusted friends, a loving partner, and family. A therapist or support group for parents who have experienced a pregnancy loss can also be helpful.

"Emotionally it's very hard, especially in the beginning," says Community member alexalfaro9. "It's important to lean on the people closest to you and tell them when you're not okay."

When should I call my doctor?

As with any surgery, you are at risk of infection, as well as retained tissue, after a D&C. Let your practitioner know right away if you have any of the following:

Heavy bleeding

Foul-smelling discharge

Severe abdominal pain

A fever over 101 degrees Fahrenheit

These could be signs of an infection or retained tissue, and they need to be treated quickly.

Can I have a successful pregnancy after a D&C?

Yes. Your body has an amazing ability to heal itself, and a D&C likely won't harm your chances of having a healthy pregnancy in the future.

Among women with unexplained recurrent pregnancy loss (defined as two or more miscarriages with no found cause), around 65% can expect a successful next pregnancy, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).

The odds of pregnancy after a miscarriage appear to be similarly positive for women who have had a D&C. In one study, 90% of women who had undergone a D&C procedure were pregnant within a year of starting to try again.

"It was 4.5 weeks for me and then I got pregnant the cycle after that," reports Community mom jr1403.

Health practitioners once recommended that women wait three menstrual cycles before trying to get pregnant after a miscarriage. However, recent data hasn't found any difference in live birth rates between women who get pregnant in the first three months after a miscarriage versus those who wait to try to conceive.

When you're physically and emotionally ready, you can discuss your options with your health care practitioner and decide when the time feels right to try again.