What to Eat for Dessert When You’re Pregnant

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

dessert during pregnancy, smoothies

End the day with something sweet by trying one of these healthy dessert ideas — and find out what to avoid while you're expecting.

It's the moment many of us have been waiting for: dessert — the cherry on top of a perfect meal. Even if you're trying to eat healthier now that you're eating for two, you don't need to forgo dessert just because you’re expecting.

There are a lot of health(ier) sweet treats you can indulge in at the end of the day that are also perfectly safe for your baby.

Here's how to have your cake … and eat it too.

Key-Takeaways

You can absolutely have dessert. Keep portions moderate and reach for better-for-you picks like fresh fruit, yogurt parfaits, dark chocolate (70%+), gelato, or homemade fruit pops.

Skip risky treats. Avoid desserts with raw eggs and licorice-root–flavored foods. Stick with pasteurized dairy and well-washed produce.

Make your treats work for you. Bake at home with healthier add-ins and aim to keep added sugars under 10% of daily calories.

Healthy desserts to eat when you're pregnant

While it's totally fine to have a daily dessert, moderation in all things is always key. Just try to stick to one or two small treats a day.

Fruit. The easiest, low-key dessert, fruit can be the perfect sweet ending to dinner. Opt for nutrient-packed produce such as peaches, raspberries, grapefruit, kiwi, strawberries, oranges, watermelon, and blackberries. “I normally try to go for fruit, dates, apples with peanut butter,” says What to Expect Community mom Sabatham. All those fruits contain tons of vitamins and minerals, as well as antioxidants and fiber.

Gelato. Churned slower with less air, this creamy dessert usually has less sugar, fat, and calories than ice cream. So when you're screaming for ice cream, try gelato instead.

Fruit pops. Here's another crave-worthy cold dessert. Skip fruit pops ones with higher sugar content or make your own by blending frozen fruits like bananas or mangos with Greek yogurt and freezing them with popsicle sticks. What to Expect Community mom BusyMamaCrew has her own unique twist: “Juice cups! You freeze juice in a mug and eat the frozen goodness with a spoon. Grape juice is great.”

Dark chocolate. Chocolate that is actually good for you? Sign us up. Those that are more than 70% cocoa are packed with compounds called flavanols that may help protect your heart. Aim for about a 1-ounce serving. “I'll do dark chocolate and banana and peanut butter together,” says What to Expect Community mom christamistine.

Yogurt parfaits. Protein, calcium, vitamins, fiber. Nope, we're not talking about your pregnancy prenatal vitamin , but a creamy yogurt parfait mixed with some berries and nuts. Stick to low-fat, unsweetened yogurt and dress up this dessert in a pretty glass or bowl.

Chocolate-covered nuts. Combine the healthy properties of dark chocolate with the ones from nuts, and you've got a tasty dessert you can eat on the go. Again, stick to a 1-ounce portion — about a small handful.

Angel food cake. With no butter, this light cake sports just egg whites, flour, cream of tartar, and sugar. Pile some sliced fruit on top for a nutritious boost.

Desserts to avoid when you're pregnant

Just to stay on the safe side, skip these favorite treats for now until your little one arrives.

Foods flavored with licorice root. Some licorice-flavored treats contain glycyrrhizin, a compound that could affect your baby's brain development when eaten in large amounts.

Tiramisu, chocolate mousse, and uncooked meringues. These all incorporate raw eggs into their decadent recipes, posing the risk of salmonella .

Tips for healthy desserts when you're pregnant

There are ways to give your desserts a nutrient boost. Here are some simple, helpful techniques.

Go for honey, Honey. While still a form of sugar, honey has a few more nutrients than the refined stuff. All in all, aim to make added sweeteners (including those in beverages, cereal, and yogurt) less than 10% of your total daily calories.

Drizzle a little maple syrup. Maple syrup contains some antioxidants and other nutrients, but it’s still a sweetener, so go easy on the syrup.

Try baking it yourself. Since you control the ingredients, you can make some healthier tweaks (like using whole grain flour or oats) on your favorite dish.

Want more tips on how to eat when you're pregnant? The What to Expect app has safe-foods lists, simple recipes, and weekly advice tailored to your stage.

Delicious dessert recipes for pregnancy

Muffins and quick breads

Cookies and cakes

Fruity treats

Tanya Steel is mom to identical twin boys and so far has lived to tell the tale. The former Editorial Director of Epicurious, she's the author of several books including the forthcoming Food Fight: A Mouthwatering History of Who Ate What & Why Through the Ages — a combination of world history and the history of food spiced up with 30 kid-approved recipes (National Geographic Kids).