What to Write in a Baby Shower Card

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Bouquet of pink and yellow flowers on pale purple background

No matter how close you are to the guest of honor, it can be challenging to know what to write in a baby shower card. These tips can help you find the perfect words.

If a loved one has a baby on the way, you're probably thrilled to help them celebrate their little one's arrival, and that may involve attending a baby shower to honor the parents-to-be. At a baby shower, guests support the expectant parents by "showering" them with gifts, playing games and celebrating the exciting new chapter in their lives.

Along with a baby shower gift , it's customary to bring a greeting card filled with heartfelt thoughts and well wishes to a baby shower. No matter how close you are to the guest of honor, however, it can be challenging to craft the perfect baby shower card message. If you need a little help finding the right words, look no further.

From simple one-line wishes to more in-depth or personal messages, the main objective of a baby shower card is to congratulate the parents-to-be. There are no hard-and-fast rules for what to write in a baby shower card, and you should include whatever phrases of love and support you are comfortable with. If you need some inspiration, try these ideas:

Simple congratulations. " Congratulations on your new baby girl! I can't wait to meet her," or "Could not be happier for you. You are going to be an amazing parent!" are always great options.

Wishes of health. " Wishing you an easy delivery and healthy baby," "Wishing you health and joy as you welcome your new baby," or "May you all be happy and healthy!"

Funny notes. Phrases like, "Savor this shower. It may be one of the last you have in peace!" or compliments like, "I hope your baby has your partner’s optimism and your hair!" will make everyone chuckle.

Classics. You can't go wrong with "Best wishes for a lifetime of happiness," or "Wishing you a lifetime of blessings!"

Support. Expectant parents will appreciate messages such as, "If you need anything, I am here for you," or "They say it takes a village. We're here to help you raise this amazing child."

You can also personalize your message based on the recipient:

Congratulations to a daughter or son. If you're a soon-to-be grandparent , consider writing a more personal message, such as, "It's such a joy to watch my son/daughter become a parent — and I can't wait to meet my perfect grandchild."

Congratulations for a baby boy. " I have a feeling this little prince is going to sweep you off your feet," or "Congratulations on your family's newest addition — your little boy will be the sweetest."

Congratulations for a baby girl. "Your daughter will be smart, quick-witted and creative — just like her mom!"

Congratulations for a parent of multiples. If the parents-to-be are expecting twins or triplets (or more), you can have fun with messages like, "Twins mean double the work — and double the love," "Good things come in threes!" or "Sending you twice the love and best wishes times two."

Congratulations to a coworker on a new baby. Play up the work angle with phrases like, "Congratulations on your biggest project yet. Can't wait to see photos!" or, for a funny option, "Thanks for the excuse to have free cake today. Wishing you all the best as you add 'parent' to your long list of skills."

What not to write in a baby shower card

Sometimes, what you don't say is as important as what you do. That's especially true with baby shower cards, since parents-to-be often read them out loud to guests at the event. It's a good idea to avoid any messages that might make the parents-to-be feel embarrassed or uncomfortable.

For example, you should skip anything negative or sad, such as a scary memory from your own labor or a reminder of the parent-to-be's previous miscarriage or loss. Also avoid off-color humor, or clumsy or ambiguous messages that the parent-to-be or crowd may misinterpret.

Should you put advice in a baby shower card?

Although shower hosts sometimes encourage guests to share parenting tips at the event, you might be on the fence about whether or not to include words of wisdom in the baby shower card. If you're a parent yourself, your instinct might be to tell the parents-to-be about things you learned or certain obstacles you struggled with. But baby shower etiquette dictates that it's best to only offer advice when asked.

Even well-intentioned advice (think: "Soak up every minute, it goes by fast!" or "You have to sleep when the baby sleeps!") could make some parents-to-be feel anxious . When in doubt, stick to hopes and wishes for the journey ahead. For example, if your gift includes a favorite children's book , you might write something like, "I hope your baby grows to have a love of reading."

Bottom line? As long as the message you write in a baby shower card is genuine and comes from the heart, it's sure to be appreciated. Expectant parents will surely be thrilled that you’re offering words of support and showing up for them in such a loving way.