What Does It Mean if My Baby's Bigger Than Average?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"Everyone comments on how pudgy my 6-month-old baby is. When I took her to the doctor, he said she was in the 95th percentile for height and weight. What exactly does that mean?"

Pediatricians determine percentiles for height and weight by using a pediatric growth chart , which is a handy tool for keeping tabs on baby growth and telling you when it's drifting from the norm. But no matter what end of the pediatric growth chart your baby falls — whether it's the 95th or the 15th percentile — don't let that number become a source of anxiety for you.

Growth charts for babies essentially show you how your baby's height and weight compares with other babies. This data is collected from a large number of both breastfed and formula-fed children by the National Center for Health Statistics at the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO).

What does it mean to be in the 95th percentile for height and weight?

What falling on the 95th percentile of a pediatric growth chart means is that your baby is currently both taller and heavier than 95 percent of all other babies her age (of the same sex).

Even though that number may sound high, that doesn't necessarily mean your baby's excessively hefty. She might just be having a growth spurt (which is common among 6-month-olds) that temporarily has her outpacing other babies her age.

And if you're nursing, bear in mind that breastfed babies tend to outweigh their counterparts fed with infant formula for the first six months. Or perhaps, she might simply be genetically programmed to be bigger than her peers (which is likely if you or her other parent are larger than average).

In other words, it's very hard to tell what factors contribute to the measurements shown on growth charts for babies, which is why your doctor will be more interested in the overall patterns in her height and weight gain. If her weight continues to keep pace with her height, then chances are she's perfectly fine.

Be sure to discuss your concerns with your baby's pediatrician during her 6-month checkup . If he's not worried about what growth charts for babies say about your daughter's weight and growth, then you shouldn't be either.

Keep in mind: It is both unadvisable and potentially very dangerous to underfeed a baby or to limit her calories and fat intake. In fact, fats are a vital part of a baby's diet and eating habits . If your baby's weight gain does outpace her overall growth over time, your pediatrician may evaluate your child in case there's an underlying problem.

The bottom line: Ignore the comments about your daughter's chubbiness, and relish her sweet self!

Here's to big, beautiful babies,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Understanding Infant Growth Charts , December 2018. WhatToExpect.com, When Baby Growth Spurts Happen and the Signs to Look For , July 2021. WhatToExpect.com, The 6-Month Well-Baby Visit , February 2020. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, Individual Growth Charts , August 2009. American Academy of Pediatrics, How to Read a Growth Chart, Percentiles Explained , September 2015.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Help Me, Heidi! How Do Percentiles Work? By Heidi Murkoff

Your Guide to Well-Baby Visits Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Newborn's Weight: What the Average Baby Weighs and Normal Gains and Losses Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Know About Premature Baby Weight Medically Reviewed by Marty Ellington, M.D., M.P.H

Is Your Baby Measuring Big? Why Size Estimates Aren't Always Spot-On Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Having a Premature Baby Medically Reviewed by Marty Ellington, M.D., M.P.H

Diaper Size Chart: Your Weight-Based Diapering Guide Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Clothes Sizes Chart and Guide Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

When Baby Growth Spurts Happen and the Signs to Look For Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Obesity and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Some Babies Are Just Born Big Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

Is There Such a Thing as a Gifted Baby? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How Much Weight Should You Gain During Pregnancy? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnancy Weight Gain Calculator Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Everyone Has an Opinion About Your Bump — Here's Why They're (Probably) Wrong Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window