What I Wish I Knew About Intrusive Thoughts as a New Parent

sculpture of a head with scribbles superimposed on top to represent intrusive thoughts

Scary, unwanted thoughts blindsided me after my baby arrived — here's why they're common, what they really mean, and how to get through them with support and self-compassion.

For What to Expect's What I Wish I'd Known series, moms and dads share the wisdom they've gained since first becoming parents.

Immediately after my wife gave birth to our first son, I yanked off my shirt, yearning to get that good skin-to-skin contact . I'd read all the books and knew just what to do as a first-time dad. I was a social worker, dang it, with over a decade of experience working with other folks' kiddos — caring for my own would be cake. But within days, my mind turned on me. I began having intrusive thoughts.

Walking down stairs, my imagination flashed to him crashing to his death. I pictured myself missing a step and dropping him, his tiny body falling through the air just out of my reach. Alone with him asleep against my chest, I thought to myself: what if I drop him on purpose? Then I thought, I'm going to drop him on purpose.

Logically, I knew this scenario was unlikely. I was so careful while holding my baby and definitely did not want to hurt him. Yet each time I approached the staircase, it felt unavoidable — it was just a matter of time. For the first months of parenting, I grasped my son extra tight and threw out prayers that he wouldn't fall. I didn't share my fears with anyone, not even my wife, afraid she would believe my thoughts were reality, too.

"For both moms and dads, some of these intrusive thoughts are pretty embarrassing," says Jonathan Abramowitz , Ph.D., a professor of clinical psychology and an anxiety researcher at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. "If I tell my doctor that I'm thinking about harming the baby. What are they going to do? Are they gonna take me away? Gonna take the baby away?"

Here's what I wish I knew about having intrusive thoughts after becoming a parent — most importantly, that it's possible to get help.

Key takeaways

Intrusive thoughts after a new baby arrives are incredibly common. Having them does not mean you want to hurt your little one or that you're a bad parent.

Avoiding your baby can make anxiety louder. Gentle, supported time together can help those scary thoughts lose their grip.

Coping tools and sometimes professional help can make intrusive thoughts go away. Breathing techniques, reassuring mantras, and therapy are good ways to combat them.

Intrusive thoughts are extremely common in the newborn phase

Intrusive thoughts are unwanted, persistent, and sometimes very scary. And I had no idea just how common they actually are for postpartum parents. In fact, between 70 and 100% of postpartum moms report having intrusive thoughts of their baby getting hurt, according to a study published in BMC Psychiatry. Trusted SourceBMC PsychiatryMaternal Unwanted and Intrusive Thoughts of Infant-Related Harm, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and Depression in the Perinatal Period: Study ProtocolSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceBMC PsychiatryMaternal Unwanted and Intrusive Thoughts of Infant-Related Harm, Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and Depression in the Perinatal Period: Study ProtocolSee All Sources

Dads are not immune either. Nearly 60% experience similar intrusive thoughts, according to another report. Trusted SourceHarvard LibraryIntrusive Thoughts of Infant Harm in Postpartum Women: The Impact of Psychoeducation on Disclosure and Help-Seeking Attitudes and BehaviorsSee All Sources [2] Because fathers are less likely to be directly asked about their postpartum mental health, the actual number is likely higher, says Nicole Taylor, M.D., a perinatal psychiatrist and What to Expect Medical Review Board member.

Trusted SourceHarvard LibraryIntrusive Thoughts of Infant Harm in Postpartum Women: The Impact of Psychoeducation on Disclosure and Help-Seeking Attitudes and BehaviorsSee All Sources

Why are intrusive thoughts so common? Society as a whole programs parents to be anxious, Abramowitz says. While your baby sleeps, you're told to monitor their every move (and breath) on your phone. Maybe you were also told to count the ounces your newborn drinks, the number of dirty diapers, and the length of each nap.

"For vulnerable folks, it can lead to this perception that everything is so fragile, and your baby's a flickering candle and a gust will come and blow it out," Abramowitz says.

The thoughts are your unconscious way of modeling the worst-case scenario. It's your mind's way of rehearsing what to avoid.

Jordan Shapiro, Ph.D.

For many postpartum moms, intrusive thoughts might be tied to hormonal changes (estrogen and progesterone), lack of sleep, and normal levels of anxiety that come with caring for a newborn, Abramowitz says. They may also be diagnosed as a symptom of postpartum depression , postpartum anxiety , or another perinatal mood disorder.

In dads, it could be external factors triggering these mind games — dads are often the butt of the joke and society seems to expect them to act more like a babysitter than a primary parent. As generations of men become more involved in parenting, they may face a form of imposter syndrome when alone with their babies.

"This could explain why men might be prone to experience anxiety, which is often correlated with symptoms like intrusive thoughts," says Jordan Shapiro, Ph.D., a gender, sexuality, and women's studies professor at Temple University.

It's important to spend time with your baby, in spite of your fears

It felt like society expected me to fumble my kid, so I was ashamed to admit that I didn't know what I was doing. It's normal to try to bury yourself in work or be home as little as possible to spend less time with your baby and avoid facing your fears. But that's actually the opposite of what an anxious parent should do.

"Don't avoid the baby," Abramowitz says. Instead, you should throw yourself even more into being with the baby as a form of exposure therapy, confronting your thoughts so you can realize that thoughts are all they are.

I didn't have much of an option but to face my fears. My wife was the breadwinner in the household, and I was the core caretaker. While I certainly escaped when I could, especially when grandma was around, most days, I was trapped with that baby, figuring things out on the fly. This was actually the best scenario to be in because it forced me to overcome my anxiety and build my comfort level in caring for him.

If you find your fears overtaking you to the point where you can't be with your child, you could be struggling with a more serious disorder or condition like postpartum obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) . Reach out to your doctor for support.

You can't ignore intrusive thoughts, no matter how much you may want to

Intrusive thoughts tend to stick around if you give them too much power. Trying to push these thoughts away just makes you think about them more, Abramowitz says. "Practice being open, accepting, and willing to have these thoughts." Then reassure yourself that it is only a thought, and move on.

There are techniques where you expose yourself to your fears, such as writing your thoughts down to clear them from your brain or talking openly about them with someone you trust so you can get some rest.

"Imagine [the thoughts as] your unconscious way of modeling the worst-case scenario," Shapiro says. "Your mind's way of rehearsing what to avoid."

"If you're concerned about the thoughts, what that means is that you're a good person.

Jonathan Abramowitz, Ph.D.

If you need guidance, Abramowitz recommends finding a cognitive behavioral psychologist who will help you question your beliefs and see how they are affecting your behavior.

If you don't have immediate access to a therapist, "take steps to calm your nervous system so that you can be in the present and more accurately see the intrusive thoughts more objectively," says Nikki Coleman, Ph.D., a psychologist and relationship expert who practices in Houston, Texas.

She recommends "slowing and deepening your breathing" through the 4-7-8 breathing technique, where you inhale for four seconds, hold your breath for seven seconds, and exhale for eight seconds. This "achieves both goals of calming your nervous system and bringing you into the present moment."

She suggests following this with a mantra like, "I am a loving, present, and capable parent," "When I am safe, my baby is safe," and "My baby trusts me because I trust myself."

You can also ground yourself in the present with the 3-2-1 method, says Dr. Taylor. "Identify three things you see, two things you can feel, and one thing you can hear. Anchor your body in the present."

Remember: Babies are more resilient than you think

For the early months of my son's life, I would rouse my son from his sleep to check that he was still breathing. I tried to control everything, but couldn't. Nine months into my parenting journey, I turned my head for one instant, and he tumbled out of his bouncer, six inches to the floor.

I rushed him to his pediatrician, where the doctor consoled me more than him. I learned that babies are durable as heck. Of course, you still don't wanna drop that baby down the steps, but it helped me to realize that a small fall wasn't even going to faze the dude.

Intrusive thoughts are terrifying, but often temporary

With this newfound knowledge and, honestly, just time connecting with my baby, I got more comfortable and less anxious. Soon, these intrusive thoughts were no louder than a whisper as I approached the top of the staircase. By the time my son was 18 months old , they were gone.

"While intrusive thoughts may feel overwhelming at first, most of them will go away on their own within hours or days," Abramowitz says. "But sometimes, especially the more you try to fight them off, they stick around for longer." For me, every time I got through one intrusive thought, it made it easier to combat the ones that came later. Thoughts came and went without rattling me.

"If you're concerned about the thoughts, what that means is that you're a good person, and you're such a good person that you don't want to do anything bad," Abramowitz says. "You don't even want to think about doing anything bad."