What Are Normal hCG Levels by Week of Pregnancy?

Updates throughout to information, headlines, copy, formatting, and sources, plus a new medical review.

hcg levels during pregnancy

They can vary a whole lot from one mom-to-be to the next, so resist the urge to compare numbers.

Your at-home pregnancy test confirmed the big news when it found hCG — aka the pregnancy hormone — in your urine. And your doctor might take a closer look at your levels via blood tests to check that they’re going up. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline PlusHCG Blood Test - QualitativeSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Medline PlusHCG Blood Test - QualitativeSee All Sources

So how much hCG should you actually have in your system — and what if the numbers don’t match up with what you’ve heard is normal?

The truth is that hCG levels can vary a whole lot from one pregnancy to another, even for the same person. And in most cases, the only thing you really need to know is that your numbers are consistently rising for the first few months before starting to decline again later.

Here’s more about what’s typical based on how far along in your pregnancy you are, plus what it could mean if your levels are lower than average.

Key Takeaways

HCG levels can vary a lot from person to person, so try not to stress or compare — what matters most is that your numbers are rising steadily in early pregnancy.

Lower-than-average hCG levels aren't automatically a red flag — sometimes it's just a miscalculated due date or a slower start. Your doctor may retest your levels or do an ultrasound to confirm things are progressing.

There's no magic trick for boosting your hCG levels, but the good news is that in a healthy pregnancy, they'll naturally rise on their own during the first trimester before tapering off. So if they're trending upward, you're likely in good shape!

What is hCG?

Human chorionic gonadotropin, or hCG, is a pregnancy hormone produced by cells around the embryo that form the placenta — the organ that develops during pregnancy to deliver nutrients and oxygen to your baby. HCG stimulates your ovaries to produce more estrogen and progesterone, which is also necessary for a healthy pregnancy. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology InformationHuman Chorionic GonadotropinSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology InformationHuman Chorionic GonadotropinSee All Sources

HCG makes its way into your urine and bloodstream almost immediately after a fertilized egg implants in the uterus — and it’s the hormone that pregnancy tests (both at-home kits and ones done by the doctor) look for to confirm that a baby’s on the way.

Though hCG production kicks in ASAP after implantation, the levels start off very low. But they rapidly increase during the early weeks of pregnancy enough for a home pregnancy to detect them around 19 days after fertilization (which is why it’s usually best to wait until the day your period is supposed to arrive to take one). A blood test can typically detect hCG sooner — as early as six days after fertilization.

HCG can affect your body in other ways. It can weaken your immune system and make you more susceptible to colds or infections. It’s also thought to be the culprit behind unpleasant pregnancy symptoms like morning sickness . (Not fun, but a small price to pay for your sweet little bundle, right?)

If you're wondering what's normal when it comes to early pregancy symptoms, try tracking them with My Journal on the What to Expect app , where you can see what other moms are going through too.

What are normal hCG levels by pregnancy week?

Curious about where your numbers stand? Use this hCG levels chart to see a range of what’s typical, keeping in mind that normal hCG levels can vary quite a bit.

hCG levels chart

Weeks From Last Menstrual Period | Approximate Amount of HCG (in MIU/ML) 3 weeks | 5 to 50 4 weeks | 5 to 426 5 weeks | 19 to 7,340 6 weeks | 1,080 to 56,500 7-8 weeks | 7,650 to 229,000 9-12 weeks | 25,700 to 288,000 13-16 weeks | 3,300 to 253,000 17-24 weeks (second trimester) | 4,060 to 165,400 25 to term (third trimester) | 3,640 to 117,000

Even if your readings fall outside these ranges, don't worry: It's still quite likely that everything is fine.

Remember that a stand-alone hCG level cannot diagnose a pregnancy abnormality. Try your best not to overanalyze a single hCG value. As long as your practitioner confirms that your pregnancy is progressing as it should, don't worry. If you are concerned, talk with your doctor about your results.

stand-alone hCG level cannot diagnose a pregnancy abnormality.

Try your best not to overanalyze a single hCG value. As long as your practitioner confirms that your pregnancy is progressing as it should, don't worry. If you are concerned, talk with your doctor about your results.

Are my hCG levels normal?

You’ll know your body is making hCG as soon as you see the positive sign on an at-home pregnancy test. But your doctor could check your levels, either with a second urine test or during your first pregnancy blood workup.

This might, naturally, leave you wondering whether you have normal hCG levels or not. But trading tales with other moms-to-be or comparing your numbers to what’s typical may just make you spin your wheels with worry.

That's because every woman's hormone levels can fluctuate enormously from day to day, person to person, and even pregnancy to pregnancy.

From the time implantation occurs, hCG levels soon begin to soar, doubling every 48 hours, give or take. The rapid increase peaks somewhere between seven and 12 weeks after your last period , and then starts to decline.

While it might sound like a predictable increase, levels aren't even close to predictable. Experts have found a huge variation in hCG levels on even the first missed day of a woman's period.

Some women have almost no measurable hCG, while others have readings of more than 400 milli-international units per milliliter (mIU/mL). And hCG levels with twins tend to be much higher than with singletons.

Either way, this is perfectly normal and has to do, in part, with exactly how long it took your egg to be fertilized, make the trip down to the uterus, and get snuggled in during implantation. Some embryos are simply zippier than others. It's also completely normal for that wide range in levels to persist throughout pregnancy.

What causes low hCG levels or levels that don't rise as expected?

A low hCG level may be chalked up to a simple math snafu — a gestational age miscalculation, which can happen when your pregnancy isn’t as far along as was initially determined. While checking for other possibilities, it’s likely your practitioner will look at your levels again or may even order an ultrasound to better zero in on your due date .

Again, it’s important to keep in mind that hCG levels vary widely from one woman to the next, and having lower numbers than someone else isn’t usually cause for concern.

What’s more important and relevant than the actual number itself is that your hCG level falls within the very wide normal range and continues to increase in the coming weeks until it declines after a few months. So look for a pattern of increasing levels instead of focusing too much on a single number.

That said, very low hCG levels that don’t seem to be increasing can signal that a pregnancy isn’t viable. Typically hCG levels that fail to keep rising are a sign of:

Ectopic pregnancy. Ectopic pregnancies happen when a fertilized egg implants somewhere outside of the uterus, like the fallopian tube or the cervix. When that happens, lower amounts of hCG are produced and the embryo can’t develop normally. HCG levels alone do not diagnose an ectopic pregnancy.

Miscarriage. Low or declining hCG levels can also be a sign of a miscarriage that has either already happened or is at risk for occurring. Keep in mind, though, that a single hCG reading that’s lower than usual isn’t necessarily a sign that a woman will experience pregnancy loss.

How do you increase hCG levels?

It can be tempting to try remedies or foods that purportedly help raise your hCG levels. Unfortunately, there’s no way to change your hCG levels or make them go up.

What's more, hCG levels reflect information about your pregnancy, but changing them wouldn't address the cause of any potential problems.

During a healthy pregnancy, hCG levels will continue to rise on their own through about the 12th week before starting to naturally decline. As long as your levels are trending upwards, you shouldn’t worry about trying to make them even higher.

Can you still be pregnant with low hCG levels?

Every woman’s hCG levels are different, so just because your numbers are on the low side doesn’t mean you won’t have a healthy pregnancy. The important thing is that your levels are trending upwards overall.

On the other hand, while one lower-than-expected hCG reading isn’t necessarily a sign of a problem, levels that consistently trend downwards or plateau in the first trimester may indicate an unviable pregnancy.

Early on, rising hCG levels are a sign that your pregnancy is progressing as it should be. But your levels don’t necessarily have to look just like someone else’s to count as normal. As long as they’re on the upswing, they’re likely right where they need to be for you and your baby.