13 Moms Share What Sex After Birth Feels Like

what sex after birth feels like, pink candle burning against purple background

The postpartum check up is one of the most anticipated appointments for new moms. It is the gateway from pause to play, from recovering to feeling a bit more healed. Around six weeks postpartum, most women get the okay from their doctors to resume activities they did before birth. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsA Partner's Guide to PregnancySee All Sources [1] That includes working out and lifting heavier items. New moms also get permission to do the one thing they're either highly anticipating or slightly dreading: having sex.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsA Partner's Guide to PregnancySee All Sources

Here, 13 members of the What to Expect Community reveal the sometimes painful, other times pleasurable aspects of having sex postpartum. Keep in mind every new mom's experience is different, and it takes time to heal regardless of how you gave birth. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicWhat You Should Know About Postpartum SexSee All Sources [2] Talk to your health care provider if post-pregnancy sex remains uncomfortable.

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicWhat You Should Know About Postpartum SexSee All Sources

It can feel painful or burn at first

"We tried once we got the clear from our OB at six weeks postpartum. It was painful! The best description was it was burning. We tried again, but with lube ... a whole tube of lube. Even with this, he could only go halfway in before it was painful for me." — FoodieGG3

"We tried after I was cleared by my midwife six weeks postpartum. It was quite painful, like a burning sensation . We took a break after the initial attempt and tried again with a lot of lube, and it was better but still uncomfortable. The second time a week later was still slightly uncomfortable but better. Hoping it only gets better from here." — shaywall

"It felt really tight. Couldn't go all the way the first couple of times, but after taking it slow it started getting easier." — emilysrosee

"We did it at five weeks postpartum before being cleared, but I had minimal tearing, so by then I was pretty much healed. At the beginning, it felt kind of sore and tender , but we used plenty of lube and took our time. Afterwards, there was a bit of a burning sensation. The second time after we were cleared (seven weeks postpartum), it felt a lot better. Still needed a lot of lube though, and there was still a slight burning sensation, but not as bad as the first time." — NewMamaFish23

"Felt like a bunch of dry sticks trying to get into my hooha …" — 3sam

"I got the okay from my doctor to 'celebrate' with my partner after 4 weeks. I had a C-section , was feeling good, and stopped bleeding. The first time was slow, and we stopped before climax. It didn't hurt but was uncomfortable. I mostly felt a little raw inside. The next day, we tried again, and it was better, more naturally lubricated for me. But after orgasm we had to stop because it was uncomfortable for me again. It felt like a sore muscle. My partner was really gentle and perceptive the whole time, which helped. By the third time, it was great! So around five weeks postpartum, we had worked our way to enjoying intercourse again!" — rewe

Some positions may feel better than others

"Well, he couldn’t go all the way in … let me tell you that. It was painful. We had to go slow. It just didn't feel good at all, but then when I changed positions it felt better. We tried the position that hurt again a week or two later and it's much better. I'm now seven weeks postpartum." — Pinkmumof3

"Certain positions were uncomfortable if they put too much pressure on the area that I tore or hit my cervix the wrong way, but if we switched to a different position, it felt good. Missionary was probably the most comfortable position for us." — lzvance

It can feel the pretty much the same as before pregnancy

"[It] felt completely the same as before pregnancy. There was no pain or discomfort at all! [I'm a first-time mom], I had a second-degree tear, and we had sex around five weeks postpartum." — taylornicole001

"I had a C-section, and at six weeks postpartum exactly, I felt brave enough to try. The only thing that felt different was that we are using condoms now, and we usually just track my cycle. Since I don't have one, we are playing it safe. It was good! And it felt so nice to finally be able to be on the bottom again." — Britanee1216

It might feel even better than it did before pregnancy

"It was amazing — no pain or burning sensation at all! We didn't even need lube because I was so aroused. This was a few days ago, and we did it again today, still amazing. I'm six weeks postpartum and had an episiotomy ." — prettyhun

"After the first three to four times when it was still a bit uncomfortable, it felt AMAZING. Probably better than before giving birth, which sounds crazy lol. We actually started pretty early (two weeks), which I wouldn’t recommend since you're still healing, but then waited until four then six weeks. Definitely use lube the first couple times though!" — mon-0312

"We couldn't wait six weeks. We tried it a little at four weeks but could only get the tip in. We tried again towards the end of five weeks, and he was able to fit more but it was still tight/too big. Once I got the okay at my six-week postpartum checkup, we felt more confident in our sex. Now at eight weeks postpartum, our sex is better than ever, and my orgasms are stronger and last longer. We've always been pretty active, but had to slow down during the pregnancy. Now we're just as active as before, maybe even more so. P.S. Always use lube, and foreplay is a necessary part of sex!" — malibugaga

Sources

A Partner's Guide to Pregnancy

Show in the article

What You Should Know About Postpartum Sex

Show in the article

Your Guide to Having Sex After Birth