What’s Inside the Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box?

Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box

A first-time mom shares what she’d keep — and toss — from Amazon’s Baby Registry Welcome Box.

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

Summary

The Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box is super easy to claim and comes with a carefully curated selection of goodies from beloved baby brands like Dr. Brown’s, CeraVe Baby and MAM. It also includes several coupons and a parenting guide that first-time moms and dads are sure to find helpful.

As a first-time mom, I couldn’t wait to start my baby registry . Partly because it was a great distraction from morning sickness, but mostly because it made becoming a parent feel so much more real. Given how easy it is to shop on Amazon, it’s no surprise it was one of the first registries I created. And, of course, I didn’t hesitate to claim the Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box .

I didn’t know much about what was inside the welcome box when I claimed it, which made opening it even more exciting. I wasn’t expecting something extravagant like a breast pump or a complete baby wardrobe. But with Amazon's baby registry being so popular — and offering an endless variety of products — I figured it had to be good.

Amazon Baby Registry WelcomeBox

Here’s What’s Inside the Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box

Although the specific items may vary (and Amazon is upfront about that), all welcome boxes include a mix of baby essentials, sample-sized skincare products and several coupons for services perfect for first-time parents.

Full-size products:

Amazon Essentials Newborn Bodysuit

Amazing Baby Cotton Muslin Swaddle

MAM Easy Start Anti-Colic Bottle and Pacifier

Dr. Brown's Anti-Colic Bottle

A small reusable Amazon-branded bag

Amazon Baby Registry WelcomeBox

Sample-size products:

Lasinoh Nursing Pads and Breastmilk Storage Bags

Cerave Baby Moisturizing Lotion (1 fl oz)

Liquid IV Electrolyte Drink Mix (3 0.56-oz sticks in assorted flavors)

A high-vision contrast card

Amazon Baby Registry WelcomeBox

Coupons:

Shutterfly: 50% off order and 10 free birth announcements

Trust & Will: $100 off an individual or couples will

Fuel Factor: $200 off

On top of the freebies and deals, there’s also an Amazon Baby Registry guide. Think of it as a quick-reference booklet with tips for first-time parents about feeding, diapering and getting your baby to sleep. As Senior Health Editor for What to Expect, I’m constantly exposed to this kind of info, but I could see it being a handy resource for parents overwhelmed by the endless sea of advice out there.

Overall, I was impressed with the box’s thoughtfully curated selection of practical items. The MAM and Dr. Brown’s bottles were especially useful, giving me the chance to try both popular brands and discover which will be my baby’s preferred bottle . The sample-sized Lansinoh nursing pads and breastmilk storage bags are perfect for slipping into my purse for on-the-go convenience. As for the reusable Amazon-branded bag, I can use it to keep diapering essentials like wipes, cream, and extra onesies neatly organized when out and about.

How to Claim your Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box

It’s relatively easy to get your Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box , especially compared to other brands:

Sign up for an Amazon Prime membership if you don’t already have one.

Start an Amazon baby registry .

Add at least 10 items from Amazon’s registry checklist .

Ensure at least $10 worth of items is purchased and shipped from your registry. (Note: You don’t have to make the purchase yourself, but the order must ship before you can request your box.)

Click the “Claim Now” button on the “Benefits and Welcome Box” page.

Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box vs. Other Registry Welcome Boxes

Compared to Babylist’s welcome box , the Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box includes fewer items. However, all the products are from trusted baby brands that my colleagues and What to Expect Community members consistently rave about. (Plus, I wasn’t looking to be buried in clutter!)

One standout feature of Amazon’s box is that it includes something for mom. The Liquid IV hydration mixes are perfect for labor and postpartum recovery — times when staying hydrated is extra important. I haven’t seen anything like that in other boxes, and honestly, it was such a thoughtful touch!

Another pleasant surprise? Amazon under-promised and over-delivered on the shipping time. When I claimed my box, I was told it would take three to four weeks to arrive, but it showed up within just a few days. Maybe I got lucky, but that speedy delivery could be a real bonus for moms-to-be who weren’t able to claim their box earlier.

Is the Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box Worth It?

Although it’s not as bountiful as some others, the Amazon Baby Registry Welcome Box is definitely worth snagging — even if you have to spend the $10 yourself. (Pro tip: I added a random household item to my registry and bought it to meet the minimum purchase requirement. Easy peasy!) Amazon does a great job of including a curated mix of practical essentials and nice-to-haves from popular brands.

I’m especially excited about the muslin swaddle — complete with an adorable zebra pattern! — and I’m super appreciative of the bottles and bodysuit. The one piece of advice I keep hearing? Pad the wardrobe, because blowouts happen. A lot.

Your Next Read

I Got the Babylist Welcome Box — Here’s What’s Inside the $8.95 Box Everyone Talks About By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Free Baby Samples? Yes, Please! How to Score Diapers, Formula and More By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Target Baby Registry Review Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Baby Registry Checklist: Exactly What to Put on a Baby Registry Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Last-Call Prime Day Baby Deals I'm Snagging As a Mom of Two — and How I'm Saving Even More Before Midnight By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

What to Write in a Baby Birth Announcement Fact Checked by Marygrace Taylor, Contributing Writer

Overwhelmed by Baby Gear? Here's What You Really Need (and What You Don't) Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

What to Put on Your Baby Sprinkle Registry Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Your No-Nonsense Hospital Bag Checklist: What to Pack and What to Skip Medically Reviewed by Andrei Rebarber, M.D.

Baby First-Aid Essentials Every Parent Should Have on Hand Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window