What the First Few Days With Baby Are Really Like

first few days after birth, mom holding newborn baby against chest

Here's what you can expect the first week with your newborn, according to brand-new parents who just went through it.

You've waited months and now your baby is finally home, but what happens next? Parents in the What to Expect community have recently shared what those first few days with their new babies were really like.

The consensus: While those first days do prove exhausting, they're even more incredible and special. And what got them through? Asking for help and looking at their beautiful babies. So if you're worried about upcoming sleepless nights, or have already been there, you need to see these:

For me, I was on such a high from life. There is no feeling like it. Yes, you are tired and exhausted, but you&rsquo;re just so in love

"For me, I was on such a high from life. There is no feeling like it. Yes, you are tired and exhausted, but you’re just so in love." — Dreigel10

I was running on adrenaline. There was no concept of day versus night. You&rsquo;re just up whenever the baby needs

"I was running on adrenaline. There was no concept of day versus night. You’re just up whenever the baby needs. I slept overnight for two to three hours at a time. I didn’t really follow the ‘sleep when baby sleeps’ advice because I just felt like there was so much to do those first few days. I think I Googled something every 20 minutes because everything is new … My husband helped by changing diapers and basically just getting me anything I asked for. I had a C-section , so I sat on our couch with my feet up for pretty much the first week I was home." — Rbusch16

The secret is to not get worked up because your newborn won't follow a sleep schedule immediately or wants to be held all the time. That is totally NORMAL

"I loved both of my postpartum periods. The secret is to not get worked up because your newborn won't follow a sleep schedule immediately or wants to be held all the time. That is totally NORMAL. My main advice as a soon-to-be third-time mom is to just follow baby's lead … The newborn stage is far too precious and short to spend it in hysterics because baby won't do what you want him to do ... This is such a beautiful, fleeting time in your life. Enjoy it, try not to worry about things that have yet to happen and take things one day at a time." — ChiPK14

Basically, it&rsquo;s a cycle of nursing, burping, pumping, cleaning pump parts and trying to get something done before it starts all over again.

"It's a balancing act. I am so obsessed with my little nugget ... I love snuggling her and I can't get enough of rubbing my face on hers and looking at her expressions. On the other hand, getting used to breastfeeding is a full-time job. Basically, it’s a cycle of nursing, burping, pumping, cleaning pump parts and trying to get something done before it starts all over again. Baby does get fussy at night, and I am also paranoid about her sleep at night … Through the haze and exhaustion, it is still amazing to look at this little perfect person that you made." — DunderMifflin20

It&rsquo;s a different kind of being exhausted. You probably won&rsquo;t notice how exhausted you really are because you mentally know you have to do it for baby.

"The first week honestly hasn’t been too bad, but I haven’t slept more than about four hours a day! It’s been hard to sleep when baby sleeps because I’m watching and listening for her. It’s a different kind of being exhausted. You probably won’t notice how exhausted you really are because you mentally know you have to do it for baby." — g.hub768

You&rsquo;ll be amazed at how well you can function on three to four (collective) hours of sleep. And like everyone else says, it&rsquo;s SO worth it.

"They can be rough, but your body adjusts. You’ll be amazed at how well you can function on three to four (collective) hours of sleep. And like everyone else says, it’s SO worth it. My only advice is to listen to your body and heart, don’t take visitors or travel around more than you have to. Allow yourself to feel your anxiousness and cry it out, if you need to. There’s absolutely nothing wrong with it, and nothing is wrong with you. You’re going to be exhausted on top of healing and learning to be a first-time mom. It’s a crazy transition, but it’s so worth it looking at your perfect baby and being able to love on them." — karlikw

Right when you think that you are at your limit or you're in over your head, your baby will look up at you with that adoring look on their face and all the frustration and fatigue will just melt away.

"Yes, it seems overwhelming. And it can be tough when you're right in the thick of things. But you can do it. And it is so worth it. And right when you think that you are at your limit or you're in over your head, your baby will look up at you with that adoring look on their face and all the frustration and fatigue will just melt away because you love that little bundle so much." — XiaoMin

You and your baby are strangers getting to know each other. So, it can be hard at first ... What I can say though is it is extremely short-lived.

"You and your baby are strangers getting to know each other. So, it can be hard at first. My first few weeks home with my first baby were rough, but it got easier … I knew it would be hard, but the first 10 days were harder than I could have imagined ... What I can say though is it is extremely short-lived. The days pass quickly, and before I knew it things were much better. Not easy, but way better and so worth it … I just spent those first days sleeping whenever the baby slept. If you can get help from anywhere, definitely do — to bring food, help keep the house clean, help with feeding." — VnessaG

You&rsquo;re just SO in love and obsessed with your baby. I remember my baby falling asleep at night, and I&rsquo;d just stay up for hours holding him and looking at him.

"You’re just SO in love and obsessed with your baby. I remember my baby falling asleep at night, and I’d just stay up for hours holding him and looking at him." — chilipeppah

I&nbsp;loved my baby, but was exhausted and overwhelmed and just kept crying for no reason &hellip; My mom came and stayed the second night, which helped so much.

"I was so hormonal. I kept crying all the time. I loved my baby, but was exhausted and overwhelmed and just kept crying for no reason. The first night I was home I couldn’t sleep at all because I was so scared … My mom came and stayed the second night, which helped so much." — jodb2015

All of the big life changes are made more apparent once you bring that baby out of the hospital and into your home. It's just a lot to take in.

"My first few days home I was a hormonal wreck. All of the big life changes are made more apparent once you bring that baby out of the hospital and into your home. It's just a lot to take in. And then add the pain from healing from birth … It was just mentally and physically hard those days. It does get better. It is completely normal to feel that way and it doesn't last forever." — finn0318

I had family come to visit about a week after &hellip; Honestly it was nice to have someone there to want to hold him for a bit so I could shower without worry.

“I just had my son about six weeks ago, and I had family come to visit about a week after having him. When I first had my son, I had this crazy burst of just being so happy, but honestly it was nice to have someone there to want to hold him for a bit so I could shower without worry. Or offer to hold him so I could eat a hot meal!” — SoupTheCat

I was both exhausted and elated. I could not believe I'd had a baby and just wanted to stare at him, but I was exhausted.

“I was both exhausted and elated. I could not believe I'd had a baby and just wanted to stare at him, but I was exhausted. I'm lucky that I didn't have severe baby blues but some women do. Do not hesitate to call your doctor and ask for help if you feel depressed. It's a normal reaction to hormones and not your fault.” — BlueEyedMonster

If you don't feel that euphoric, instant attachment that you see in movies right after you give birth, you are perfectly normal

“If you don't feel that euphoric, instant attachment that you see in movies right after you give birth, you are perfectly normal. For me, it happened day by day during the fog of the first two weeks.” — chrizzo1

Note: Baby blues — feeling sad, overwhelmed and anxious — in the days after birth is totally normal and experienced by up to 80 percent of new moms. But if those feelings continue for more than two to three weeks, you may have postpartum depression , which is treatable. If you are feeling sad, irritable or anxious, contact your doctor. The following resources offer more information and support if you (or someone you know) may be suffering from PPD:

What to Expect When You’re Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Postpartum Depression (PPD) , April 2021. WhatToExpect.com, The Baby Blues , April 2021. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Postpartum Depression , 2020.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Baby Month 1: Your Newborn Guide Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Becoming a New Mom Can Be Incredibly Lonely. Here's How to Cope Fact Checked by Melissa Bykofsky, Executive Editor

Postpartum Insomnia Keeping You Up More Than Baby? Here's How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The Parent-Baby Bond: What If It Doesn’t Happen Right Away? Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

11 Reasons Your Baby Won't Sleep and How to Cope Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

What to Do and How to Cope When Your Preemie's in the NICU Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Postpartum Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

15 Moms Share What Breastfeeding Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Here's What to Do if Your Baby Is Crying in Her Sleep Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Newborn Sleep Basics Every Parent Should Know Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

From Fussiness to Full Nights: Understanding Baby Sleep Patterns Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Here’s How Much Sleep Babies Actually Need Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Can You Sleep Train a Newborn? What Works and What Needs to Wait Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Practical Ways First-Time Dads Can Support Their Partner and Baby Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window