What the Rare Condition Cephalopelvic Disproportion (CPD) Means for Delivery

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting, and new medical review.

cephalopelvic disproportion, chicken egg inside pink and purple womb-like space

When a baby has trouble exiting through the birth canal, it could be due to cephalopelvic disproportion, or CPD. Here’s what you need to know about this rare condition.

It’s completely normal to feel a mix of excitement and nerves as your due date draws near — especially when you start thinking about labor , how long it might last , and what recovery will be like. As you watch your belly grow, you might even find yourself wondering how your baby will make their way out through such a small space!

Rest assured, your body is designed for this — in almost all cases, babies fit through the birth canal without a problem. Sometimes, though, a baby’s head and a mother’s pelvis might not be the perfect match, a condition known as cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD).

Fortunately, this condition is very rare, and doctors know exactly what to look for and how to manage it safely, often with assisted labor techniques or a C-section if needed.

To allay any concerns you may have, read on for more about CPD, including what causes it, how it’s diagnosed, and what treatments are available.

Key Takeaways:

Cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD) means that a baby’s head won’t fit normally through mom’s pelvis during delivery. The condition is very rare, and doctors are trained to recognize and safely manage it.

Your provider keeps close tabs on your baby’s size and position. At each prenatal visit , your doctor measures your belly and may use ultrasound to estimate your baby’s growth. These check-ins help spot larger-than-average babies or other factors that could make delivery more challenging — so there are rarely surprises come delivery day.

Even with CPD, safe delivery options are available. If your baby needs extra help during birth, your doctor may recommend assisted delivery techniques or, in some cases, a C-section. The good news: With modern monitoring and skilled care, both you and your baby can expect a safe and healthy outcome.

What is cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD)?

Cephalopelvic disproportion means that there’s an imbalance between your baby’s head (“cephalo”) and your pelvis. In other words, your baby’s head may be a little too big to fit easily through the birth canal — or your pelvis may be a bit small to accommodate it, according to the Cleveland Clinic .

Sometimes, a baby’s position (for example, facing outward instead of inward) or the shape of their head can make things trickier, too.

A common reason behind CPD is fetal macrosomia , which means a baby weighs more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces at birth. (For comparison, the average newborn weighs around 7½ pounds.)

What causes cephalopelvic disproportion?

A number of factors can contribute to CPD, though having one (or more) of these risks doesn’t mean you’ll have CPD. In fact, most women with these risk factors still deliver vaginally without issue.

Common risk factors include:

Prior fetal macrosomia: If you’ve already had a baby who weighed more than 8 pounds, 13 ounces or if you were this size or bigger at birth, your odds for having a larger baby increase.

Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM): Uncontrolled GDM could result in a bigger baby with wider shoulders, a large head and more body fat, making delivery a bit tougher. The good news is that proper nutrition and exercise can help manage GDM.

Obesity: Women who weigh more tend to carry — and give birth to — larger infants.

Multiple pregnancies: The more babies you have, the more they tend to weigh. Each successive pregnancy (up to the fifth pregnancy) typically increases an infant’s birth weight by about 4 ounces.

Having a boy: Sons are bigger on average than daughters, and most babies who have macrosomia are male.

Hydrocephalus: This condition is a build-up of fluid in a baby’s head, making it grow larger.

Being overdue: If you sail past your due date , there’s extra time to add more pounds, which contributes to a bigger-than-usual baby when you deliver.

Your age: Women over 35 tend to have larger babies, which ups your CPD risk.

Your baby's position: If he decides to face sideways or outwards instead of assuming the typical, inward-facing position, your baby (even a more average-sized one) may need some extra help making his exit.

How is cephalopelvic disproportion diagnosed?

There’s no single test that can diagnose CPD before labor starts.

Instead, your provider will keep close tabs on your baby’s growth at every prenatal visit. They’ll measure your fundal height (he measurement between your pubic bone and the top of your uterus,) to gauge your baby’s length and weight. And ultrasound can estimate weight by measuring your baby’s head, abdomen and femur. Ultrasound can also detect too much amniotic fluid, or polyhydramnios , which can indicate a big baby in utero.

Even with all this information, your provider can’t tell beforehand if you’ll have CPD, even if you’re a small woman carrying a large baby. They can only confirm CPD once labor has begun — if progress stalls and your baby has trouble descending into the birth canal.

“I am 5’5” 110 prepregnancy and very narrow hips/waist,” says What to Expect Community Mom Aurora31. “I have delivered 3 babies vaginally, one with a 38 cm head.” And two of her babies were over 9 pounds!

How is CPD managed?

If your provider notices that you’re “measuring big” at one of your prenatal appointments, they’ll monitor you closely.

Once you’re in labor and your provider finds that you have CPD, they may consider:

Trial of labor : A woman’s body is well-equipped to bear babies, even those on the larger side, so as long as your labor is progressing apace and your baby is doing well, a vaginal birth is possible. A trial of labor simply means you’ll try for a vaginal birth.

Assisted labor techniques : Sometimes a little help is needed to ease a baby out of the birth canal at the second or pushing stage of labor. At this point, the use of forceps or vacuum extraction may speed this phase of delivery, according to Sarah Obican , M.D., board-certified OB/GYN specializing in maternal fetal medicine at Tampa General Hospital in Florida and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. Dr. Obican explains that this is only performed “if criteria for an assisted delivery are met,” including full dilation and baby being in a good position for assistance.

C-section: A case of CPD may result in dystocia, which is slowed labor. If your baby isn’t descending into the birth canal, your contractions aren’t deemed effective, or there are signs of fetal distress , your doctor may perform a C-section. An ultrasound would be done prior to the procedure, Dr. Obican notes.

“During the birth of my first born my doctor diagnosed me with Cephalopelvic Disproportion (CPD), essentially my pelvis was too small to continue with the birth, and I was taken away for an emergency C-section, says What to Expect Community mom joyful-mama. “The whole experience was quite peaceful — baby wasn’t in distress, I didn’t feel that anything was being rushed . . . it was quite simply as I began to push (with forceps assistance) baby just couldn’t come out.”

Get even more reassurance — and week-by-week guidance — in the What to Expect app.

What are some of the complications of cephalopelvic disproportion?

Even though CPD is rare, it can sometimes lead to delivery complications, such as:

Temporarily misshapen head : Because of the tight fit in the birth canal, your baby’s head may be pressed into a cone shape as he emerges. In the case of a cone shape, “the soft tissue fixes itself,” Dr. Obican says, and nothing needs to be done.

Shoulder dystocia : CPD can lead to the head being delivered but one or both shoulders becoming stuck behind the pelvic bone. “ Shoulder dystocia is a true emergency and the doctor will often need to perform multiple maneuvers to alleviate the impacted shoulder that is stuck,” says Dr. Obican.

Episiotomy : Delivering a large baby may require an episiotomy or cause perineal tears .

Increased risk of future CPD : Once you’ve had a very large infant, you may be more likely to have another, which means it’s possible that you may have a higher risk of developing CPD in successive pregnancies.

While the idea of CPD can sound intimidating, try not to worry about this rather rare condition. Your provider will keep a close eye on your baby’s growth and position throughout pregnancy, and there are multiple safe delivery options if your little one winds up needing some help.