What to Eat for Dinner When You’re Pregnant

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

dinner during pregnancy chicken salad

Put together a perfect plate by trying out some of these healthy dinner ideas during pregnancy.

It's the end of the day. Your feet are swollen. Tired doesn't begin to describe how you feel, and the only thing that sounds good right about now is a bath followed by some cookies and The Bachelor . Dinner, schminner.

While there are some nights you simply can't fathom anything more, getting into a routine of cooking dinner will help ensure you're feeding yourself and your growing baby well, even at the end of a long day.

And we're not talking hour-long, slaving-at-the-stove meals. We've come up with plenty of quick, simple, yummy, and nutritious dinners you'll love, even if you're feeling full, tired, queasy, or all of the above. And who's to say you can't tuck into a bowl of gelato for dessert while rolling your eyes at the TV?

Dinner is a great time to make up for whatever nutrients you didn't get during the day. Low on fiber from breakfast and lunch ? Throw some frozen lentils into whatever you're making. Not enough protein in your snacks? Add some chicken, tofu, or nuts.

What makes a perfect dinner? Anything that's in the optimal pregnancy diet : a balanced mix of lean proteins, whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and healthy fats.

Key Takeaways:

Simple is best. Dinner while pregnant shouldn't be a complicated affair. Your best bet? Stick to easy meals that are fast to make, nutritious to eat, and oh-so-satisfying.

Aim for balance, not a perfect plate. As long as most of your day's food includes lean protein, fruits, and whole grains, it's fine to grab a dinner that just sounds good.

Shortcuts for the win! Make dinners that are less work for yourself by picking frozen veggies, pre-cooked grains, canned beans, and leftovers from the fridge.

Dinner foods to eat while pregnant

It can be confusing figuring out what to eat for dinner, but here are some tried-and-true options:

Cooked sushi. You don't need to swear off all sushi . As long as it's cooked fish or an all-veggie roll — like California rolls, cooked eel with cucumber, or cooked salmon and avocado — you're good to go, especially as the seaweed wrap helps add valuable iodine to your diet .

Lean proteins. Tofu, fish that's low in mercury , and lean meats like pork, chicken, and turkey are all healthy options, even if they're just layered on some seven-grain toast at the end of a long day.

Sautés and stir-fries . Can't spare more than a few minutes to toss together dinner? Heat some olive oil in a sauté pan, throw in some lean protein from the fridge or freezer, add veggies and a condiment, and five minutes later you've got a full nutritious dinner.

Slow-cooker dishes. Before you head off in the morning, throw some ingredients into the Instant Pot or slow-cooker — there are plenty of recipes online for any dietary preference — and voilà, when you come home several hours later, you'll have an Indian chicken curry, Thai beef stew, or Southwestern turkey chili with black beans ready to be devoured.

Hearty salads. Fresh and fiber-rich, salad can be a grab bag of whatever healthy ingredients you have in the fridge. Just throw some olive oil, balsamic vinegar, and sea salt on it, and you've got the perfect feast.

Hungry for more meal ideas? Download the What to Expect app for nutrition tips, snack options, and support from other pregnant moms also in the dinner trenches.

Dinner foods to avoid while pregnant

You know the drill by now, but it's worth repeating the foods you should avoid when you're pregnant , either at home or in restaurants.

Charcuterie. Meats such as salami and bologna often contain not-so-great nitrates and nitrites. Hot dogs, pâté, and smoked meats can also potentially harbor listeria , a type of bacteria that can make you sick, so steer clear of those for now too.

Raw seafood and some fish. As you know, raw fish needs to be off-limits during pregnancy because of the potential bacteria risk. And skip anything high in ethyl-mercury, such as shark, swordfish, king mackerel, tuna steaks, tilefish, marlin, and orange roughy.

Hollandaise sauce and aioli. Both made with raw eggs, these sauces may be tasty on eggs Benedict or tuna, but you don't want to risk potential salmonella that may be hiding in them.

Healthy dinner tips for pregnancy

If you adopt just a few of these simple techniques, dinner during pregnancy will be even more of a breeze.

Take some shortcuts. Canned beans and fish along with frozen veggies will save you major prep time, plus they're full of nutrients.

Double up. You're eating for two, so why not cook for two or three nights at a time? Prepare extra food to save for dinner later in the week or even lunch the next day. Just make sure to wrap it well and store it correctly.

Use your freezer. Store extra portions of produce, veggies, or leftovers like dumplings, sliced roasts, soups, and stews for easy, nutrient-rich dinners.

Go easy on yourself. Just because it's dinner doesn't mean you need to make this the ultimate protein-, calcium-, vitamin-rich plate. If you've had a healthy day of meals, this can be whatever sounds good to you that is wholesome and fills some nutritional gaps.

"The first trimester is a bit like survival mode in regards to food, but once you feel a little more energized in the second trimester, you can jump back onto your healthy diet," says What to Expect Community parent MillieCabo.

Pregnancy dinner ideas

Soups, stews, and sandwiches

Salads

Arugula Salad With Mango and Cucumber

Baby Spinach and Edamame Salad With Seared Scallops

Nutty Bulgur Salad

Baby Spinach and Edamame Salad With Parmesan Shavings

Shrimp and Mango Salad With Sesame Ginger Vinaigrette

Shrimp Caesar Salad

Steak Salad

It's Mediterranean to Me Salad

Toasted Barley, Roasted Red Pepper, and Corn Salad With Feta Cheese

Fig and Arugula Salad With Parmesan Shavings

Chicken and turkey

Rotini With Chicken and Garden Vegetables

Spinach Fettuccine With Chicken and Sauteed Greens

Cornmeal-Pecan Crusted Chicken With Mango-Black Bean Salsa

Steamed Sesame Vegetable Medley With Chicken Over Quinoa

Oven-Fried Chicken Breasts

Chicken Burgers With Mango Relish

Turkey Chili

Turkey Cutlets in Mushroom Sauce

Market Chicken Pita

Chicken With Pomegranate Glaze

Fish and shellfish

Lemon-Thyme Shrimp Over Ratatouille

Speedy Shrimp and Red Pepper Rigatoni

Roast Salmon With Tuscan White Beans

Sautéed Halibut With Spring Vegetables

Roasted Mediterranean Sea Bass With Red Pepper and White Beans

Pan-Roasted Salmon With a Mild Mustard Crust

Salmon Hash Patties

Salmon With Basil and Tomatoes

Flounder With Carrot, Fennel and Leeks

Beef and pork

Vegetarian and vegan

Cheddar Potato Scramble

Mom's Best Macaroni and Cheese

Broccoli-Cheddar Omelet

Quinoa Tabbouleh

Huevos Rancheros Con Frijoles

Asian Tofu With Snow Peas and Peppers

Wheat Berry Primavera

Tanya Steel is mom to identical twin boys and so far has lived to tell the tale. The former Editorial Director of Epicurious, she's the author of several books including the forthcoming Food Fight: A Mouthwatering History of Who Ate What & Why Through the Ages — a combination of world history and the history of food spiced up with 30 kid-approved recipes (National Geographic Kids).