What to Know About Irregular Periods (Especially If You're Trying to Conceive)

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

periods

Learn more about irregular periods, if and how they might affect your chances of getting pregnant, and what to do if you have them.

Irregular periods can be annoying and inconvenient; happily, they're usually nothing to worry about. Still, because irregular menstrual cycles can occasionally signal an underlying hormonal imbalance and can sometimes make conceiving a baby slightly more difficult, you should discuss any irregularities in your cycle with your doctor during your checkups.

Your doctor can diagnose your condition and prescribe the right treatment to help get your periods — and your fertility — back on track.

Key Takeaways

Irregular periods are often no big deal. Most cycle quirks are caused by temporary stuff like stress, travel or exercise.

It's still worth mentioning to your doctor. Persistent irregularity can sometimes point to hormone issues (like thyroid problems or PCOS) that your provider can diagnose and treat.

You can absolutely get pregnant with irregular periods. It's just harder to pinpoint ovulation by counting days, so you may need to watch for other ovulation signs.

What are irregular periods?

Irregular periods are those that happen at unusual intervals (more than 45 days or fewer than 21 days apart), at unpredictable intervals, or a combination of these. That said, if you have irregular periods your actual period may still seem normal — i.e., the amount you bleed and the number of days you bleed are similar to a typical period.

What causes irregular periods?

Occasional irregularities in your menstrual cycle are most commonly due to stress, travel, excessive exercise, or another temporary change to your normal routine. And, of course, a missed or abnormal period could also be due to pregnancy.

Cycles that are consistently irregular are more often due to factors such as an eating disorder, weight loss or weight gain, thyroid levels that are too high or too low, or hormonal imbalances (including those related to starting, stopping, or missing doses of contraceptives).

The most common cause of chronically irregular periods is a disorder called polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Missed or irregular periods can also be a sign of compromised ovarian function.

"My periods naturally varied massively, so that obviously made tracking ovulation very difficult. I had all my hormones tested and they were totally normal. It wasn't until I went in for a scan that they told me I have polycistic-appearing ovaries. I didn't realize you could have this without the hormone imbalances, so it was good to have some answers and find out why my periods were all over," says What to Expect Community member -jan-. "I then went on letrozole and my cycles are now consistently 32 days. Still very slightly longer than 'normal,' but the regularity is so reassuring and definitely helps with timing."

How can you tell if you have irregular periods?

Tracking your menstrual cycles (by noting the first day of your period on your calendar or period app over the course of a few months) will help you learn if your cycles are actually irregular or just a bit shorter (or longer) than the typical 28- to 30-day average cycle. Keeping track can also help your doctor better determine whether treatment is necessary.

Track your cycle in the What to Expect app for easy period logging, ovulation-sign reminders, and TTC tips.

Can you get pregnant if you have irregular periods?

Yes. Irregular menstrual cycles don't always affect fertility. In fact, plenty of women with irregular menstrual cycles get pregnant, sometimes on their first try. So if you're wondering whether irregular periods mean infertility, the answer is no. But irregular periods may make it harder for you to get pregnant.

That's because when your periods are irregular, it makes it more difficult to know when to try to conceive: If your period comes without any discernible pattern, you can't reliably track your cycle to estimate when ovulation happens. Instead, you'll have to be on the lookout for other signs of ovulation , since cycle length won't tell you when to time baby-making sex.

The real concern when it comes to irregular periods is that occasionally the condition might indicate irregular or absent ovulation. And if you don't ovulate, you can't get pregnant. Problems with ovulation are responsible for up to 30 percent of all cases of infertility.

If an ovulation problem is a possibility, now's the time to consult your doctor to find out if any underlying health issues are at play. Many conditions are manageable, and there are lots of effective tools that can help you get pregnant.

How are irregular periods treated?

If irregular periods are chronic or making it difficult for you to conceive, speak to your doctor to find out if there's a way to get them back on track. This can involve trying to lower your stress levels (extreme stress can derail your cycles) or cutting back on intense exercising (which could also prevent you from ovulating and having regular periods).

Your doctor may also check your hormone levels and perform an ultrasound. A variety of treatments can help, based on the diagnosis and your goals to conceive (or not). For example, your doctor may prescribe medications to treat an underlying thyroid condition or regulate your menstrual cycle.

If you are trying to get pregnant with irregular cycles, your doctor may recommend a fertility drug like letrozole (Femara), clomiphene (Clomid), or injectable fertility meds to induce ovulation. You should have a complete fertility evaluation before starting any of these drugs.

Rest assured that irregular periods don't mean you won't be able to have a healthy pregnancy and baby. Still, it's important for you to consult with your physician, even if you're not actively TTC.