Introducing Avocado to Your Baby

when can babies eat avocados?

When can babies eat avocado, and how should you safely prepare it for your little one? Here's everything parents need to know about introducing this nutritious food to early eaters.

Avocado is chock-full of healthy fats to support your baby’s fast-growing brain, so it’s worth making it a mainstay on her menu once she starts solids.

That’s true whether you're introducing solid foods in the form of purées or are trying a baby-led weaning approach, which involves jumping straight to finger foods as soon as solids are introduced. Avocado's soft, smush-able texture is just right for curious new noshers, and the prep work for you is minimal, since there’s no cooking required.

Here’s how to offer the creamy green fruit to babies and toddlers, plus creative serving ideas to expand your tiny eater’s palate.

When can babies have avocado?

Avocado is fair game as soon as your sweet pea starts solids , usually sometime around 6 months. In fact, its soft, creamy texture and mild flavor make avocado an ideal first (or second, or third) food.

How to prepare avocado for your baby

Avocado has a naturally soft, smooshy texture, so there’s not much you have to do to make it baby-friendly. Just make sure your avocado is pitted, fully peeled and very ripe (the skin should be dark and yield to gentle pressure), since avocado that’s underripe or has bits of peel on it can be hard and pose a possible choking hazard.

And even though you might not be able to imagine your avocado toast or guac without salt, leave it out for your little one. She doesn’t need the added sodium.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve avocado at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills, or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare avocado for a 6-month-old

preparing avocado for a 6-month-old

Slice ripe avocado into thick strips that your baby can gum. You can roll the strips in infant cereal before serving to make them easier to grip. Another option, once your baby has been introduced to bread, is to try spreading mashed avocado on strips of whole grain toast.

How to prepare avocado for a 9-month-old

preparing avocado for a 9-month-old

Once your older baby starts working on her pincer grasp , help her hone her skills by serving finely diced pieces of ripe avocado.

How to prepare avocado for 12-month-olds and older

preparing avocado for a 12-month-old

Whole pieces of avocado or avocado toast are still good options. You can also serve mashed avocado or homemade guacamole with pieces of soft whole grain pita or steamed veggies for dunking. (Messy — but tasty!)

Avocado recipes for babies and toddlers

The creamy green fruit is easy to work into your tot’s menu for breakfast, lunch, snacktime and dinner — and the results are always delicious. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Whole grain avocado toast or toast strips. Experiment with toppings like a sprinkle of hemp seeds, finely grated carrot or thinly sliced tomato, or a light sprinkling of salt-free spice blends like za’atar.

Tot-friendly tacos. Mash avocado on a whole grain tortilla, top with beans and cheese, and fold in half to make a soft taco. Cut the taco into thirds or quarters to make them easier for your baby or toddler to hold.

Dressed-up dip. Add avocado to hummus or white bean dip.

Green pasta sauce. Blend avocado with a squeeze of fresh lemon juice and a splash or two of the pasta cooking water. Toss with whole grain pasta.

Green smoothie. Add avocado to a fruit and yogurt smoothie.

Avocado “fries.” Coat avocado strips in beaten egg and panko breadcrumbs and bake until crispy and golden.

Use it in baking. Substitute mashed avocado for the butter or oil in your favorite whole grain mini muffin recipe.

What are the benefits of avocado for babies and toddlers?

Avocado is loaded with healthy fat to support your mini muncher’s fast-growing brain and quickly developing nervous system. The fat can play a role in managing dry skin , too, by keeping your little one well lubricated from the inside out.

That’s not all. The potassium in avocado plays a key role in building strong, healthy muscle tissue. And since it’s packed with fiber, it can also help stave off constipation .

Can babies be allergic to avocado?

Avocado allergies don’t occur too often. They can occasionally trigger oral allergy syndrome — a condition caused by cross-reaction in allergens found in both pollen and raw fruits and vegetables. However, kids under 3 aren’t typically affected.

That said, any food can technically cause an allergy, so it’s always a good idea to be on the lookout for signs of a possible allergic reaction. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, immediately or within an hour or two after eating, she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are avocados a choking hazard for babies?

Avocados are not considered a common choking hazard for babies. However, prepare them safely by making sure they're very ripe, the peel is removed and they are offered in an age-appropriate size.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never serve food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Next time you’re making guac, set some avocado aside for your budding eater. It’s easy for your baby to love and even easier for you to prep, making it a win-win for everyone at mealtime.