When Your Child's Friend Is a Bad Influence

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates throughout to text, style, sourcing and formatting, and medically reviewed.

when your child's friend is a bad influence; two toddler girls trying to climb a shelf at daycare

"My toddler's new friend from day care is introducing her to naughty behavior — throwing toys, sticking out her tongue, teasing other kids, you name it. Should I try to keep my child away from a little one who's a bad influence?"

Here’s a tricky situation that’s bound to pop up several times over the next decade or so. Throughout the day care and school years, you’ll find that some of your child’s friends are a complete joy to have around, while others can be quite a handful.

Sounds like you’re faced with a little rascal right now!

Do toddlers deliberately act "bad" and naughty?

Here’s some perspective: At this age, little ones aren’t really capable of being bad people (though, yes, they can be a bad influence inadvertently).

Poorly behaved toddlers and preschoolers just don’t have a fully developed set of social skills yet. Think of them as “humans in training.” So while they sometimes act out and act naughty to get attention or a reaction, they're not sophisticated enough to be thinking it out and doing it to be manipulative or "bad."

Tips on handling your child's friend who's a bad influence

That said, it’s frustrating to teach your child to do the “right” things and see it all unravel when a naughty, bad influence pal comes on the scene. So what can you do about it? Follow these tips on managing your tot's tricky friend:

Host playdates as much as possible

Have the friend over to your house for most playdates , and minimize how often your child goes to the pal’s pad. True, it’s more work for you, but this way, you can be on the lookout for undesirable behavior and nip it in the bud.

Set ground rules

Maybe sticking out your tongue and calling one another doody-head is considered funny at the friend’s house. If so, the buddy will naturally expect to do the same things at your place. So set the record straight.

In a calm voice, say, “At our house the rule is no sticking out your tongue [or whatever the offense is]. Please stop.”

If the child’s mom or dad is with her, it’s fine for her to hear you explain your ground rules Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsWhat Parents Can Do to Support FriendshipsSee All Sources [1] (hey, maybe she’ll pick up some ideas for taming her tot), though be prepared to stand your ground in case any problems with parents arise.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsWhat Parents Can Do to Support FriendshipsSee All Sources

Cope with some copying

Mimicking other toddlers' behavior — both good and bad — is one very normal way children learn. But you still need to remind your child of your own family rules (“No throwing toys, please. That is not allowed”). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsFriend or Foe?See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsFriend or Foe?See All Sources

While she may not obey you every time, she’ll actually take comfort in knowing that your rules don’t change. Kids crave consistency.

Ask for the day care or preschool teacher’s help

If your pipsqueak’s pal is a classmate, the teacher may have noticed that your child and her friend are double trouble when they’re together. If so, ask about separating them for a bit during the day.

For instance, when they do small-group activities, can one child go to the art center while the other goes to water play ? If you're nervous, check out these tips for talking to a teacher about problems at preschool .

Cut back on playdates with the friend

If a friend is a real fireball every time she's with your child, limit the social visits. Come up with creative excuses, become extremely busy — do whatever it takes so your sweetie sees her friend less often (or not at all).

After all, you’re still the parent, and you have a lot of control over whom your young child plays with. The teen years are a whole other story!

Good luck!

Heidi Murkoff

Sources

What Parents Can Do to Support Friendships

Show in the article

Friend or Foe?

Show in the article

How to Help Your Toddler Make Friends

7 Ways to Discipline Your Toddler,

Talking to a Teacher About Problems in Preschool

Social Development in Preschoolers

Milestones During the First 2 Years

Toddler Development