When Will You Get Your First Period After a Miscarriage?

Light copy updates, updates to sources, and fact-checked for accuracy.

first period after miscarriage, flower bud

Is your first period after a miscarriage or later pregnancy loss heavier, longer, or more painful than usual? It’s more than likely completely normal.

If you're recovering from a pregnancy loss , you might be surprised to find that your first period after a miscarriage could be a bit different than usual for the first cycle or two. And you may be anxious to know whether the bleeding you’re experiencing is normal.

While you should never hesitate to see your doctor if you’re concerned, keep in mind that changes to your first menstrual cycles after a loss are usually nothing to worry about and do not impact your future potential of giving birth to a healthy baby.

Key Takeaways

Your first period will usually return about 4 to 6 weeks after a miscarriage, depending on how quickly hCG levels fall. Factors like remaining tissue, how far along you were, and prior cycle regularity can play a role as well.

It's normal if your first cycle or two after pregnancy loss is heavier, longer, more painful, or includes clots. PMS or emotional symptoms can be more intense, too. The good news is that your period will typically return to its usual pattern over time.

You can ovulate (and get pregnant) before your first period, though many clinicians advise waiting 1 to 2 cycles to heal physically and emotionally after pregnancy loss.

When will you get your first period after you have a miscarriage?

Many women can expect their first period four to six weeks after a miscarriage. The exact timing may vary by several weeks, however, depending on when your hCG levels return to zero. Your body will still think it's pregnant until this hormone is gone. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsEarly Pregnancy LossSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsEarly Pregnancy LossSee All Sources

A few factors can delay your first period after a miscarriage:

Whether you had a "complete" miscarriage

A "complete" miscarriage means all the pregnancy tissue is gone from your uterus. It may have passed naturally on its own, or your doctor may have performed a D&C (dilation and curettage), a procedure that physically removes that tissue from your uterus. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsDilation and Curettage (D&C)See All Sources [2] In some cases, medications (usually misoprostol and mifepristone) can help complete a miscarriage.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsDilation and Curettage (D&C)See All Sources

Sometimes, however, fragments of the placental tissue remain in the uterus after a miscarriage (or, more rarely, after a D&C). Miscarriage bleeding may taper off, only to continue a few days later. This doesn’t mean your period has returned; it’s a continuation of a pregnancy loss. Your periods will not return to normal until this pregnancy tissue is gone.

How far along in your pregnancy you were

HCG rises as your pregnancy progresses. The further along you were in your pregnancy, the higher your hCG levels. If you miscarried late in the first trimester or in the second trimester, it will take longer for your hCG levels to return to zero and your periods to resume. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineHuman Chorionic GonadotropinSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineHuman Chorionic GonadotropinSee All Sources

Whether you had regular periods before your miscarriage

Since your periods will likely eventually return to the way they were before you conceived, if you had irregular periods , you’ll probably have irregular periods again. This can mean that it may take longer than four to six weeks for your first period after miscarriage to arrive.

How heavy will your first period after miscarriage be?

The first period after a miscarriage may be heavier, longer, and more painful. That may be because your body didn’t ovulate this cycle, causing the endometrial lining to become thicker and resulting in a heavier or longer period.

"I've just gotten my period after a D&C," says What to Expect Community mom sajama88. "It's definitely different and worse than normal so far."

Says Community mom ernst1: "I just got my period after miscarrying a month ago at 7 weeks, and it is crazy heavy! Definitely the heaviest period I’ve ever had, and I have heavy periods."

Try not to stress: Your periods won’t be this way forever. Eventually, your menstrual cycle will most likely return to the way it was before your pregnancy loss.

If your periods were short and light, they’ll probably go back to being that way. If they were longer and heavier, you can expect the same once things have settled.

What will your first period after a miscarriage look like?

A woman’s first period after a pregnancy loss is often a little different than usual. Bleeding in your first cycle or two post-miscarriage may be somewhat heavier than is typical for you, and you may notice a bit of clotting due to a heavier flow.

With time, you can expect your periods to look similar to how they did before your pregnancy loss.

What PMS symptoms might come with your first period after miscarriage?

Hormonal fluctuations after a miscarriage can be significant, and the miscarriage itself can be distressing. Sometimes the emotional symptoms women experience after a pregnancy loss may be similar to those of postpartum depression .

In fact, research suggests about 20% of women have symptoms of anxiety or depression following a miscarriage, especially those with a history of depression and those who don’t have good social support systems. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineDepression and Anxiety Following Early Pregnancy Loss: Recommendations for Primary Care ProvidersSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineDepression and Anxiety Following Early Pregnancy Loss: Recommendations for Primary Care ProvidersSee All Sources

Symptoms of depression include loss of interest in things you used to enjoy and hopelessness. If you think you might be experiencing depression, check in with your doctor. Help is available.

Once you get your first period after a miscarriage does that mean you can start trying to get pregnant again?

It’s usually okay to start having sex as soon as you stop bleeding after a miscarriage or D&C, but check in with your practitioner first. The return of your period is one of the first signals that your body is ready to start trying again.

But most pratitioners recommend waiting at least a cycle or two, or two to three months, after your miscarriage before you begin trying to get pregnant again so that your body can have time to heal, and so that you can get your nutritional reserves back up to where they should be to conceive. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicPregnancy After Miscarriage: What You Need to KnowSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicPregnancy After Miscarriage: What You Need to KnowSee All Sources

Even when you're physically ready to get pregnant again, however, you may or may not feel emotionally ready.

Some women find that trying to conceive helps them shift their focus and feel more in control over their bodies. Others struggle with worries about another miscarriage or need more time to grieve. Only you and your partner can decide when or if you’re emotionally ready to try for a baby again.

Also keep in mind that the return of your period doesn’t necessarily mean the return of ovulation. It’s possible that you may have one or more anovulatory cycles after a miscarriage (which means that you get your period but you haven’t actually ovulated).

To figure out if you’re actually ovulating, you’ll need to begin tracking your cycles and looking for signs of ovulation again.

What are your chances of getting pregnant after a miscarriage but before your first period?

It is possible to get pregnant after a pregnancy loss but before your first period, because you can ovulate before your first post-miscarriage period. Research has actually found that women may be more fertile in the three months following a miscarriage.

Remember that in order to get pregnant, you need to be ovulating. You may ovulate two to four weeks after you miscarry — or about two weeks before your first post-miscarriage period — if you had regular cycles before conceiving. But not all women ovulate during their first cycle after a miscarriage.

Eager to start tracking your cycles again? Wait until after your first period to resume charting ovulation . Until then, it’s likely that your readings will be all over the place and not very reliable.

Have more questions about navigating pregnancy after a miscarriage? The What to Expect app has more information on conceiving after a pregnancy loss.

Is the first period after a miscarriage painful?

The first period after a miscarriage may be more painful than in the past, especially if ovulation doesn’t take place. That’s because the endometrial lining becomes thicker when you don’t ovulate — and menstrual pains and cramps tend to worsen with a heavier flow.

Keep in mind that your periods should eventually get back to the way they were before your miscarriage given a few cycles.

What does brown discharge with the first period after a miscarriage mean?

Brown discharge is old blood leaving your body. It’s perfectly normal to have brown discharge for a few days after you have your period.

If you’re experiencing brown or pink discharge instead of usual menstrual blood around the time you expect your period, it could be due to a fertilized egg implanting in the uterine wall. You’ll need to wait another week after implantation before you take a home pregnancy test for accurate results.

When to call the doctor

Call your doctor as soon as possible if your bleeding becomes very heavy at any time after a miscarriage.

Check in with your practitioner if you begin bleeding again a few days after you miscarried, as you may have had an incomplete miscarriage. An incomplete miscarriage is totally normal and common. Your practitioner, however, may recommend a D&C if it’s necessary to remove remaining placental fragments. They may also check your hCG levels to make sure they have returned to zero.

Having a miscarriage can cause intense feelings of loss and mourning. If you're feeling this way after a pregnancy loss, know that you're not alone.

A good statistic to keep in mind: Most women miscarry just one time and go on to have healthy pregnancies and babies. And plenty of women who do have multiple miscarriages also go on to have viable pregnancies. So try to remain hopeful — and start tracking your periods again as soon as you feel ready.