When Your Toddler Tags Along on Your Doctor's Visit

toddler and mom at doctor's office

When your pipsqueak's the patient, she's pretty well occupied, especially if her pediatrician's office is brimming with books and toys. But there might not be much to keep your critter content at your own doctor's appointment. Here's how to make doctor's visits work when you've got your toddler in tow.

Is it okay to bring your active toddler places where she'll have to stay calm, like to your own doctor’s visit? Sometimes yes, sometimes no. For long procedures and doctor’s appointments during which you’ll be incapacitated (from having your feet in stirrups to having “blurry” drops in your eyes), you’re better off making childcare arrangements — or rescheduling your appointment if your sitter canceled or your partner suddenly got called in to work. But if you’re headed to a quick checkup (seeing your dermatologist for a brief post-procedure follow-up, for instance), you can probably get away with taking your tiny tagalong. Just keep the following tips in mind when you need to bring your child to a doctor’s visit for yourself.

Consider whether the doc is a family-friendly practitioner. Your munchkin will be much more welcome at doctor’s appointments in offices with a family feel. Ask yourself: Are there usually other kids in the waiting room? Stacks of blocks or children’s magazines in the racks? Then you’re probably good to go. If it’s your first doctor’s visit at this office, though, call ahead and ask the receptionist whether or not you can bring your child with you.

Schedule the doctor’s visit for early in the day. Your itty-bitty escort will be much more cooperative during doctor’s appointments if you make them first thing in the morning, when she’s well-rested and recently fed. Also, the earlier your doctor’s visit is, the shorter your wait will likely be since there’s less time for the office to run behind (and a shorter wait means a happier child).

Hire a helper. Another solution: Schedule your doctor’s visit after school, and hire a responsible teen or tween sitter to come along. She can play with your wee one in the waiting room while you see your physician in peace. Bonus: Since she’s having fun with her sitter, your child may come to associate doctor’s appointments with good times (a plus if your darling has a fear of doctors ).

Strap your child in. If you’re helper-less, secure your sweetie in her stroller before you get on the examining table or into the dentist’s chair. That way, there’s no chance of your toddler running amok or picking up a piece of possibly dangerous (and expensive) equipment during the doctor’s visit. However, if despite your best efforts your child throws a fit…

Break out the big guns. Doctor’s appointments are times when it’s perfectly okay to pull out practically anything and everything that will keep your toddler amused. Whether it’s a special snack or a fascinating (or new) toy that she doesn’t normally get to enjoy, the wow factor will buy you some time. Just skip anything messy or loud. And if these playthings and snacks can’t keep your cutie calm and stop toddler tantrums , you may need to reschedule your doctor’s appointment for a time you can set out solo.

What to Expect the Second Year, Heidi Murkoff and Sharon Mazel. American Academy of Pediatrics, Caring for Your Baby and Young Child, 6th Edition: Birth to Age 5 , 2014. Dr. Marion Newman, How to Become Smart and Good: A Blueprint for Parents, Caregivers and Teachers , 2014.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

11 Tips to Make Flying With a Toddler Go More Smoothly Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

Why Can't Toddlers Sit Still? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 18-Month Well-Baby Visit Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 30-Month Checkup Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Find the Best Pediatrician for Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

12 Tricks to Get Your Toddler to Take Medicine Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 2-Year-Old Checkup Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Toddler Playdate Ideas and Tips to Set You Up for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Guide to Well-Baby Visits Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Your Child Prepare for Your New Baby By Maura Hohman, Contributing Editor/Writer

The 15-Month Well-Baby Visit Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The 3-Year-Old Checkup Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When to Call the Doctor If Your Child Is Sick

8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler Fact Checked by Jill Malter

How to Help Make Shots Hurt Less for Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window