When Is the Best Time to Have Your Baby Shower?

Minor copy and formatting changes.

When to have a baby shower

Although there's no right time to celebrate your newest arrival, there are a few things you may want to consider when deciding when to have a baby shower.

Not sure when you should have your baby shower ? The short answer is that there's no "right" time — some parents opt for a shower early on in their pregnancies, while others wait until a week or two before their due dates .

Ultimately, the timing of your baby shower depends on what works for you, your family and the person hosting the event.

When should you have a baby shower?

Still, many moms-to-be report a sweet spot of the early- to mid-third trimester, when they are far enough along to start showing and have finished setting up their baby registry, but not so close to their due date that they're feeling overly tired or rundown. (Although some pregnant women have energy up until the end, others may not feel enthusiastic about socializing late in the third trimester.)

How much time you have after the shower is another consideration: Cut it too close, and you might not be able to finish writing baby shower thank-you notes before your little one arrives. Many parents also appreciate a few weeks to unpack their gifts, wash new clothes and set everything up in baby's nursery .

Because there's always a chance your little one will arrive early , having a buffer of a few weeks between your shower and due date may also give you some peace of mind.

Of course, everyone's situation is different. For some parents-to-be, their ideal baby shower timing might conflict with big events when guests will be out of town. (It's sometimes tricky to schedule a fall baby shower or a winter baby shower around the holidays!)

And if you've hired an outside venue to host your shower, you'll may have a more limited selection of dates. You'll likely also want to ensure that close family and friends can make the date you ultimately choose. (On the other hand, if you're opting for a virtual baby shower , scheduling tends to be a lot easier.)

Below, What to Expect community members share how far along they were when they had their baby showers — more proof that there's no right time (or way) to celebrate a new arrival.

The best time to have a baby shower, according to parents

"With my son, I was around 32 weeks . [Now, we're] having a sprinkle for this bub, and we are doing it around the 20-week mark because we are having a gender reveal at the same time." — MrsWeird-Chalke

"With my last, I wanted an early one, but the people throwing it wouldn't do it earlier than [28 to 32 weeks] because 'they wanted me to have a belly.' It was lovely, but I would have definitely preferred it being at least a month earlier than that. For instance, if I was having one this time around, I'd be having it [at 23 to 27 weeks ]. I was PLENTY big enough for 'cute belly' pics by then." — BoyMom

"I'm having twins and not allowed to fly past 30 weeks, so I'm having my shower at 26 weeks , right before the holidays and before I'm too big to enjoy everyone’s company." — CourtneyJeanne1

"I'll be 27 weeks. There's no right or wrong time!" — yasminpetersen

"I have potential complications that could lead to hospitalized bed rest at 30 to 32 weeks and a C-section around 35 weeks . Hoping that's not the case, but definitely want to be prepared if it is. I have friends who had their shower around 28 weeks , and they said it was great because they had a lot of energy still and were able to really get everything settled. I'll be 29 weeks ." — jenniv624

"I’m having mine at 30 weeks so I have time to organize even if baby comes early." — beaniebaby444

"I'm doing mine slightly early due to when my mum and sister can travel to where I live ... I'll be 30 weeks, nearly 31 weeks pregnant." — jenj505

"I vote [28 to 32 weeks]. You're big but cute, and you have time to organize everything and decorate with the gifts." — BabyGMomToBe

"I think anywhere between 30 to 33 weeks is good. It gives you time to get the items you still need." — tonimoe

"We are planning one for 32 weeks. Mostly because I had my daughter at 36 weeks , and I want time to get any items we still need afterwards." — zsmom_1

"I had mine at 32 weeks with my daughter and [am] planning to have this one around the same time. I liked having enough time to buy whatever was needed after the shower without feeling rushed. Also, [it] gave me enough time to put everything away at my own pace." — mommmmmmmmmabear

"I'll be 33 weeks. That date just worked best between all the birthdays, vacations, weddings, Easter and Mother's Day. I probably would have wanted it [a little later] if I could have, but my parents weren't available!" — MrsA830

"I'm a [ second-time mom ] and just fair warning ... you may [want to] think about having the shower a little earlier — maybe around 32 to 34 weeks if possible. I had a perfectly healthy pregnancy, but my water broke at 36 weeks, and my little guy was born four weeks early. I think my baby showers were around 30 to 32 weeks but there is really not [a] perfect time for it, so go with your gut." — anickerson1016

"I'll be 36 [weeks] at mine. I'm assuming I'll be uncomfortable, but it's in my house so I don't have to go anywhere, and I know my mom and MIL will be really good about doing everything and cleaning up." — SassaaFrass

"My job did my baby shower when I was 37 weeks . I went to a 'quick' routine doctor's appointment right before it started, and my blood pressure was super high. They ended up sending me to the hospital and inducing me that day. I was never able to go back to work to enjoy the baby shower. They sent me nice pics of them eating the cake though!" — kdj0223

"Do whenever is best for you. My surprise shower was at 37 weeks with my first, and that was fine but I had an extremely easy pregnancy the first time around. I wasn't expecting one, and I didn't have to do anything for it or during it, so it was a nice few hours rather than a pain." — AngieHW

"I'm having my shower AFTER baby is born so that everyone can meet him at once while celebrating. The shower is for him after all, not me." — Kaleyystewart

WhatToExpect.com, How to Plan a Baby Shower , August 2021. WhatToExpect.com, A Complete Guide to Baby Shower Etiquette , November 2023. WhatToExpect.com, Your Guide to the Third Trimester of Pregnancy , October 2021.

Updates history

December 4, 2023

Editor: Caroline Picard

Minor copy and formatting changes.

Fact-checked to ensure accuracy.

Your Next Read

Hosting a Baby Shower? Here’s Your Stress-Free Planning Checklist Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Baby Shower? Smart Etiquette Tips to Make The Day Run Smoother Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Shower Invitation Wording Ideas Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Throw a Fall-Themed Baby Shower for Your Little Pumpkin Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Planning a Coed Baby Shower? Why They’re the New Thing — Plus Party Themes Guests Will Love Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

When to Tell People You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

How to Throw a Winter Wonderland Baby Shower for Your Little Snow Angel Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan the Ultimate Gender Reveal Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

The Ultimate Third Trimester Checklist: Everything to Do Before Your Baby’s Birthday Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

How to Plan a Virtual Baby Shower Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

35 Creative Baby Shower Themes Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Cope With Baby Shower Anxiety Medically Reviewed by Shari Lusskin, M.D.

What to Write in a Baby Shower Card Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How to Plan a First Birthday Party Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Saying “I Do” While Expecting: Having a Comfortable Wedding When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window