When Do Babies Grow and Lose Their Hair?

Updates throughout to copy, sourcing and formatting, including a new medical review for accuracy.

when babies grow hair, mother putting baby down on his back

Whether your baby is still bald or sporting a mop top, here's what causes infant hair loss, when your little one’s permanent hair will grow in and how to care for those locks (or lack thereof) in the meantime.

While a few babies come out with perfectly styled locks, many start off with a spiky mohawk, tufted patches, or the scraggly comb-over of a little Homer Simpson. And even more newborns have almost no hair at all.

Whatever your baby’s hairstyle du jour, don’t worry too much — or get too attached. Newborn 'dos are hair today, gone tomorrow.

"My boy was born with a full head of hair and kept it up until a few weeks ago," says What to Expect Community user mum102023. "Now it’s all falling out!"

Here’s a look at how your baby’s hair can grow and change, why some little ones experience infant hair loss — plus how to care for whatever coif your cutie’s got.

Why are some babies born with hair?

Believe it or not, babies begin to grow hair in the womb. Even if your baby is totally bald when she’s born, the seeds of her future locks have long been planted. Hair follicles start to develop by week 14 or 15 of pregnancy, Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicFetal DevelopmentSee All Sources [1] setting the stage for future strands to sprout.

Fetal Development

That’s not to say your newborn will necessarily come into the world with a full head of hair — far from it. Many babies lose some or all of that hair they’re born with: Most infants have almost none when they’re first born, and the tiny tresses that emerge in those early weeks and months could very well shed between 2 and 3 months. Trusted SourceSeattle Children'sHair LossSee All Sources [2]

Hair Loss

Why do babies lose their hair?

Whether your baby was born with a massive mane or started growing a few sprouts that then began to shed, infant hair loss is common and nothing to worry about, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHair Loss (Alopecia) in ChildrenSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHair Loss (Alopecia) in ChildrenSee All Sources

In fact, it’s a normal, physiological response to birth. Some experts link it to plummeting pregnancy hormones — the ones that may have given you great hair too! — which kick off what’s called the exogen, or shedding phase in some parts of the scalp, causing lots of hair to fall out altogether.

"It is very common and even normal for babies to lose their hair in the first few months of life," says Kyle Monk , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, California, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

Baby hair grows in cycles, she explains, and hair shedding is most common during this exogen phase. Luckily, the exogen phase is usually followed rather quickly (or even simultaneously) by new hair growth. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineIntegrative and Mechanistic Approach to the Hair Growth Cycle and Hair LossSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineIntegrative and Mechanistic Approach to the Hair Growth Cycle and Hair LossSee All Sources

"I tell parents not to worry, as this is just temporary," Dr. Monk says. "The hair will generally grow back within the first year."

It is very common and even normal for babies to lose their hair in the first few months of life.

Dr. Kyle Monk, pediatrician at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

When will your baby’s hair grow back?

As for when she’ll start sporting a permanent load of locks? Know that it’ll happen eventually.

Exactly when can be anyone’s guess — it’s different for every child. Some get a great new head of hair by 6 months, some not for two or three years. And even if those strands are sparse early on, it doesn’t mean your child’s hair will be thin when she’s older.

In fact, the baby hair that grows in may be nothing like her newborn locks. Color and texture often change — so your baby’s thick, dark hair could make its reappearance a lot finer and lighter. Red can give way to blond. Curly can go straight. Trusted SourceNational Institute of Health, MedLine PlusIs hair color determined by genetics?See All Sources [5] Surprise, surprise!

Trusted SourceNational Institute of Health, MedLine PlusIs hair color determined by genetics?See All Sources

"Three of mine were born with one color hair and it came in a different color," says What to Expect Community user cinquieme. "One was a redhead-turned-blonde; one had dark brown hair that came in blond; and my current baby was born with dark brown hair that is now coming in red/auburn. My three other kids kept their newborn hair color."

KEY TAKEAWAYS

Babies may begin to grow hair in the womb, but newborn locks can look very different from baby to baby. Some little ones lose some or all of that hair they’re born with, and any hair that does emerge in those early weeks and months could very well shed.

lose some or all of that hair they’re born with, and any hair that does emerge in those early weeks and months could very well shed.

Luckily, infant hair loss is common and nothing to worry about, experts say. It may be linked to plummeting pregnancy hormones, which kick off the exogen, or shedding phase in parts of the scalp. For some babies, this causes them to lose all or most of their newborn hair.

Though it’s different for every child , some babies grow a new head of hair by 6 months, but others won't for two or three years. Your baby's hair color and texture might change, too.

While a bald newborn is totally normal, you can give your baby's hair the best possible treatment by avoiding over-brushing, steering clear of tight hairstyles, making sure your little one has a healthy diet once she starts solids, and keeping her off of her back when she's awake.

How to care for your baby’s hair and help it grow

Have dreams of styling a gorgeous, sweet-smelling head of baby hair? While there’s not much you can directly do to get your sweetie’s strands growing (and again, a bald newborn is totally normal), you can give existing tresses the best possible treatment and give her body what it needs to grow healthy and strong from head to toe.

Keep your baby off of her back when she’s awake. It’s common for younger babies to develop bald patches on the back of their heads, thanks to so much time spent laying on their backs during sleep. While you should always place your baby on her back to sleep (it’s the safest position and can prevent SIDS ), try to offer opportunities for her to have that head up while she’s awake. Do plenty of tummy time and hold her upright while you’re playing or reading books if she can’t yet sit up on her own. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsBack to Sleep, Tummy to PlaySee All Sources [6]

Avoid over-brushing. Contrary to the old wives’ tale, brushing 100 times a day doesn’t encourage hair growth — and it can actually promote damage and breakage, according to the American Academy of Dermatology Association (AAD). Brush whatever fuzz your baby has as needed to style it, then stop. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of Dermatologists10 Hair Care Habits That Can Damage Your HairSee All Sources [7]

Comb — don’t brush — wet hair. Even a little bit of brushing can damage wet hair. If your little one’s locks are long enough that they need some help post-bath, use a comb instead.

Steer clear of tight hairstyles. Tempted to do up the little mane your baby does have? Just avoid pulling it back tightly and stick with soft hair bands or clips that won’t pull strands out or break them.

Focus on healthy food. It’s a must for your baby’s growth and development overall, so in that sense, wholesome meals and snacks will strengthen and support those lengthening locks. Breast milk or formula is all that your baby needs before 6 months, the AAP says . Once she starts solids, introduce a wide variety of healthy foods and focus on the nutrients that are especially important for babies. Think protein, calcium, whole grains and complex carbohydrates, healthy fats, iron, omega-3s, and vitamins A, B, C and E.

Consider coconut oil. Try massaging a dab onto your baby’s noggin after bath time. Very limited research suggests that certain compounds in coconut oil could help combat hair damage and promote a healthy scalp. As with all natural remedies, just run it by your baby’s pediatrician first.

Soothe cradle cap. If flaky, red patches have appeared on baby’s scalp, alleviate this common skin condition — also called seborrheic dermatitis — with mineral oil and regular shampooing. This can help clear up the scales and may speed hair growth.

Got a baby with a full head of hair? Caring for those fine locks calls for some finesse, but it’s nothing you can’t handle. Here’s how to keep those newborn strands silky and smooth.

Don't wash your baby's hair every day. Particularly with newborns, there’s just no need. Aim for a quick shampoo when you bathe your baby , which doesn’t need to happen more often than a couple times a week. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicBaby Bath Basics: A Parent's GuideSee All Sources [8]

Gently shampoo your baby’s scalp at bathtime. A too-brisk scalp massage can stress hair follicles and speed up hair loss or breakage.

Use a soft-bristle brush or a wide-toothed comb that won’t snag on tangles or pull your baby’s hair.

If your baby needs a quick trim, go for it. Just do it when she’s well-rested and fed so she’ll be less cranky, and set her up with some toys to distract her.

Whether your baby is born bald and stays that way for a while or comes out with a long, luxurious mane, her hair situation will likely change. In the meantime, give that sweet little head plenty of kisses and take lots of pictures. A few years from now, you’ll both have fun marveling at the hair she was — or wasn’t! — born with.