When Do You Feel Baby Kicks During a Twin Pregnancy?

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

fetal movement with twins, two peas in a pod

Got two babies on the way? Here’s what you need to know about when and how much you’ll feel your twins move.

If you already know you’re having twins , anticipating when you’ll feel your little ones kick and move around may be fraught with both anticipation and a decent dose of anxiety. Will you notice their acrobatics sooner than you would if you were carrying one? And what should twin fetal movement feel like? Can you tell if something’s wrong?

"I was getting so stressed about [fetal movement], but of course the day I went in for an extra scan was the day I first felt a really defined kick," says What to Expect Community mom Jft92. "Now, at 34 weeks, there’s basically a full-time festival in my belly!"

There’s a big range in what’s normal for fetal movement with twins, but one thing you can be sure of: Because you’re having two, you’ll be seeing your health care practitioner more often, offering extra reassurance that everything’s going fine with your future soccer players. Here’s what you need to know about fetal movement and baby kicks when you're pregnant with twins.

Key Takeaways

Most moms with first-time twin pregnancies feel movement around 18 to 20 weeks (similar to singletons), and sometimes earlier in later pregnancies. It varies from person to person, depending on build and the position of the placenta.

Twin movement may be felt in different spots at once, shifting sooner from distinct kicks to rolling and pressing as space tightens.

Some moms-to-be can tell their babies apart early, others can’t — tracking patterns and feeling for around 10 movements per baby during kick counts helps gauge normal activity.

Babies have rest periods, but a clear drop or absence of movement warrants a call to your OB/GYN, who can assess your babies with ultrasound or monitoring.

When will you feel your babies kick when you're pregnant with twins?

Most first-time moms of twins don’t feel fetal movement , or quickening, until 18 to 20 weeks — about the same average for singletons. That said, if this is your second or later pregnancy, you’re more likely to feel the flutterings faster.

"I started feeling quickening around 13 weeks; by the time I was 16 weeks it was more of a rolling feeling; and now at 25 weeks it’s full blown kicking, twisting, and turns," says What to Expect Community mom jasminee0614.

Where you fall in that range depends on your size and build, and on the positioning of your placenta(s). If you’re slender, you might feel your babies earlier, simply because you’ve got less padding on your belly “muffling” the movements. Placental position plays a role, too: An anterior (front-facing) placenta can “block” you from feeling flutters and, later, even kicks for weeks longer than other moms. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMultiple PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMultiple PregnancySee All Sources

"I felt my Di-Di twins move around 20 to 22-ish weeks," says What to Expect Community mom mommamanda95. "Both placentas are anterior and the babies were mostly facing each other and kicking each other early on."

How is fetal movement different with twins vs. singletons?

Some major differences between how movement is felt in twin versus singleton pregnancies are how early you feel fetal movement, how much of it you feel, and how quickly your twins run out of room. With two, you’ll progress more quickly from being able to detect each separate kick, punch, or elbow jab to feeling a sort of rolling, pressing sensation in your abdomen as the babies move around in a tighter space.

When you're pregnant with twins, that change in fetal movement is more likely to happen late in the second trimester, whereas singleton moms may not get to that point until the third trimester. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineFetal behavior in normal dichorionic twin pregnancySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of MedicineFetal behavior in normal dichorionic twin pregnancySee All Sources

You might also feel your babies moving at the same time but in more than one area of your belly if you're pregnant with multiples.

Will I be able to feel my twin babies kick and move separately?

Some twin moms are able to tell which of their twins is delivering the kicks or other movement, particularly earlier in the second trimester (when there’s still some room to spare), and also if the babies are settled on different sides. Baby A may like to hang out on your right side, with Baby B on the left, for example, or one twin might be up top and the other down lower.

But plenty of twin moms are never able to tell if it’s Baby A or Baby B, simply because the babies are positioned close together, making distinguishing among four arms and four legs more difficult.

How do I count kicks with twins?

Counting your baby’s kicks and movements is a good tool for any mom-to-be to try to gauge how much your babies are moving. The way it’s done is the same for multiples as it is for singletons. Follow these steps: Trusted SourceChildren's Hospital of PhiladelphiaFetal Movement CountingSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceChildren's Hospital of PhiladelphiaFetal Movement CountingSee All Sources

Twice a day, once in the morning and again in the evening, note the time and start counting any movement you feel (kicks, flutters, swishes, and rolls) and try to keep track separately of each baby if you can tell them apart.

Stop when you reach 10 per baby, and note the time again.

If it took more than an hour to feel 10 movements, have a snack or go for a walk, then lie down and relax and count again.

If two hours go by without 10 movements, call your practitioner.

But remember that with twins — especially since their movement gets more restricted more quickly than with single babies — what’s just as important as kick-counting is generally paying attention to your babies’ patterns. Are they usually active right after you eat, or when you’re putting your feet up to rest? If they deviate from that pattern, alert your health care provider. Trusted SourceStanford MedicineFetal Movement CountingSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceStanford MedicineFetal Movement CountingSee All Sources

Tracking kicks for two in there? The My Journal tool in the What to Expect app makes it easier to monitor fetal movement and stay on top of your twins’ development — with expert-backed guidance and support every step of the way.

What if I can’t feel my twins moving?

Your babies will have periods of movement and periods of rest, or even sleep, throughout your pregnancy. So if their movements slow down a bit, don’t immediately worry. After a few weeks of a lot of kicking and rolling, it may just be that your duo has grown to the point where they have less room for their usual acrobatics.

If there truly is a marked decrease or lack of activity in one twin, contact your OB/GYN or midwife. Your practitioner will look for a few things, including low levels of amniotic fluid and discordant growth, where one twin is growing faster than the other.

Discordant growth itself is actually common with multiples and doesn’t always signal a problem unless there’s a significant difference in size between twins. That can be caused by a problem with the umbilical cord or the placenta (which would mean baby isn’t getting nutrients she needs) or twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS, an extremely rare condition in identical twins when one twin is getting more blood supply than the other).

Bottom line: If at any time you suspect or feel less movement from one of your babies and you’re concerned, check in with your practitioner. An ultrasound or other tests can help put your mind at ease.

How do I know if something’s wrong?

There are several ways your health care provider will make sure your babies are fine, even if you’re having trouble feeling them move (or aren’t feeling as much as you did earlier in your pregnancy). Because you’re pregnant with twins, you’ll have more frequent visits, at which your doctor may use an ultrasound to check growth and assess health. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSpecial Tests for Monitoring Fetal Well-BeingSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsSpecial Tests for Monitoring Fetal Well-BeingSee All Sources

Your practitioner may also schedule a nonstress test , where you’ll wear a fetal monitor while relaxing in a chair. This test is a simple, noninvasive way to assess how your babies are doing that can put your mind at rest.