When a Toddler Interrupts Sex

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting. | January 15, 2019

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"My toddler walked in on my husband and me having sex! What do I do? What do I say to her?"

First of all, relax (even though your intimate moment was anything but relaxing). Toddlers are fairly oblivious, and they’re especially unaware when they’re sleepy (which is good news if your little one burst in during an evening romp). Even though you’re well aware of what was going on, she hasn’t a clue that she walked in on you having sex. How could she? She doesn’t even know what sex is!

But she may know that she saw something after she interrupted sex. So, once your clothes are back on, try to uncover her feelings. Was she scared that you and your hubby were hurting each other? Stumped as to why you two were wrestling when she’s not allowed to roughhouse in the house? If so, address her fear and confusion head-on. Explain that grown-ups sometimes show they love each other in ways that kids don’t — and because adults are big and strong, their hugs and kisses look different than ones between kids or between parents and kids. Reassure your child that both Mommy and Daddy are just fine.

Despite not realizing that she interrupted sex, she may feel like she did something wrong if you shouted “Go away!” or “Get out!” when she walked in on you. Give yourself a break for reacting that way (she did startle you, after all) and then apologize for yelling. Remind her of a time when she was scared and reacted quickly — then tell her that moms and dads get surprised and act hastily too. After some comforting cuddles, distract her with an activity or a snack.

Moving forward, think about how you’ll prevent future sex interruptions. If your toddler's prone to night waking , maybe you need a lock on your door (or a better one if your toddler burst past the one you have now). Maybe you need to check that your toddler’s crib or bed rails are secure so she can’t get out. Or maybe you just need to talk to your toddler about privacy: Make a game out of having her practice walking up to a closed door, knocking, and calling out “Mommy?” instead of opening the door. That’s a great skill that’ll prevent getting walked in on — and it may even let you change clothes or go to the bathroom without toddler input or interruption.

Last but not least, use this interrupted-sex incident as an opportunity to think about how you want to address sexuality issues with your little one. Because children love asking questions , the day is coming (if it’s not already here) when she’ll ask how babies are made (or “What are those two doggies doing?”) — and you’ll want to be ready with an age-appropriate answer. Remember that her curiosity is normal, and it’s never too early to start simple conversations about body parts and natural human impulses.

Wishing you interruption-free sex.

Heidi Murkoff

Mayo Clinic, Sex Education: Talking to Toddlers and Preschoolers about Sex , July 2016. American Academy of Pediatrics, Healthychildren.org, Sexual Behaviors in Young Children: What’s Normal, What’s Not , July 2016. Nemours, KidsHealth, Sleepwalking , August 2018. American Academy of Family Physicians, Familydoctor.org, Talking to Your Kids About Sex , January 2017. Nemours, KidsHealth, Questions and Answers About Sex , August 2014. What to Expect the Second Year , Heidi Murkoff and Sharon Mazel. Whattoexpect.com, Toddler Sleep Walking and Sleep-Talking , December 2018.

Go to Your Toddler's Month

Your Next Read

When Toddlers Touch Themselves: Why It Happens and How to Respond Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Toddler Penis Care Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Toddler Vaginal and Vulvar Care Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

What to Do When Your Toddler Suddenly Hates Baths Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here's What to Do When Your Toddler Goes Through a Regression Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Can't Toddlers Sit Still? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Toddler Temper Tantrums Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

7 Ways to Discipline Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Avoid Spoiling Your Child Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Divorce With Young Children By Heidi Murkoff

Why Is My Toddler Swearing and How Can I Stop It? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Help Toddlers Transition Between Activities Fact Checked by Christine Gordon

What to Do if Your Toddler Refuses to Poop on the Potty Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Here’s Why Your Toddler Is Taking Off His Clothes and What to Do About It Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do When Your Partner Is Afraid of Sex During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Lorene Temming, M.D., M.S.C.I., F.A.C.O.G.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window