Introducing Tofu to Your Baby

Tofu is tasty and versatile. Here's when babies can have tofu, plus how to safely prepare it for early eaters.

Tofu is easy to prep and packed with important nutrients like protein, making it an ideal mealtime staple for both meat-eating and vegetarian families alike. And since it’s simple to serve in finger food form, tofu is a particularly good choice for early eaters.

Soybean-based foods like tofu are a main allergen, though. And if you’re new to tofu yourself, you might have questions about how to prep it for your baby or toddler. Here’s everything parents need to know about how and when to introduce tofu to your baby, plus simple ideas to make it delicious.

When can babies have tofu?

Tofu is made from soy, which is a main allergen . So the creamy bean curd shouldn’t be the very first item on your new eater’s menu. But contrary to the old approach to introducing allergens, you don’t have to wait too long before serving soy-based foods.

While experts used to think that introducing allergenic foods later reduced the risk for reactions, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) now says there’s no reason to wait.

After getting the green light from your child’s pediatrician to start introducing solids — usually around 6 months — and your baby has tried and tolerated several less-allergenic foods (like fruits, veggies or baby cereal), you can likely move on to allergens like soy, including tofu, under the guidance of your pediatrician.

When you put tofu or another soy food on your baby’s menu for the first time, plan to serve it at home (versus at day care or in a restaurant). That’ll make it easier to keep an eye on her after eating so you can watch for any potential allergic reactions.

Make sure tofu is the only new food being introduced during the meal, too. This will make it easier to pinpoint soy as the culprit if there’s a problem.

How to prepare tofu for your baby

Most types of tofu are easy for babies to gum and break down, so you don’t have to do much to make tofu work for your mini muncher — whether or not you introduced solids by spoon-feeding purées or with a baby-led weaning approach (which involves introducing solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods).

Firm and extra firm tofus work best for slicing into strips or cubes as a finger food . You can serve tofu raw, baked or stir-fried — just make sure the final texture is soft enough that you can still squish it between your fingers. Tofu that’s very well-baked or overly crisp might have a tough outer skin that’s difficult for your baby to gum or chew.

As for soft or silken tofus? They’re very creamy and delicate — making them good options for puréeing into smoothies or dips, or even adding to baked goods.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve tofu at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare tofu for a 6-month-old

Preparing tofu for a 6-month-old

Slice cooked or raw tofu into long, narrow strips about the size of your pinky finger. Firm tofu is a better choice than extra-firm for brand new eaters, since the slightly softer texture is easier to gum. Opting to serve the tofu raw? Try slicing it with a crinkle cutter or rolling it in baby cereal to make it easier for your little one to hold.

How to prepare tofu for a 9-month-old

Preparing tofu for a 9-month-old

Cut baked or raw tofu into pea-sized pieces to encourage your older baby to work on her pincer grasp. You can also try adding silken tofu to smoothies as she starts learning to sip from a straw cup.

How to prepare tofu for 12 months and older

Preparing tofu for a 12-month-old

Let your growing gourmand practice spearing small cubes (no larger than half an inch in any direction) of baked or raw tofu with a fork. Try serving homemade dipping sauces made with silken tofu, too — your toddler might start to get excited about the idea of dunking her fruits and veggies.

Tofu recipes for babies and toddlers

Tofu doesn’t have to be boring or bland — and it works with far more than just stir-fries. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially other top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Some tot-approved ways to add tofu to the menu (that you’ll love, too):

Baked tofu fingers. Brush finger-sized slices of firm or extra-firm tofu with olive or toasted sesame oil and bake until golden. Experiment, too, with adding herbs or spices before baking — like ground cumin, oregano or a pinch of garlic powder.

Cheesy tofu nuggets. Dredge cubes of firm or extra-firm tofu in flour, followed by beaten egg, followed by bread crumbs seasoned with Parmesan cheese. Spray lightly with oil and bake until golden.

Fruity tofu smoothie. Swap soft or silken tofu for yogurt or milk in your sweetie’s favorite fruit smoothie.

Creamy tofu ranch. Blend soft or silken tofu with garlic powder, onion powder, chopped fresh dill, chopped fresh chives and lemon juice for a zippy dip or toast spread.

Tofu balls. Mash firm or extra-firm tofu with peanut butter, low-sodium soy sauce and enough breadcrumbs so the mixture holds together when you form golf-sized balls. Dredge the balls in flour and pan-fry until golden. Serve with marinara sauce, just like meatballs.

Curried scrambled tofu. Crumble firm or extra-firm tofu. Season with curry powder and turmeric. Sauté with diced bell pepper or onion and serve with a side of whole grain toast and fruit.

Tofu egg replacer. If your tot has an egg allergy, try swapping 1/4 cup silken tofu for each egg in recipes like whole grain pancakes, muffins or quick breads.

What are the benefits of tofu for babies and toddlers?

Tofu is packed with high-quality protein , which serves as the building block to support your little one’s rapid growth. It’s also rich in good fats and hard-to-get minerals like choline to promote healthy brain development .

Some types of tofu are also a good source of bone-building calcium. How much depends on how the tofu was prepared, so check the package nutrition label to see how much calcium is in the variety you're considering.

Can babies be allergic to tofu?

Soybean is one of the most common allergens, so it’s possible for your baby or toddler to have a reaction to a soy-based food like tofu. (Though thankfully, most tots with soy allergies outgrow them by age 5.) That means it’s extra important to watch for signs of a possible reaction when you introduce products like tofu.

Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

If you suspect that your baby or toddler has soy allergy, take tofu and other foods containing soy off the menu and touch base with her pediatrician to discuss her symptoms. Your doctor might recommend allergy testing to confirm the diagnosis.

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Is tofu a choking hazard for babies?

Since most varieties are soft and easily smushable, tofu is not considered a top choking hazard. However, you should still take steps to prepare tofu safely, such as by serving it in age-appropriate sizes and making sure it doesn't become too crispy when cooked.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never serve food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Tasty, wholesome and versatile, tofu earns a spot on your tot’s menu. Whether you opt for silken or firm, or savory or sweet, the mild flavor and creamy texture is sure to go over big with your little gourmand.