Reading Books to Your Baby or Toddler

reading

You can read to your baby from day one! Learn why reading to children is so beneficial, plus the best reading activities for different ages.

Long before they understand a single word, most babies love to hear their parents read out loud. After all, storytime combines some of your child's favorite things: snuggles, interesting pictures, fascinating sounds...and, of course, you. So it’s worth starting reading together as early as possible.

When should you start reading to your baby?

It’s never too early to break out the books. You can make reading a part of your baby’s regular routine as soon as she comes home — and keep it up.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends reading sessions from infancy on to prepare your child for language development and early literacy skills, as well as to promote parent-child bonding.

What are the benefits of reading to your baby?

Curling up with a good book is a sweet, relaxing way to bond with your little one. But flipping through those bright, colorful books is more than just a fun way to pass the time.

Reading with your baby or toddler sets the stage for early learning and skill development that will serve your child throughout her life. In fact, children who are introduced to reading early tend to read earlier themselves, since kids who are read to as babies have better language skills and are more interested in reading when they start school.

Even before your baby is old enough to understand what’s happening on the page, reading together lays the foundation for learning how to talk. Exposure to new words and sounds expands your baby’s vocabulary, eventually making her a stronger and more expressive talker. Reading also introduces her to important concepts like numbers, letters, colors and shapes.

These learning benefits extend into toddlerhood and beyond. Reading helps your toddler master the ABCs, develop phonemic awareness (meaning starting to understand that words are made up of individual sounds) and learn that those marks on a page represent letters and words (and things and concepts).

Sharing a book also helps babies and parents bond, which the AAP notes is essential for a child's cognitive and social-emotional development. Hearing you read expressively is one way your baby learns about different emotions, and encouraging her to look at, point to and eventually answer questions about what she sees on the page encourages back-and-forth communication. And as your child grows, reading is an opportunity to help her understand the world around her.

Finally, reading together is one way to establish a predictable daily routine , which can help babies and toddlers thrive. Snuggling up with a book before nap or bedtime can signal to your sweetie that it’s time to wind down for sleep, for instance.

Reading activities for babies and toddlers

Not sure how to narrate to a newborn? Struggling to lure in a less-than-interested toddler? These easy, age-appropriate storytime ideas can help you get the reading ball rolling.

Reading activities: Newborns

Your new bundle will be happy to cuddle up and listen to you read, well, anything these days. The sound of your voice alone is soothing and relaxing to your newborn, so feel free to read aloud whatever you might be looking at. If you’re paging through a novel with your free hand while nursing, go ahead and narrate some of it to your little one.

As for baby-friendly books ? Your newborn will, of course, appreciate those, too. Books with simple faces, bright colors and patterns are a feast for your newborn’s eyes. And she’ll delight in hearing text that’s simple, repetitive or rhyming.

Reading activities: 2 to 12 months

Reading can start to become more interactive as your cutie grows increasingly aware of the world around her. By around 6 months of age, your little one will begin understanding simple words as they’re spoken. And a few months later, your soon-to-be toddler may start pointing to colors, animals and objects as you say their names aloud.

Offer interactive books. Your baby will love grabbing at books with soft mirrors or different textures. She’ll delight in uncovering the surprises in fold-out or lift-the-flap books, too — and will start manipulating the folds and flaps herself as her fine motor skills improve.

Try stories about familiar activities. Your baby will get a kick out of seeing books that mimic the parts of her own day — like eating, bathtime, playtime or bedtime.

“Read” photo albums. Look through albums with pictures of friends and family members, telling your baby about the people in the photos. She’ll get excited about seeing her favorite people in book form!

Let her get mouthy. If your little chomper wants to do some reading with her mouth, let her explore. Just be sure to choose sturdy books made of chew-safe material, like vinyl or cloth books.

Invite some participation. As your older baby nears her first birthday, ask her to help you turn the pages and point out different objects. Don’t be surprised if she starts imitating some of the sounds you make!

Reading activities: 12 to 24 months

Between 12 and 18 months of age, many toddlers demonstrate their growing word comprehension by pointing to the colors, animals, characters and objects in a book that they know the words for. Reading reinforces their understanding of the new words they’re learning and the contexts they’re used in — for instance, from the colors of the rainbow to what a rainbow is. It also introduces them to words that they may not encounter in their daily lives, like zebra.

Read books that reinforce everyday activities. Young toddlers can connect with characters doing the same things they do, such as saying hello or goodbye, eating meals, taking a bath or getting ready for bed.

Try finger plays. Books with rhymes like the Itsy-Bitsy spider, puppets or other small props give stories an added element of interest that draw young toddlers in.

Choose interactive elements. Because many toddlers are also continuing to develop fine motor skills at this time, your little reader may particularly love books that have interactive elements, such as flaps, popups and buttons.

Get rhythmic. Encourage your toddler to clap or sing along to rhyming or sing-song books.

Use your child’s name. Your toddler will get excited to see a character with the same name as her.

Add silly voices and animal sounds. Read in an animated, excited tone and include lots of commentary, asking questions and offering opportunities for your toddler to show off his comprehension as you go: "Where's the dog?" or "What's on the cat's head?"

Reading activities: 24 to 36 months

Start transitioning from board books to ones with paper pages — your older toddler can now turn the pages, and she’s starting to understand how reading as an activity works.

Ask for some input. Encourage your toddler to think and get creative by pausing throughout the story to ask her what she thinks might happen next.

Invite your child to read to you. Have a book that your toddler has gotten really familiar with? She might like to “read” the story to you!

Make connections. Point out events in stories that happen in your toddler’s life, like visiting grandparents, sharing a toy or taking a nap after lunch.

Build routines around reading. Come up with little rituals that can easily be repeated, like starting each session by putting your toddler in charge of picking a book from the shelf, and ending by asking her what her favorite part of the story was and why.

Create your own books. Make your own scrapbooks or photo albums filled with pictures of people your toddler knows and loves. Invite her to flip through and tell you about who she sees.

Show her that adults read, too. Let your toddler see you enjoying a book or magazine; you can even read aloud from whatever it is you're perusing. The words aren't as important as your enthusiasm for them. Any exposure to reading builds vocabulary and helps her learn how books work.

You can’t go wrong with reading to your baby or toddler, especially when you start early and do it often. When you hit on a story or activity that gets your budding bookworm extra excited, make it a regular part of reading time!

And if your sweetie gets a little squirmy during story time, don’t sweat it. Let her sit (or wriggle) beside you on the sofa, or even play nearby on the floor. There's a good chance she'll still be listening even if her eyes aren't on the book.