When Can You Have Sex After Birth?

when can you have sex after birth, couple looking at each other while laying in bed

Between the 3 a.m. feedings and colicky cries, you might not have thought about when you can get between the sheets just yet. Here's how to know when it's time.

Sex may not be the first thing on your mind during those early, hazy days after your baby is born. But at some point — perhaps on a day when you've gotten the chance to shower, eat a hot meal and maybe sneak in a quick catnap — you might take a look at your partner and think, "Yup, tonight's the night."

When that urge hits, you'll want to make sure your body is physically healed. Recovering from childbirth doesn't happen overnight, and holding off on sex until you're fully ready will make the experience both safer and more enjoyable.

So just how long do you need to wait? Here's what the experts have to say, plus the important things to know if you and your partner decide to have sex sooner.

When can you have sex after birth?

While there are no hard-and-fast guidelines for when you can start having sex again after birth, many OB/GYNs recommend waiting six weeks, according to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsA Partner's Guide to PregnancySee All Sources [1] The rule of thumb applies for both vaginal and cesarean section births.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsA Partner's Guide to PregnancySee All Sources

The six-week mark is typically when you'll go in for your first postpartum checkup . During the visit, your provider will examine your vagina or C-section scar to see how your body is recovering.

In the meantime, your doctor will likely advise holding off on both vaginal penetration and receiving oral sex. Non-penetrative forms of intimacy like masturbation (if you're up for it) are totally fine.

Just keep in mind that every woman is different. While some might feel eager to resume intimacy as soon as they get the green light, it's also completely normal to need more time.

Almost a quarter of moms have sex within six weeks of delivery, according to a recent survey conducted by Everyday Health Group, What to Expect's parent company. However, another 46 percent waited longer than that — sometimes taking six months, a year or more before resuming penetrative sex.

The bottom line? There's no rush to have sex after having a baby, and you shouldn't feel pressured. If cuddling, massage or hand-holding sound like more your speed right now, those forms of intimacy are great too.

Why do you need to wait to have sex after birth?

First and foremost, your body needs time to recover from labor and delivery. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicWhat You Should Know About Postpartum SexSee All Sources [2] Regardless of whether you gave birth vaginally or via C-section, your uterus has sustained a wound where your placenta detached, which is why you experience lochia, or postpartum bleeding, for several weeks after birth, says Gail Herrine, M.D., F.A.C.O.G., a professor of clinical obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive science at Temple University and a medical director at Temple University Hospital in Philadelphia.

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicWhat You Should Know About Postpartum SexSee All Sources

At the same time, your cervix may still be dilated, making it easier for bacteria from your partner's penis, fingers, saliva or toys to enter your healing uterus and cause an infection.

If you experienced vaginal or perineal tearing , an episiotomy , or had a C-section, those wounds need time to heal as well. Penetrative sex could aggravate still-delicate tissues or stitches, which could slow the healing process, or again, potentially set the stage for an infection.

Having a built-in waiting period before sex can resume can also help non-birthing partners manage expectations around postpartum intimacy. It's normal to feel exhausted and touched out during those early weeks (or months) after you give birth.

"Many women are not really interested in being touched in that sexual way during that period of time," Dr. Herrine says. The six-week pause "is a way to give her permission to do that."

How to safely have sex before 6 weeks postpartum

If you decide to have sex before the six-week mark (or before your provider tells you it's okay to do so), your partner should wear a condom, even if you're using other forms of birth control. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsImmediate Postpartum Long-Acting Reversible ContraceptionSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsImmediate Postpartum Long-Acting Reversible ContraceptionSee All Sources

"That would decrease the risk of infection from bacteria on the partner's penis that could move up into the vagina," explains Dr. Herrine.

Also pay attention to possible signs of infection or indications that your healing may have slowed. An uptick in pain or bleeding or trouble urinating are all red flags that warrant a call to your provider, Dr. Herrine says.

And if you aren't currently using any birth control , it's a good idea to take a pregnancy test . Ovulation can potentially kick in as early as 25 days after giving birth, and without protection, you're at risk for an unintended pregnancy, notes ACOG. You can still get pregnant even if you're currently breastfeeding.

Waiting six weeks before having sex after giving birth gives your body — and you — a much-needed chance to rest and recover. So try to be patient if you're eager to get going. And if you want to give it just a little bit longer, that's perfectly okay too.

FAQ

Why can't you have sex after birth?

Regardless of whether you gave birth vaginally or via C-section, your body needs time to recover from labor and delivery. Your uterus, cervix and any wounds or stitches are still healing.

What happens if you have sex before six weeks?

Having sex before your body has had time to heal can put you at a higher risk of infection. It can also aggravate stitches.

How do I prepare for postpartum sex?

First, find out how you're recovering at your postpartum checkup. You'll want to discuss birth control with your doctor as well. (You can still get pregnant while breastfeeding.)

How does sex feel after birth?

Sex after giving birth can feel uncomfortable at first, but with time it may feel the same (or even better!) than it did before.