When Do Babies Recognize and Respond to Their Name?

words

Hint: It may happen sooner than you think!

You probably can't get enough of saying your little one's name, and she can't get enough of hearing it. Starting in her very first months, she's listening closely to everything you say, absorbing language like a little sponge.

Your baby's receptive language skills — in other words, her understanding of words and sounds — begin to develop from birth, but it takes time for her brain to sort out individual words from the flow of sounds all around her.

One day, though, you'll say your little one's name, and lo and behold, she'll turn her head and look at you expectantly, because she understands that her name is a word, and that word has meaning. One word down, a few million to go!

Most babies understand and respond to their own names by about 5 to 6 months of age, and most do by 9 months. Receptive language (the understanding that words have meaning) develops on a different timeline than expressive language (the ability to say words with meaning), and your baby is likely to understand what you're saying long before she's able to say any recognizable words back to you.

Although every child develops on her own timeline, here's a look at roughly what to expect when it comes to your baby's understanding of language:

Birth to 3 months: Your baby will understand that crying is communication and will recognize her caregivers' voices. She will also react to music and to loud sounds, and start to coo and smile.

3 to 6 months: Your little one will respond to her name as well as any changes of tone in your voice. She’ll also start to babble and giggle or squeal with delight when playing alone or with you.

6 to 9 months: Your baby will respond to her own name, and she’ll even start to turn in the direction of someone talking. She'll also understand simple words used every day, such as "cup," "book" and "bottle."

9 to 12 months: Most babies understand and identify who you mean when you say "Mommy" and "Daddy" and understand the word “No” (but not always obey it). She’ll use gestures like pointing, reaching and waving , and may start to play with you by exchanging back and forth gestures and sounds. She may even start imitating a few sounds or saying simple words like “hi,” “mama,” “dada” or “uh-oh.”

How to help your baby learn their name

The best way to help your baby understand words is to talk, read and sing to her from the very beginning. Even reading the newspaper out loud to your newborn helps her begin the task of separating sounds into words and sentences.

As she grows and begins to spend more hours awake and alert, direct the verbal flow to your baby — she'll be eager to listen! Fill the silence by singing songs — everything from lullabies to show tunes to pop music.

Narrate your day, describing what you're doing as you bathe your baby, make lunch or play with the dog. Label the names of objects and people. Use colors, textures and sizes when you talk about objects.

Read books to your baby often , naming and pointing to the pictures she sees. Alternate between talking, listening to and showing interest in your baby’s responses, and reacting to what she says to help teach her how to take turns in conversation.

It's nearly impossible to "overwhelm" a baby with too much information or too many words, because babies are surprisingly good at letting you know when enough is enough. Watch her cues: She'll turn her head, fuss or squirm when she wants a break from the verbal patter. (Enjoy the self-regulating impulse while it lasts — toddlers are a whole other story!)

When to talk to your doctor

Generally speaking, there’s a wide range of what’s normal for babies. That said, you may want to reach out to your baby’s doctor if you notice the following:

Your baby doesn’t startle at loud noises

Your baby doesn’t turn to the source of a sound after 6 months

Your baby doesn’t laugh or squeal by 6 months

Your baby doesn’t respond to sounds by 6 to 9 months

Your baby isn’t babbling by 7 to 9 months

Your baby isn’t responding to her name by 7 to 9 months

Your baby isn’t using gestures like waving or pointing by 12 months

Though these may not be a cause for concern at all, your pediatrician may want to do further testing or screening to determine whether there's an underlying medical issue like hearing loss or stay on the lookout for potential issues that could be causing the delays.

As for what's next? Once your little one can sort out individual words from the flow of sound around her — for example, "cup" and "bye-bye" — it’s only a matter of time before she’ll begin to follow simple directions — “Give me the cup” or “Wave bye-bye.”

After she hits those baby milestones, she’s on her way to sounding out her first words and a lifetime of talking.