Introducing Green Beans to Your Baby

when can babies eat green beans?

When can babies have green beans, and what's the best way to prepare them for early eaters? Everything parents need to know about offering up green beans here.

Puréed green beans are a popular early food for spoon-fed babies. But this popular green veggie can also work as a finger food or for baby-led weaning, as long as you cook and prepare it safely.

Here’s the skinny on when green beans can make it onto your baby’s menu, how to serve them safely and ideas for making green beans delicious.

When can babies have green beans?

Green beans are one of the first veggies many spoon-fed babies try. You can introduce them whenever your child starts solids , usually around 6 months.

That can also be true for babies first trying solids with baby-led weaning , an approach that introduces solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods instead of purées. If you're trying baby-led weaning, wait until your child is at least 6 months old before introducing green beans in finger food form. At that point, your little one is more likely to have the ability to self-feed.

How to prepare green beans for your baby

Stick with well-cooked green beans through baby- and toddlerhood. Steaming, roasting or sautéing all work, as long as the beans are soft enough that you can smush them between two fingers. Avoid serving raw green beans, which are too hard and tough for tots to gum or chew and can be a choking hazard.

Wondering what kind of green beans are best? You might find your very young baby has an easier time holding fresh green beans, which tend to be longer than their frozen or canned counterparts.

But nutritionally speaking, fresh, frozen or canned green beans are all great choices. If you opt for canned, seek out a low-sodium variety and rinse the beans well to get rid of any extra salt.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve green beans at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills, or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare green beans for a 6-month-old

green beans 6 months

Offer whole, very well-cooked green beans for your baby to palm and gum. If she has trouble grasping the green bean, rolling it in baby cereal can help make it more grippable.

How to prepare green beans for a 9-month-old

green beans 9 months

Once she starts showing off her pincer grasp , you can cut the cooked beans into small, pea-sized pieces for her to pick up.

How to prepare green beans for 12 months old and older

green beans 12 months

You can offer whole or cut green beans to your toddler, still making sure they’re thoroughly cooked and softened.

Green bean recipes for babies and toddlers

Plain and simple steamed beans are a fine start. But there are plenty of other tot-friendly ways to make these veggies delicious or work them into a meal. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Some ideas to try:

Buttery cheesy green beans. Toss well-cooked green beans with melted butter and sprinkle with Parmesan cheese.

Braised tomato green beans. Sauté green beans in olive oil and sliced garlic, then simmer in crushed tomato until the tomato has thickened and the green beans are very, very soft.

Shredded green bean frittata. Shred or finely dice green beans and steam or sauté until soft. Fold into beaten eggs and bake until puffed and golden. Serve frittata sliced into strips.

Green bean fries. Dip green beans in beaten egg followed by panko breadcrumbs. Bake until soft.

Sesame green beans. Drizzle well-cooked green beans with toasted sesame oil. For toddlers over 1, you can also add a light drizzle of low-sodium soy sauce.

Green bean sweet potato mash. Fold finely diced cooked green beans into cooked mashed sweet potatoes.

Creamy green bean potato soup. Boil peeled, chopped potatoes and green beans in low-sodium vegetable broth (enough to cover the veggies) until soft. Purée, adding a little bit more broth if necessary to make a thick, almost scoopable soup. Stir in a few tablespoons of butter to taste. Serve on a preloaded spoon for your baby to bring up to her mouth.

What are the benefits of green beans for babies and toddlers?

Got a green bean lover on your hands? Then your growing gourmand is getting plenty of good nutrition.

Green beans are rich in vitamin A (which is involved in eye health), vitamin K (which plays a key role in blood clotting) and vitamin C (which supports immune health and enhances iron absorption). Green beans also serve up folate, a B vitamin that your baby’s body needs in order for her cells to grow and divide.

To top it all off? Like most veggies, green beans deliver a healthy dose of fiber — a must for keeping constipation at bay and helping your cutie stay regular.

Can babies be allergic to green beans?

Good news: The chances of your little bean being allergic to greens beans are small. (In rare cases, tots with peanut allergies could also have a reaction to green beans, since the two both belong to the legume family.)

Of course, you should still be familiar with the signs of a possible allergic reaction, especially when you’re serving a food for the first time. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are green beans a choking hazard for babies?

Raw, firm veggies like green beans are a top choking hazard for children under 4. Make sure to always cook green beans until they're very soft and can be smushed with two fingers, and serve them in an age-appropriate size.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never offer food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

When it comes to starting solids, green beans are good for spoon-feeding or self-feeding. Just make sure the whole veggies are well-cooked so your cutie has an easy time gumming and, eventually, chewing them.