When Can Babies Eat Peanut Butter?

When can babies have peanut butter? Here's everything you need to know about safely introducing this common allergen to your child.

Thinking about putting peanut butter on your baby’s menu sooner rather than later? That’s a smart idea, but figuring out exactly when — and how — to offer it can come with a lot of questions.

That’s especially true if you’re trying baby-led weaning (an approach that introduces solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods) instead of spoon-feeding purées. The good news is that there are plenty of safe, simple ways to serve the sticky stuff, no matter your feeding approach. Here’s what you need to know.

Key Takeaways

Introducing peanut butter around 6 months (after baby has tried other foods) may actually lower the risk of peanut allergies — especially for little ones with eczema or egg allergies. Just be sure to check in with your pediatrician first, and follow their guidance on when and how to serve it.

Peanut butter may be delicious, but it’s also a choking hazard in thick globs. For beginner eaters, think smooth, thin, and mixed-in — like swirled into baby cereal or spread in a whisper-thin layer on toast. For older babies and toddlers, peanut butter can show up in pancakes, smoothies, or even swirled into sweet potato soup.

Keep a close watch for allergies. Peanuts are a common allergen, so when you offer peanut butter for the first time, do it in a familiar setting (like home), when you can monitor your little one closely for any reaction. And remember — if you ever have questions or concerns, your pediatrician is just a call away.

When can babies have peanut butter?

Peanuts are a common — and often severe — allergen , so peanut butter shouldn’t be the very first item on your new eater’s menu. On the other hand, you don’t want to wait too long before introducing it either.

While experts used to think that introducing allergenic foods later reduced the risk for reactions, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) now says there’s no reason to wait. In fact, serving peanut butter sooner rather than later is thought to reduce the likelihood of allergy in infants who are considered at high risk (specifically, those with an egg allergy and/or severe eczema ).

And the research backs it up. In October 2025, the AAP reported that early introduction of allergens like peanut butter has been shown to reduce the incidence of peanut allergies.

Once your pediatrician has given the green light to start introducing solids (usually around 6 months) and your baby has tolerated several less-allergenic foods (like fruits, veggies, or infant cereal ), your doctor will likely allow you to move on to allergens like peanut butter.

Talk with your pediatrician before introducing peanut butter, especially if your baby has eczema or has already had an immediate allergic reaction to another food.

If your baby has mild to moderate eczema, her doctor may recommend making sure she’s exposed to peanut butter (or another peanut-based product) by 6 months. If she has severe eczema or another existing food allergy, her doctor will likely recommend getting an evaluation by an allergist before deciding whether to try putting any peanut-based foods on the menu.

When you offer a peanut-based food for the first time, plan to serve it at home or, for little ones with severe eczema and/or an egg allergy, at your pediatrician’s office (versus at day care or in a restaurant). That’ll make it easier to keep an eye on her after eating so you can watch for any potential allergic reactions. You’ll also know for sure about all of the ingredients she ate at mealtime, making it easier to pinpoint peanut butter as the culprit if there’s a problem.

"I gave some on the end of a spoon 2 days ago, he loved it, and we’ll be giving him a second dose today," says What to Expect Community parent BabyyJ2025. "The advice I received was to start with a small amount and make sure you can monitor for a few hours. If after the second dose nothing has happened, you can reasonably assume there isn’t an allergy and should then incorporate it regularly."

How to prepare peanut butter for your baby

After careful consultation with your doctor, you’re ready to move forward. But while a spoonful of peanut butter might be your idea of a simple snack, you’ll need to do a little more prep work to make the sticky spread manageable for your baby, especially if you're introducing solids with baby-led weaning.

Start off by stirring a small amount of peanut butter into another dish, or spread a very thin layer on toast, once your baby has been introduced to bread . Do not give your little one thick gobs of peanut butter or whole peanuts, since both can pose a choking hazard.

Pay attention to the kind of peanut butter you’re using too. Smooth is a safer choice than crunchy for babies and young toddlers. And forget those old commercials about which brand choosy moms choose: The best peanut butter for your baby is an all-natural variety made without any added sodium, sugar, or preservatives.

Keep in mind, though, that peanut butter isn’t the only way to introduce your baby to peanuts. Peanut butter powder and store-bought baby peanut butter puffs can also get the job done — and your new nosher will likely find them just as delicious. And if you're feeling overwhelmed, there are even products that help parents introduce allergens like peanuts in the form of easy-to-mix powders that you stir into baby's food.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve peanut butter at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to them if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, or swallowing skills, or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

"I rubbed a little [peanut butter] on my LO's gums. She smacked her lips and quite enjoyed it," says What to Expect Community parent NatS261. "I've tried twice more just to be sure. We have no allergies in the family, so it wasn't a big risk."

How to prepare peanut butter for a 6-month-old

Preparing peanut butter for a 6-month-old

Mix a small amount of peanut butter or peanut powder into another food your baby has already tried, such as baby cereal, mashed sweet potato, or yogurt (just keep in mind that dairy is also a common allergen). You can let your baby scoop up the food with her hands or offer it on a preloaded spoon.

Another idea? Soak a few peanut butter puffs in breast milk or formula. Offer them on a preloaded spoon, since your baby might not have the fine motor skills to pick them up at this age.

How to prepare peanut butter for a 9-month-old

Preparing peanut butter for a 9-month-old

Spread a thin layer of peanut butter on whole grain toast or homemade whole grain pancakes and cut into pieces for your baby to pick up and pop into her mouth. You can also try adding peanut butter to smoothies, or even thin peanut butter with water or milk to make a simple sauce for whole grain pasta.

How to prepare peanut butter for 12-month-olds and up

Preparing peanut butter for a 12-month-old

Most of the serving ideas for babies still work for toddlers, with a few small tweaks. Now your little one can practice scooping up peanut butter yogurt or oatmeal with her own spoon, or practice spearing peanut butter pancakes with her fork. Just make sure to continue to offer small amounts of peanut butter, since big chunks or gobs are still a choking hazard.

Wondering what on the solids menu is safe to serve your baby and when? We have all the answers you need in the What to Expect app , where you can find expert advice and tips from other parents.

Peanut butter recipes for babies and toddlers

The spread might be sticky, but incorporating peanut butter into a variety of tot-friendly meals and snacks couldn’t be smoother. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially when serving dishes with other top allergens like eggs, soy, wheat, dairy, and seafood.

Some tasty ideas to try:

Peanut butter banana spears or bites. Spread a thin layer of smooth peanut butter on banana spears or slices.

Peanut butter and berry toast. Spread a thin layer of smooth peanut butter on whole grain toast and top with lightly mashed raspberries. Slice into strips and serve.

Peanut butter hummus. Sub peanut butter for tahini in your favorite hummus recipe.

Easy peanut noodles. Thin smooth peanut butter with warm water (and a splash of lime juice, if you’d like) to make a sauce for whole wheat pasta.

Peanut sweet potato soup. Thin baked sweet potato flesh with enough coconut milk and a spoonful or two of peanut butter to make a scoopable soup.

No sugar, no-bake peanut butter cookies. Combine mashed banana, rolled oats, and peanut butter and roll into small balls. Refrigerate to firm up before serving.

What are the benefits of peanut butter for babies and toddlers?

Peanut butter is an inexpensive, easy-to-prep protein source that’ll help fuel your little one’s rapid growth. And it’s an easy way to help her fill up on key vitamins and minerals like niacin, folate, magnesium, copper, iron, and zinc.

Fun fact: You can count peanut butter as a brain food , thanks to its antioxidants that come in the form of vitamin E.

Can babies be allergic to peanut butter?

Peanuts are one of the most common baby food allergens, along with cow’s milk and eggs . That means it’s extra important to watch for signs of a possible reaction when you introduce them. (And check with her pediatrician before introducing peanut butter if she’s at high risk of having an allergy.)

Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, immediately or within an hour or two after eating, she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip, or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

If you suspect that your baby or toddler has a peanut allergy, take peanut butter and other foods that contain peanut butter or peanuts off the menu and touch base with her pediatrician to discuss her symptoms. The doctor might recommend allergy testing to confirm the diagnosis.

An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Is peanut butter a choking hazard for babies?

Chunks of sticky peanut butter are one of the top choking hazards for children under 4. Make sure you're offering peanut butter safely to your child by thinning or mixing small amounts with other foods (such as with baby cereal, yogurt, or mashed sweet potato) for the earliest eaters, then continuing to offer it in small, manageable quantities for older babies and toddlers, like thinly spread on toast.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes, and never serve food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat, or playing.

Peanut butter is pretty sticky, but the question of when and how to serve it doesn’t have to be. But if you have any questions about offering it, check in with your baby’s pediatrician. Together you can come up with the right introduction plan for your little one.