When Should You Stop Swaddling a Newborn Baby?

Light copy changes, updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

when to stop swaddling baby, young baby lying down with mom

Snug-as-a-bug wrapping can help your little one snooze more soundly — but at some point, you’ll have to say so long to the swaddle.

Swaddling is a smart strategy for helping your newborn sleep more soundly. Tucking her in a snug wrap can make her feel safe and secure as she adjusts to life outside the womb, keep her cozy and warm as her internal thermostat ramps up, and prevent her from flailing her arms and legs and triggering the startle reflex .

But within a couple of short months, it’ll be time to kiss the practice goodbye. Though safe for newborns (provided you’re swaddling in accordance with other safe sleep guidelines), swaddling becomes risky as your baby gets older and becomes more mobile. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsHow to Keep Your Sleeping Baby Safe: AAP Policy ExplainedSee All Sources

So when exactly should you stop swaddling your baby , and how can you ease your little one’s transition to swaddle-free sleep? Here’s what you need to know.

Key Takeaways

Swaddling is beneficial for newborns, but experts recommend stopping around 2 months, or as soon as your baby shows signs of rolling, since swaddling past this stage can pose safety risks and limit motor development.

To ease the shift from swaddle to independent sleep, parents might choose to go cold turkey, gradually free one arm at a time, or use transitional sleep sacks.

Supporting your little one's sleep during this time can include keeping a consistent bedtime routine, maintaining a soothing environment (white noise, dim lights), and using comfort measures like rocking or infant massage to help little ones adjust.

At what age should you stop swaddling?

Experts recommend that you stop swaddling your baby when she starts trying to roll over, which can happen around 2 months. While your baby may not actually roll over until 3 or 4 months, it is safest to stop swaddling before your little one rolls over. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSwaddling: Is it Safe for Your Baby?See All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSwaddling: Is it Safe for Your Baby?See All Sources

Once your baby is mobile and rolling, a swaddle can pose a possible suffocation and strangulation hazard if it comes loose or your child's movement is restricted.

And it’s not just a safety issue. As your baby gets more mobile, being confined to a wrap can prevent her from practicing age-appropriate motor skills, which could negatively impact her development. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsUnwrapping the Controversy Over SwaddlingSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsUnwrapping the Controversy Over SwaddlingSee All Sources

With all this considered, you might be wondering whether it makes more sense to stop swaddling even earlier, say, when your baby is a month old. Unless your baby is showing signs of being more mobile and attempting to roll over, there's no need to stop swaddling quite that early, especially if it seems to help your baby sleep better.

But if you want to stop sooner — maybe you’re tired of the whole swaddle wrapping thing or your baby doesn’t seem to sleep any better with a swaddle than without — it's perfectly fine to do so. Babies don’t need to be swaddled, and some actually snooze more soundly without being wrapped up.

Though before you give up on swaddling altogether, you might want to consider looking into a Velcro or zipper swaddle wrap . Some parents find them easier to use, and some babies seem to prefer them to old-fashioned blankets.

How do you transition out of a swaddle?

After wrapping and unwrapping your baby more times than you could possibly count, stopping swaddling can feel like the end of an era. And if her swaddle blanket has become an integral part of her sleep routine, you might worry that stopping could seriously throw things off.

The good news is all babies eventually adjust to sleeping without a swaddle. And of course, you could certainly try stopping cold turkey to see how your baby responds. You never know — she might sleep just as well as before!

But if you suspect that wouldn’t be the case (or you don’t want to risk a bad night's sleep experimenting), you can also try a more gradual approach. Here’s how to do it:

Start by swaddling your baby with one of her arms out of the swaddle.

A few nights later after she’s gotten used to having one arm out, move on to swaddling her with both of her arms free.

A few nights after that, stop using the swaddle blanket altogether.

Swaddling your baby with one or both arms out is perfectly safe, as long as you continue to wrap her blanket securely. In fact, some newborns prefer being swaddled with one or both arms free from the very beginning.

"I would try first swaddling with one arm out," says What to Expect Community user babyj1129. "Then a few days later, take the other arm out. That worked for us to drop the swaddle."

Another swaddle transition option: Trade your swaddle blanket for a transitional sleep sack. These swaddle wrap/wearable blanket hybrids offer a similar snugness to a wrap, but don’t come with the risk of potentially being kicked off while your baby is sleeping.

If you choose to use one of these sleep sack products , just keep in mind that you’ll eventually have to transition your baby out of that too — either because she outgrows it or because it, too, becomes unsafe as she starts moving more.

Ultimately, there's no one best way to stop swaddling — so do what you think will work best for your baby and you. And if you’re unsure or have questions, reach out to your baby's pediatrician.

How do I get my baby to sleep without being swaddled?

It’s understandable that you might worry your baby won’t sleep as well without her swaddle. But rest assured, even if your baby initially has a tough time transitioning, she'll eventually get used to it.

Remember, you still have lots of tools at your disposal for helping your little one sleep. Establishing a calming bedtime routine with a predictable pattern — like a bath, feeding, rocking, and a lullaby or a story — can help your baby unwind and, hopefully, fall asleep.

Creating a soothing ambiance by dimming the lights, speaking softly and playing white noise can help too. And finally, don’t discount the power of touch: Infant massage can calm a fussy baby and get her in the zone to fall asleep.

And even though you can no longer use a swaddle blanket, you may still be able to use a swaddle-sleep-sack hybrid to bridge the transition. You could also go straight to trying a regular sleep sack — basically, a wearable blanket that, depending on the model, your child may be able to continue to use well into toddlerhood (though you may need to size up as she gets bigger).

Swaddling is a smart sleep strategy for newborns. But once your little one is about 2 months old and reaches the point of trying to roll or kick free of her swaddle blanket, it’s time to move on. Here’s to the next exciting phase of babyhood!

Looking for more information as you navigate your baby's sleep routine? Open the What to Expect app to track your little one's sleep and see what’s typical right now — so your whole family can get some more rest.