Introducing Brussels Sprouts to Your Baby

when can babies eat Brussels sprouts?

When can babies eat Brussels sprouts, and how should you prepare them for baby-led weaning? Everything parents need to know about serving up these nutrient-rich veggies.

Sure, Brussels sprouts might seem like a sophisticated, “grown-up” veggie. But there’s no reason why your baby can’t give them a try — and offering Brussels sprouts when she’s young just might give her a taste for the mini cabbages for life.

The veggies work best as a finger food, whether you’re following a baby-led weaning approach or simply graduating from purées. Here’s when and how to serve them, plus some easy, unexpected ideas for making Brussels sprouts delicious.

When can babies have Brussels sprouts?

Your baby can try gobbling up the little green orbs shortly after she starts solids , but it’s best to wait until at least 6 months, when she’s capable of self-feeding.

Puréed Brussels sprouts probably aren’t anyone’s idea of a tasty snack, but babies past the half-year mark can start to gum and eventually pick up pieces of the steamed or roasted veggie.

And in fact, it may be worth offering bitter-tasting vegetables like Brussels sprouts sooner rather than later, since some research suggests that very early food experiences can help shape a child’s taste preferences later on.

How to prepare Brussels sprouts for your baby

First and foremost, Brussels sprouts should be cooked until they’re soft enough for you to smush between your fingers — a sign that your mini muncher will have an easy time gumming or chewing them.

Pay attention to size, too. Whole Brussels sprouts are a choking hazard for babies and toddlers, so be sure to cut them into age-appropriate pieces before adding them to your tot’s tray or plate, and always remove the hard bottom stem.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve Brussels sprouts at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare Brussels sprouts for a 6-month-old

6 months brussels sprouts

Steam or roast Brussels sprouts and cut small ones into halves or larger ones into quarters for your baby to gum. At 6 months, she probably will not be able to pick up these pieces on her own. That’s okay! She’ll get the hang of it soon.

If you want to help her along, you can offer the pieces on a preloaded spoon or as part of a bigger dish that makes the sprouts a little easier to manage. Think mashed on toast, or finely diced and stirred into hummus or mashed sweet potato.

How to prepare Brussels sprouts for a 9-month-old

brussels sprouts 9 months

As your baby starts to master her pincer grasp , now’s the time to offer steamed or roasted Brussels sprouts in smaller pieces, like halved quarters.

How to prepare Brussels sprouts for a 12-month-old

brussels sprouts 12 months

Give your new toddler a chance to practice spearing quartered Brussels sprouts with her fork.

How to prepare Brussels sprouts for an 18-month-old

brussels sprouts 18 months

With more teeth and stronger chewing skills, your 18-month-old may be ready to try finely shredded cooked or raw Brussels sprouts, either with her fingers or a fork. Serve the raw sprouts with some added fat for flavor (it’ll also enhance nutrient absorption), like olive oil.

Brussels sprouts recipes for babies and toddlers

There are more ways to incorporate Brussels sprouts into your baby or toddler’s diet than you might think. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Some tasty Brussels sprouts ideas to try:

Buttery orange sprouts. Sauté sliced sprouts in butter until very tender. Towards the end of cooking, add a generous splash of orange juice and simmer until the juice thickens slightly to form a sweet sauce. Serve as a side for meat or fish.

Roasted Brussels sprouts, apples and squash. Halve or quarter Brussels sprouts and dice peeled apple and butternut squash into 1- or 2-inch pieces. Toss with olive oil and a pinch each of onion and garlic powder and roast until softened.

Savory Brussels sprouts pancakes. Make a thick batter with whole wheat flour and beaten egg (it should be the consistency of pancake batter). Fold in finely shredded Brussels sprouts and pan-fry until golden.

Mashed potatoes ‘n sprouts. Fold chopped and cooked Brussels sprouts into mashed potatoes or mashed sweet potatoes.

Shredded sprout salad. Finely shred Brussels sprouts and toss with olive oil and lemon juice or balsamic vinegar to coat. Stir in a generous amount of grated Parmesan cheese and serve.

Brussels sprouts fried rice. Sauté shredded Brussels sprouts in toasted sesame oil (you can add a splash of low-sodium soy sauce for toddlers over 1) until softened. Add cooked brown or white rice and beaten egg, stirring often until the egg is cooked. Fold in a handful of sesame seeds and serve.

Brussels sprouts toaster pizza. Top a whole wheat English muffin half with low-sodium tomato sauce and shredded mozzarella cheese. Sprinkle with sautéed and shredded or finely chopped Brussels sprouts and toast until bubbly. Cut into wedges or strips to serve.

What are the benefits of Brussels sprouts for babies and toddlers?

The mini cabbages are chock-full of nutrients for your new nosher, including vitamin K. Brussels sprouts also serve up lots of vitamin C to support immune health and enhance your tot’s absorption of iron . Consider offering them with iron-rich foods like beef, poultry or beans.

Like most veggies, Brussels sprouts deliver plenty of fiber, which can help keep your little one regular . Just keep in mind that too much roughage can cause gas and potentially make your child uncomfortable. So stick with serving Brussels sprouts in moderate quantities, and try cutting back or asking the pediatrician for advice if you notice the sprouts seem to trigger tummy troubles.

Can babies be allergic to Brussels sprouts?

According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), any food can be an allergen. However, the chances of your little sprout being allergic to these sprouts is slim. Still, it’s important to be familiar with the signs of a possible allergic reaction, especially when you’re serving a food for the first time.

Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are Brussels sprouts a choking hazard for babies?

Chunks of raw vegetables such as Brussels sprouts are one of the top choking hazards for children under 4. Make sure to prepare Brussels sprouts for your child safely by cooking them until they're very soft and smushable, then cutting them into age-appropriate pieces.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never offer food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Give your growing gourmand a chance to try Brussels sprouts early on. With so many delicious ways to serve them, she just might gobble them up and signal for more.