Introducing Muffins to Your Baby

when can babies eat muffins?

When can babies eat muffins, and how should you safely prepare this multi-ingredient food for early eaters? Here's everything parents need to know.

Chances are, you’d never turn down a freshly baked muffin — and neither will your baby or toddler. Whether mini or full-sized and cut into pieces, muffins are a guaranteed pleaser for new eaters that can serve up plenty of quality nutrition.

Best of all, they’ll work for every tot’s menu. Whether you started off with traditional purées and are graduating to solids or took the baby-led weaning route from the start, by your baby’s half birthday, muffins can usually make for a fantastic finger food.

The key is choosing homemade over store-bought for baked goods, as processed muffins can contain lots of empty-calorie ingredients like sugar. Just as important? You’ll want to make sure your emerging epicurean has been exposed to any allergenic ingredients separately before having them in muffin form.

When can babies have muffins?

It’s perfectly fine to offer your baby foods made with multiple ingredients like muffins early on in her journey with solids. Most new noshers try their first bite of muffin sometime between 6 and 9 months. But you should get the green light from the pediatrician before adding multi-ingredient foods like muffins to the menu.

The reason? Muffins are usually made with ingredients that are common allergens — think wheat, dairy, eggs or peanut butter. To tell if your little one has a possible food allergy , it’s important to introduce potentially allergenic foods by themselves before serving them mixed with other ingredients.

For instance, if your baby showed signs of an allergic reaction after eating a muffin made with eggs and whole wheat flour, and she hadn’t yet tried each of those ingredients individually, it would be hard for you to figure out whether the culprit was the wheat, the eggs or another ingredient altogether.

How to prepare muffins for your baby

For babies and young toddlers, homemade muffins are the way to go. Most store-bought varieties contain ingredients that new eaters don’t need — like added sugar and sodium.

Baking your own muffins means you can stick with wholesome ingredients like whole grains, fruits and even veggies. Sure, it’s a little more time-consuming. The good news is that most baby-friendly muffin recipes come together quickly (try combining all the ingredients in the blender and pouring the batter directly into the muffin cups). And you can make and freeze big batches, then thaw individual muffins for quick, easy meals and snacks.

As for the size? Mini muffins are easy for little hands and the portion size is just right for tiny tummies. But there’s no need to shell out for a special tin if you don’t already have one. Depending on your tot’s age and appetite, a quarter or half of a full-sized muffin works just as well as one or two minis. Just be sure to cut it into age-appropriate pieces to avoid a possible choking risk.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve muffins at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills, or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare muffins for a 6-month-old

Whole mini muffins are the perfect size for your baby to hold and gum right now. (Less prep work for you!) Cut full-sized muffins into quarters or even strips.

How to prepare muffins for a 9-month-old

Try cutting muffins into bite-sized pieces. The smaller morsels will encourage your older baby to work on her pincer grasp .

How to prepare muffins for 12-month-olds and older

It’s back to whole mini muffins for your newly minted toddler (or maybe two or three, depending on her appetite). For full-sized muffins, cut them in quarters and serve just one or two.

Want to help your growing gourmand get to work on her utensil skills? There’s no reason why you can’t cut a muffin into smaller pieces to help her practice. The soft texture is easy to stab with a fork.

Healthy muffin tips for babies and toddlers

While homemade is best, you’ll still want to hold off on making that standard white flour- and sugar-laden blueberry muffin recipe with your tot. The key to serving muffins to your baby or toddler is keeping them ultra wholesome — so she can fill up on the nutrition her growing body needs.

Some tips to help you whip up delicious homemade muffins for your tot:

Go with whole grains. Think whole wheat flour, cornmeal or oat flour (make your own by grinding oatmeal in a food processor until it reaches a flour-like consistency). Whole grains offer baby fiber, vitamins and minerals she won’t get from all-purpose refined flour.

Trade added sugar for fruit. Skip the white or brown sugar, as well as natural sweeteners like honey (which babies shouldn't have until age 1 ), maple syrup and molasses. Instead, give your muffins a hint of sweetness with mashed banana, unsweetened applesauce, prune purée or mashed sweet potatoes.

Experiment with superfoods. Try swapping out the butter or oil for nutrient-rich fats like flaxseed oil or mashed avocado. Or fold in tiny seeds like hemp seeds, which are rich in protein, iron and omega-3 fatty acids.

Try some veggies. Trade some of the fat or liquid for puréed pumpkin or butternut squash, fold in grated carrots or beets, or sneak in some very finely chopped spinach. They’ll add a welcome sweet note (except the spinach, which won’t taste like anything) while packing a nutrient punch.

Go savory. Since added sugar is out anyway, why not just embrace the savory side? Try cheesy corn muffins with grated cheddar and cornmeal, or make Mediterranean-inspired muffins with flavors like oregano and finely diced pitted olives.

What are the benefits of muffins for babies and toddlers?

Muffins made with whole grains like whole wheat flour or oats serve up complex carbohydrates, which give your cutie lasting energy (read: she’ll be fuller for longer) and deliver fiber to keep constipation at bay. Whole grains also offer important vitamins and minerals like B vitamins, iron and magnesium.

It’s not all about the good carbs, though. Muffins are also an easy way to sneak some extra nutrition onto your little muncher’s menu. Mashed sweet potato or pumpkin give a boost of vitamin A, finely chopped spinach serves up iron and berries offer antioxidants.

Want your muffins to pack a protein and healthy fat punch? Try adding hemp or flax seeds, peanut or almond butter (avoid whole nuts, which are choking hazards for kids under 4), or mashed avocado.

Can babies be allergic to muffins?

Muffins are often made with common childhood allergens like eggs, milk, wheat or peanuts. If you’re serving a muffin that contains allergens, make sure your child has been introduced to each allergenic ingredient individually before offering them together in any multi-ingredient food. And if your child has a known allergy or sensitivity, always check the muffin’s ingredient list thoroughly before serving to confirm that it’s safe.

Additionally, it’s possible — though much less likely — for your child to have an allergy to another ingredient in a muffin, like a fruit or spice.

Which all adds up to the importance of being familiar with signs of a possible allergic reaction, and keeping an eye on your little one after she tries a muffin for the first time. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are muffins a choking hazard for babies?

Thanks to their soft texture, muffins are not considered a top choking hazard for young children. Still, you should serve them safely by offering them in age-appropriate sizes and being mindful of mix-ins (avoiding muffin recipes that contain chopped nuts or dried fruit, for example).

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never offer food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Muffins are delicious, versatile and easy to pack with the nutrition your growing tot needs. Once you get the go-ahead from the pediatrician to serve multi-ingredient foods and have introduced allergenic ingredients, you’re ready to add them to the menu. Happy baking!