Introducing Watermelon to Your Baby

When can babies eat watermelon? Everything you need to know about introducing this juicy summer fruit to your little one.

You know nothing beats cool, sweet watermelon on a hot day. And once your baby has a taste of the juicy fruit, chances are she’ll feel the same. So when can she try that first refreshing bite? Here’s what to know about offering watermelon to your baby.

When can babies have watermelon?

You can offer watermelon at any point after your baby starts solids. That's usually around 6 months.

If you're introducing solids with a baby-led weaning approach (which introduces solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods instead of spoon-feeding purées), you'll want to wait until at least the 6-month mark, when your baby is likely more capable of self-feeding.

How to prepare watermelon for your baby

As long as it's ripe enough, watermelon’s soft texture is easy for new eaters to gum, and eventually, chew. So there’s not much prep work you need to do in order to make it baby-friendly. Just slice it into an age-appropriate size, and, for noshers under 1, remove the rind. Watermelon also purées well, either on its own or with other fruits.

However, watermelon can be a choking hazard if your child bites off a large piece or does not chew well. Check the fruit first to make sure it is very ripe and mushes well. Some watermelon might be too firm for young eaters.

Watermelon seeds can be choking hazards, too, so spring for seedless watermelon when possible. If seedless isn’t available, be sure to thoroughly remove all of the seeds before serving.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve watermelon at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare watermelon for a 6-month-old

Preparing watermelon for a 6-month-old

Slice watermelon into wide, thin rectangular pieces and remove the rind. Your baby can palm and gum the pieces, but if they’re slippery, you can roll them in some baby cereal to make them more grippable.

How to prepare watermelon for a 9-month-old

Stick with the same prep methods you were using at 6 months for your older baby.

How to prepare watermelon for 12 months old and older

Preparing watermelon for a 9-month-old

You can start serving traditional triangle-shaped wedges to your newly minted toddler after her first birthday. No need to get rid of the rind now, just keep an eye on your cutie while she eats and take the rind away once she’s gobbled up all that good flesh.

Watermelon recipes for babies and toddlers

Watermelon’s a tasty treat all by itself. But there are plenty of other ways your little epicure can enjoy the seasonal fruit, too. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Watermelon popsicles. Purée watermelon flesh in a blender until smooth. Pour into popsicles molds, freeze and serve.

Red, white and blue parfait. Layer ripe diced watermelon and smushed or halved blueberries with plain Greek yogurt to make a patriotic parfait.

Pink oatmeal. Purée watermelon and strawberries or raspberries until smooth. Swirl the mixture into oatmeal (baby oatmeal or regular). Encourage your baby to rake the oatmeal with her palms or serve on a preloaded spoon.

Watermelon smoothie. Purée fresh or frozen watermelon with fresh or frozen banana chunks and plain regular yogurt or milk until smooth.

Watermelon “pizza.” Spread plain Greek yogurt on a wedge of very ripe watermelon. Top with finely chopped soft fruit (like strawberries or kiwi).

Watermelon dippers. Make a dip with plain regular yogurt, peanut or almond butter, and ground cinnamon. Serve with ripe watermelon matchsticks for your toddler to dunk.

What are the benefits of watermelon for babies and toddlers?

Given the name, it probably comes as no surprise that watermelon has a high H20 content. So snacking on the fruit can help your sweetie stay hydrated.

But that’s not the only swell thing about this summer treat. Watermelon is a good source of vitamin A, a nutrient that’s important for your baby’s developing eyes and immune system. It’s also rich in vitamin C, another immune system helper and a nutrient that’s involved in iron absorption.

Can babies be allergic to watermelon?

Watermelon allergies in babies and toddlers are possible, but unlikely. Raw melons, including watermelon, have the potential to trigger oral allergy syndrome — a condition caused by cross-reaction in allergens found in both pollen and raw fruits and vegetables. But kids under 3 aren’t typically affected.

All that said, it’s always a good idea to know the signs of a possible allergic reaction, especially when you’re serving a food for the first time. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Is watermelon a choking hazard for babies?

Watermelon that is firm and underripe can be a choking hazard for babies and toddlers. Make sure to choose very ripe watermelon that has a soft, juicy texture, and take steps to prepare it safely, such as by serving it in an age-appropriate size, choosing seedless varieties and removing the rind (for babies under 1).

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never serve food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

You can’t go wrong with watermelon when you want to share a sweet summer snack with your sweet pea.