When Should Your Child Switch to a Forward-Facing Car Seat?

When (and how) to make the switch from a rear-facing to a forward-facing car seat is confusing for many parents. Here's what you need to know about the safest age for children to ride in a forward-facing car seat.

Many parents aren't sure when it's safe to switch their child's rear-facing car seat to the forward-facing position. Expert organizations used to say it was fine to turn your child's car seat around when she turned 2. But the recommendations have changed in recent years.

Now, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that the vast majority of children stay rear-facing as long as possible, even after turning 2, and parents shouldn’t make the switch based on age. The biggest reason? Rear-facing car seats are better at protecting the head, neck and spine in the event of a crash.

Here’s why it’s worth holding off on turning your child's car seat around and how to tell when she’s ready to face forward.

Key Takeaways

Keep your child rear-facing for as long as possible: The AAP recommends keeping your child rear-facing until he reaches the maximum height or weight limit for his car seat, which may not happen until age 3 or 4, not age 2 as was previously believed.

Rear-facing seats are safer: Rear-facing seats better protect a child's head, neck, and spine during a crash, offering more safety, especially for infants and toddlers whose bodies are still developing.

Know when to switch car seats: Don't base the switch to forward-facing on age alone. Wait until your child exceeds the rear-facing weight or height limit for his seat, ensuring that he's physically ready for a forward-facing seat.

When should you turn your child's car seat around?

Rear-facing vs. forward-facing car seats: What's the difference?

First, some background on rear-facing and forward-facing seats. Infants should always be in rear-facing car seats, and there are two types that are safe for the youngest children.

Many parents prefer to start with a rear-facing infant car seat because they’re lightweight, portable and convenient. Rear-facing infant seats come with a base plus a seat that clicks into place, so you can quickly take the seat in and out. Infant car seats also have handles that make them easy to carry when your baby is inside.

The downside? Your baby will outgrow an infant car seat well before she’s ready to face forward. Most rear-facing infant seats have an upper weight limit between 28 and 35 pounds and an upper height limit of 30 to 35 inches, depending on the model.

Once your baby reaches the maximum height or weight, whichever comes first, you’ll need to upgrade: The next step is a convertible car seat that can start off being used in a rear-facing position and eventually face forward when your child is (much) bigger.

Convertible seats tend to be heavy and bulky and are designed to stay put in your car. The fact that you can’t easily tote them around is why many parents opt to start with a more convenient rear-facing infant seat.

Still, convertible seats are safe and acceptable for infants, notes the AAP. And they can be a good option for families who'd prefer not to have to eventually buy a second car seat: Convertible seats can often be used rear-facing until a child is between 40 and 50 pounds, and then can face forward until a child is 65 pounds or more.

When can a child face forward in a car seat?

You should keep your child in the rear-facing position for as long as possible. But instead of using age as a guideline, keep the following in mind:

When they reach either the weight or height limit. Your child should stay rear-facing until she has hit the maximum height or weight for that position, according to the AAP and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCar Seats: Information for FamiliesSee All Sources [1] Most rear-facing infant seats can accommodate children until they reach 28 to 35 pounds or 30 to 35 inches, but keep in mind that many children will reach the maximum height before the maximum weight. Once a child outgrows a rear-facing infant seat, she should switch to a convertible seat in a rear-facing position, which can often be used until a child is between 40 and 50 pounds. (The specific weight will depend on your car seat model.) You can find your seat’s height and weight limits on the tag or in the manufacturer instructions.

Not before age 2. Years ago, age 2 was considered the standard time to switch to the forward-facing position. Now, it’s considered the absolute minimum, because most 2-year-olds won’t be adequately protected from a crash in a forward-facing seat. Rather than basing your switch on the calendar, do so only when your child reaches the maximum height or weight limit for the rear-facing position of her convertible seat. For many, this doesn’t happen until age 3 or 4.

Any child who has outgrown the rear-facing weight or height limit for her convertible seat should use a forward-facing seat with a harness for as long as possible, up to the highest weight or height allowed by the car seat manufacturer. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionChild Passenger SafetySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionChild Passenger SafetySee All Sources

Why are rear-facing car seats safer for children?

Rear-facing is the safest position for babies and toddlers because it offers the most protection in the event of a crash. That’s why the AAP, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and NHTSA all say children should stay in a rear-facing seat for as long as possible, not just until age 2.

Infants, toddlers and preschoolers have less mature bones and connective tissues that are at greater risk for serious injury. Rear-facing seats act as a protective cradle — particularly for a baby or child’s delicate neck and spinal cord — in a serious accident. They give babies and young children more protection, and age alone isn’t enough to determine whether a child is physically developed enough to sit safely in a front-facing seat.

Car seat safety 101

Buckling your child into the car seat becomes automatic pretty fast, but it never hurts to brush up on the basics. In addition to keeping your little one rear-facing for as long as possible, always remember to:

Properly strap her in. When buckling your child into the car seat, be mindful of any uneven or twisted straps (they could increase risk of injury), make sure the angle indicator is in a safe range for your baby's age, and do a "pinch test" on the strap fabric by your child's shoulder (if you can pinch it vertically, it's too loose and needs to be tightened).

Never leave a child unattended in or around a car, even if she's buckled into her car seat.

Only use car seats for travel. Car seats should not be used for sleeping , eating or anything else. If your child falls asleep in her car seat, move her to a safe sleep location once you're done driving.

Children under 13 should sit in the back seat . Never place a rear-facing car seat in the front passenger seat, since the airbag could injure your baby.

Read the manual. Check both the car seat manual and the car manual for proper location placement and installation information. If you’re unsure whether a seat is installed correctly or are having trouble, contact a local certified Child Passenger Safety Technician (CPST) for help.

Never use a car seat that’s damaged or expired, or has an unknown history. These seats may not provide adequate protection in the event of a crash. When using an older car seat, always check whether it has been recalled .

Frequently Asked Questions

When should I switch my baby from a rear-facing to a forward-facing car seat?

Experts recommend that children stay in a rear-facing car seat until they're at least 2 years old and reach the maximum weight and height limit allowed by the car seat manufacturer for the rear-facing mode.

Is it safe for a baby to face forward in a car seat?

No, it isn't safe for your baby to face forward in a car seat. Keeping your baby rear-facing for as long as possible is the safest option. Wait until your child's over the age of 2 and hits the rear-facing height or weight limit before using a forward-facing car seat.

How do you know when baby has outgrown a rear-facing car seat?

Your baby has outgrown a rear-facing car seat once she exceeds the rear-facing height or weight requirement for the seat. Don't worry if your baby's legs are bent — this isn't a sign that she's outgrown the rear-facing installation.

How do you install a forward-facing car seat?

You install a forward-facing car seat either with your car's LATCH system or a seatbelt. Every car model and every car seat are slightly different, so it's important to follow the instructions in both the car manual and the car seat manual. If you've misplaced yours, you can find many car seat manuals (along with helpful installation videos) online.