How to Protect Babies and Toddlers in the Heat

Keep baby safe in heat

Geared up for summer, but not sure if your little one can stand the heat? With the right precautions, you and your baby can enjoy the great (hot!) outdoors.

As the summer season heats up, you’re probably planning trips to the beach, backyard barbeques and playground playdates. But the sunshine brings rising temperatures and even heat waves — leaving you wondering if it’s ever too hot for your baby to be outside.

Here are a few key tips to safely head outside with your little one in the heat.

When is it too hot to take my baby outside?

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) says that children of all ages can and should play outside when the weather doesn't pose a significant health risk, in this case defined as when the heat index is below 90 degrees Fahrenheit as determined by the National Weather Service. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsExtreme Heat: Keeping Kids Safe When Temperatures SoarSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsExtreme Heat: Keeping Kids Safe When Temperatures SoarSee All Sources

Babies, toddlers and small children shouldn't be outside for any prolonged period of time if the heat index is listed as 90 degrees or higher.

How can I protect my child in the heat if I have to go out?

When planning daytime activities, the AAP says to limit sun exposure as much as possible between the hours of 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., when the sun is strongest. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSun Safety and Protection TipsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsSun Safety and Protection TipsSee All Sources

That rule is especially important for infants, who are less able to sweat (the body’s natural way of keeping internal temperature down).

Since that’s a large portion of the day, look for shade if you’re out and about during those hours with your baby, and stay inside as much as possible if it's in the 90s or above.

You can take "baby steps" when introducing your little one to the steamy summer weather. Start by gradually increasing outdoor time, taking breaks every 15 to 30 minutes during very hot weather. And again, use caution in temperatures 90 or above (or 84 with 70 percent humidity).

Be sure you offer plenty of fluids (breast milk or formula for babies under 6 months and breast milk, formula and/or sips of water for babies 6 months and older). And bring some water for yourself and anyone else out with you too.

If you’re still unsure about your baby’s safety in the heat, listen to your intuition. If you feel too hot, sweaty or uncomfortable, chances are your baby does too ... and going back inside may be in order. But if you feel comfortable outside, it’s likely she does too, particularly since babies aren’t usually quite as active as toddlers or older kids.

How can I protect my baby or toddler in the heat in a stroller?

If you're using a stroller or car seat, consider one with a large canopy that provides extra sun protection for delicate skin. Canopy extenders can also help keep your baby shaded from head to toe.

Avoid draping a blanket over your stroller or car seat for sun protection — even those made with breathable fabrics — as they can pose suffocation risks, increase the chance of baby overheating from poor air circulation, and prevent you from seeing your baby if she’s in distress.

How should I dress my baby in the sun and hot weather?

On hot days, follow these tips for dressing baby in the heat:

Avoid overdressing your baby or toddler , and leave that light blanket or extra layer in the car. A light-colored, short-sleeved onesie for young babies may be the best outfit, as long as you can keep your baby out of the direct sun.

Choose lightweight and light-colored clothes. If you can’t avoid direct sun exposure and your child is younger than 6 months, dress her in lightweight long pants and a light long-sleeved shirt. For babies and tots 6 months and up, lightweight shorts and a shirt in a breathable fabric like cotton are best. Look for clothing with a tight weave (not see-through) for maximum UV protection.

Put a brimmed hat on your baby or tot (if she'll let you!) to give your little one's face and neck extra protection. This is particularly important for infants and toddlers with little or no hair.

Wear commercially available sun-protective clothing, like swim shirts.

Dressing Your Newborn for Any Type of Weather

What sunscreen can I use on my baby?

Protecting your baby’s delicate skin is just as important as ensuring she’s comfortable in the heat. After all, it takes just 15 minutes for the sun to damage unprotected skin.

Here are some helpful tips for putting sunscreen on infants :

Apply a small amount of sunscreen with an SPF of 30 to 50 to exposed areas, such as the face (nose, cheeks and ears) and hands, if your baby is under 6 months and there's no shade or clothing protection available.

Try to use baby- and toddler-safe sunscreen containing zinc oxide and titanium dioxide. These mineral ingredients sit on top of the skin rather than being absorbed into it, making them easier on sensitive skin.

Apply 30 minutes before sun exposure, and reapply often. For the best protection for babies 6 months and older, cover any exposed skin with SPF 30 to 50 before you head outside, and reapply every two hours. Even during overcast days, the sun is stronger than it appears. Follow the same timing rules for babies under 6 months old, but use less sunscreen on smaller areas and try to limit your time in the heat and direct sun even more. And follow similar guidelines for sunscreen and toddlers .

Take special care around baby’s eyes. Have a squirming child on your hands? Wait to apply sunscreen until she’s calmer or have your partner or a friend distract her with a toy. If your cutie rubs sunscreen into her eyes, gently wipe both her eyes and hands with a cool damp cloth.

Signs of overheating in babies and toddlers

Since your baby or toddler can’t tell you if she’s feeling uncomfortable, it’s important to keep on the lookout for cues of heat exhaustion or other heat-related conditions .

Warning signs include being very warm to the touch (more than how your baby’s typically warm belly feels), extreme thirst, sweating, acting very tired or weak, and showing a general lack of energy.

Since your baby may just be tired because it’s nearing naptime or she had an exciting morning, your instincts will tell you if your baby seems more off than usual.

If you think your child is suffering from heat exhaustion, immediately take her to a cool place and undress her to help her body shed excess heat. Sponge her down with cool water (but not cold enough to cause shivering).

Continue to give your older baby or toddler small sips of water or breast milk, or your under-6-month-old infant breast milk or formula. Call the pediatrician right away if symptoms worsen or seem severe.

Preventing dehydration in babies and young children

Just as you carry around your trusty water bottle on hot summer days, have fluids readily available for your baby.

Infants under 6 months should regularly drink breast milk or formula and babies (especially those 4 to 6 months or older who have started solids) can be given sips of water on hot days in addition to milk.

If you live in a particularly hot climate and think your infant might need more liquids, talk to your doctor about whether you should offer an oral rehydration solution (like Pedialyte) to replenish lost vitamins.

The easiest way to tell if your baby is becoming dehydrated is to monitor how many wet diapers she’s making (just like you did when she was a newborn). If you’re changing fewer than four wet diapers in a day, offer more fluids. Other signs to be on the lookout for include:

A mouth that appears dry and tacky inside

Few tears with crying

Less energy and playfulness

It's a good idea to call your doctor if your child is displaying signs of dehydration so he or she can do a thorough checkup and offer appropriate rehydration.

If your baby is displaying severe symptoms of dehydration (a sunken soft spot on her head is a big red flag) or other symptoms worsen, see the doctor immediately.

How to protect your baby in a hot car

While an air-conditioned car is a great escape from the heat, it’s crucial to never leave a baby in a car , even for a quick dash into the grocery store.

In moderate sun, a car can become like an oven, rising almost 20 degrees Fahrenheit in 10 minutes — extremely dangerous for little ones whose body temperature goes up five times faster than yours. Even in 60-degree weather, a car can become extremely hot quickly and cause heatstroke in children.

In fact, heatstroke, which happens when a person's core body temperature reaches or exceeds 104 to 105 degrees F and results in central nervous system dysfunction, has caused dozens of preventable vehicular deaths among children in recent years, according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). Trusted SourceNational Highway Traffic Safety AdministrationPrevent Hot Car DeathsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Highway Traffic Safety AdministrationPrevent Hot Car DeathsSee All Sources

Bottom line: Keep your baby and other children with you at all times when you're going somewhere by car.

As long as you follow these safety guidelines when it gets hot out there, you and your little one will be just fine and can enjoy the warm weather together. As always, talk to your pediatrician if you have any questions or concerns about keeping your baby or toddler safe in the heat.