Introducing Mushrooms to Your Baby

When can babies eat mushrooms, and how should you safely prepare them for babies and toddlers? Here's everything you need to know.

Mushrooms might not come to mind when you think of first foods to serve your baby. But no matter how you slice ‘em, the flavor-packed fungi can be a good choice for new eaters, especially if you’re getting started with a baby-led weaning approach.

Here’s when to add mushrooms to your baby's menu, whether you’re trying baby-led weaning or just cutting back on purées as your gourmand gets more experienced with finger foods. Plus, easy ideas for making mushrooms mouthwatering for young eaters.

When can babies have mushrooms?

You can add mushrooms to your child's menu whenever she starts solids . That's usually around 6 months.

Since mushrooms are easiest to prep as a finger food (either on their own or in other dishes), babies tend to try them earlier when following a baby-led weaning approach , which introduces solids in the form of gummable finger foods instead of spoon-feeding purées.

How to prepare mushrooms for your baby

Always serve cooked mushrooms instead of raw, and make sure they are chopped or sliced into age-appropriate pieces. Whole or uncooked mushrooms can both be a choking hazard to young eaters, and the raw fungi can be tough to digest.

Steer clear of the stems, too. The round shape of the whole stem also poses a choking risk, and even when sliced, the woody texture can be tough for little ones to gum or chew.

Wondering what type of mushrooms work best? You can cut portobello mushrooms into big slices that are perfect for palming, making them a great option for babies who haven’t yet mastered their pincer grasp. But once your cutie can handle picking up smaller pieces, any mushroom is fair game — think white button, cremini or shiitake.

Fresh and frozen mushrooms are both good choices. If you opt for canned, keep the salt to a minimum by seeking out low-sodium varieties and rinsing them well before cooking or serving.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve mushrooms at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare mushrooms for a 6-month-old

Preparing mushrooms for a 6-month-old

If your pediatrician has given you the green light to introduce mushrooms to your 6-month-old, try sautéing large portobello mushroom strips in olive oil until softened. Your cutie can pick up the strips and gum them or suck at the savory juices.

How to prepare mushrooms for a 9-month-old

Preparing mushrooms for a 9-month-old

Offer finely chopped, sautéed mushrooms to help your cutie hone her emerging pincer grasp . This is also a good age to start incorporating chopped or diced mushrooms into a variety of different dishes — sauces, risotto, egg dishes and meatballs are all good choices.

How to prepare mushrooms for a 12-month-old and up

Preparing mushrooms for a 12-month-old

You can continue incorporating chopped or diced mushrooms into different dishes. When serving cooked mushrooms as a side dish on their own, cut them into quarters or thin slices for your toddler to try picking up with her fork.

Mushroom recipes for babies and toddlers

Mushrooms work in plenty of tot-friendly foods, thanks to their mild, earthy flavor. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

A few mushroom recipes to try:

Marinated portobello strips. Marinate sliced portobello mushrooms in olive oil, lemon juice, chopped garlic and fresh herbs before sautéing or grilling.

Lentil-mushroom marinara. Add mushrooms and cooked lentils to homemade or store-bought marinara sauce (use low-sodium if store-bought). Sauté mushrooms with onion and garlic if making your own sauce or simmer cooked mushrooms in store-bought sauce. Toss sauce with whole wheat pasta or use as a simmer sauce for mushrooms.

Mushroom toaster pizzas. Top English muffin pizzas with thinly sliced sautéed mushrooms.

Mushroom meatballs. Fold finely chopped, uncooked mushrooms into meatball mix before forming into balls and cooking.

Mushroom frittata. Add thinly sliced sautéed mushrooms to frittatas before baking.

Slow-cooker beef and mushroom stew. Add thinly sliced or quartered mushrooms to slow-cooker beef stews along with veggies like potatoes, carrots or peas.

Turkey mushroom chili. Sauté finely chopped mushrooms along with the onion and other veggies when making chili.

Mushroom taco filling. Sauté finely chopped mushrooms with diced onion, garlic, cumin and chili powder to taste. Serve the filling as part of a deconstructed taco plate with tortilla strips, shredded cheese, mashed avocado and diced tomato.

What are the benefits of mushrooms for babies and toddlers?

Mushrooms aren’t exactly known as a superfood, but they offer more nutrition than you might think. They contain B vitamins, plus minerals like phosphorus, selenium, copper and potassium — all of which help support your baby’s growth and development.

Also good? Mushrooms serve up probiotic fiber, special types of plant fibers that promote the growth of good bacteria in the gut to encourage healthy digestion.

Can babies be allergic to mushrooms?

While any food can potentially cause an allergic reaction, mushrooms are not considered a common allergen. Even so, it’s always a good idea to look for signs of a possible reaction — especially when you’re serving it for the first time.

Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are mushrooms a choking hazard for babies?

Small round mushrooms served whole, as well as the round, woody stems on mushrooms can be a choking hazard. Always prepare mushrooms safely by offering them in an age-appropriate size, such as chopping them into bite-sizes pieces or slices for younger babies.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never serve food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Mushrooms can be a delicious part of your baby’s menu. Serve them straight up, then have some fungi fun by working them into dishes like sauces, stews, meatballs and more.