When Your Baby’s Umbilical Cord Will Fall Off and What to Do

umbilical cord care

Caring for baby’s umbilical cord after birth is simpler than it might seem. Here’s what you need to know.

Your baby’s umbilical cord stump is a funny little piece of skin that’s actually the last link to his stay in the womb. When the umbilical cord is cut at birth, a bit remains still attached to his navel — and it’ll go through a metamorphosis during your baby’s early days.

Indeed, the color and look of the stump changes from yellowish-green to black and crusty as it dries up and then falls off. Frankly, it looks downright weird, even gross, but don't be intimidated. Read on for easy care tips for your baby’s umbilical cord as well as what to do if you think something’s not right.

When does the umbilical cord fall off?

It may seem like it’s taking its sweet time, but the umbilical cord stump should dry up and drop away by the time your baby is 3 weeks old, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP).

It’s possible the stump will fall away sooner, but if it’s lingering longer than that timeframe, make an appointment with the pediatrician to get it checked out.

What to do when the umbilical cord falls off

Most cords dry completely and then fall off, leaving behind a cute baby belly button. You might notice a small raw spot or a bit of blood-tinged fluid oozing out. Try not to worry — this is also normal. But if you notice more profuse bleeding, call the doctor.

In some cases, the cord may form reddish-pink scar tissue called an umbilical granuloma , which may secrete a yellowish discharge. This should clear up in a week, but if it doesn't, check in with your baby’s pediatrician. An umbilical granuloma is a very treatable condition.

Umbilical cord care tips

Nowadays, the standard practice when it comes to caring for a newborn umbilical cord is to keep it dry. Skip the rubbing alcohol and other ointments, and follow these umbilical cord tips to promote good healing:

Keep it clean. If the stump gets dirty, dab it gently with a wet washcloth and then pat the area with a dry cloth. (It's unlikely you'll need to do this, as the cord usually stays pretty clean.) Avoid using soap, which can irritate a baby’s tender skin.

Air the stump out. Help the base dry by regularly exposing it to air.

Stick to sponge baths. Don't dunk that navel underwater for now — sponge baths are enough. Once the stump falls off, feel free to bathe your baby in his pint-sized tub.

Diaper delicately. Avoid covering the stump with the top of his diaper. Some newborn-size disposables feature a little notch at the waistband, or you can simply fold down the front of the diaper to keep it from rubbing the stump area.

Change diapers frequently. Change wet and dirty diapers promptly so they don't leak upward toward the navel and aggravate your baby’s healing cord.

Dress delicately too. Choose loose-fitting clothing that doesn't press against the stump or outfits with a special cutout for this area. Instead of onesies that snap at the crotch, try kimono-style bodysuits, which tie on the side for more air circulation and less rubbing.

Resist touching or pulling. Let the scab fall off on its own. Never pull it, even if it seems to connect by only the tiniest thread. If it gets yanked off too soon, it could start bleeding continuously. If this happens, call your baby's doctor immediately.

Infected umbilical cord or belly button

Healing belly buttons almost always look worse than they actually are, even when they're progressing normally. It's rare that a healing umbilical cord stump gets infected, but when it does, the condition is called omphalitis .

Watch for these symptoms of a newborn belly button infection, or omphalitis:

Red skin or a red, swollen appearance at the base of the cord

A fluid-filled lump on or near your baby's umbilical cord stump

Oozing pus or discharge

Bleeding from the scab (though a little dried blood is normal)

Foul smell

Fever or lethargy

Low appetite

Abdominal swelling

Crying when you touch the cord or the area around it

If you notice any signs of infection or your baby seems to be in pain, call your pediatrician. A course of antibiotics will get your baby’s belly button back to healing in no time.

Umbilical cord or belly button bleeding

It’s normal to spot a few drops of blood on your baby’s diaper after his stump falls off, but you should monitor any additional umbilical cord bleeding closely. Contact your baby’s doctor if a small amount of bleeding lasts for more than three days.

If heavier belly button bleeding won’t stop after 10 minutes of direct pressure applied two times or if there’s a blood stain that’s more than two inches across, immediately call or visit the pediatrician. Continuous bleeding or a sizable spot of blood at this very young age (under a month) is a concern and should get checked out.

Less is more when it comes to caring for your baby’s umbilical cord. If you keep the stump area dry and you do your best to avoid touching it when you diaper and dress your baby, this little piece of leftover skin should fall off in no time at all.