When Pregnancy Kills Your Appetite

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

appetite loss during pregnancy

From first-trimester nausea to third-trimester fullness, here’s why food suddenly feels unappealing during pregnancy — and how to make sure you and baby still get the nutrients you need.

Always associated pregnancy with a voracious appetite for everything from pepperoni pizza to ice cream and pickles? While pregnancy is often painted as a time of constant cravings and frequent snacking , many women experience the opposite: a frustrating loss of appetite.

"I am worried I'll never enjoy food again!" says What to Expect Community member cantwaittobemommy. "I am such a foodie and even commercials about food make me gag lately."

Appetite changes during pregnancy are common and usually temporary.

Key Takeaways

Loss of appetite during pregnancy is common and usually temporary. Despite the stereotype of constant cravings, many women experience decreased appetite, thanks to everything from nausea and hormonal changes to heartburn and your growing uterus.

Your trimester might determine the likely cause. First trimester appetite loss is often driven by morning sickness and food aversions. In the second trimester, appetite typically improves (though not always). By the third trimester, feeling full quickly is common as baby crowds your stomach.

Focus on overall nutrition over time rather than perfect eating every day. Some days will be easier than others. Prioritize hydration and lean on small, nutritious, frequent meals.

Should I worry about a loss of appetite?

The big picture matters most. Gaining enough pregnancy weight is the clearest sign that you’re eating enough to support your baby’s needs. Depending on your pre-pregnancy weight, most women of normal weight should aim to tack on 25 to 35 pounds.

During the first trimester, when morning sickness (often more like all-day sickness) is at its worst, it’s common to only gain only 1 to 4 pounds — or sometimes even lose weight. That’s typically okay. At this point your fetus is still tiny, with relatively modest nutritional needs. As long as you’re taking your prenatal vitamin, you and baby should be covered. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMorning Sickness: Nausea and Vomiting of PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMorning Sickness: Nausea and Vomiting of PregnancySee All Sources

"I had no appetite and lost about 6 pounds," remembers What to Expect Community mom Emilyarau. "I started feeling better around 12 to 13 weeks and gained it back over the next two trimesters. Overall I think I gained 28 pounds, which was healthy."

After the first trimester, gaining about 1 pound per week is advised. If your appetite is still nowhere to be found by early in your second trimester , or if you aren't meeting the recommended weight gain goals later in pregnancy, consult your doctor.

Still worried? Try not to be. You’re going to have easy days and difficult days. What matters most is your overall nutrition over time. And most women find appetite loss manageable with a few smart strategies.

Loss of appetite in the first trimester

What causes loss of appetite in the first trimester?

Just as you begin stocking your refrigerator with healthy foods (and yes, sometimes those cookies you’re craving), loss of appetite — plus its common sidekick, morning sickness — strikes, turning your nose at the sight and smell of your favorite foods.

Nausea and vomiting affect an estimated 70% of pregnant women. Trusted SourceMarch of DimesMorning SicknessSee All Sources [2] And when you feel queasy, food is rarely appealing.

Trusted SourceMarch of DimesMorning SicknessSee All Sources

Morning sickness may even be your body’s instinctual way of steering you away from potentially harmful foods, which could explain some common food aversions .

"I’m in this never-ending cycle of no appetite > waiting too long to eat > feeling sick," says What to Expect Community memberlihinz.

Increasing pregnancy hormones (including estrogen and hCG — the ones responsible for making you cry at that car commercial) also play a role in increasing nausea and your sensitivity to smell while decreasing your appetite. You may even notice a metallic taste in your mouth.

"I’m 5 weeks, 2 days, and I struggle to have an appetite, let alone find anything that sounds appealing," says What to Expect Community member MamaGrizzly22. "Weird thing is, it’s not stemming from bad nausea."

How can I meet my nutritional needs in the first trimester if I've lost my appetite?

Here are some tips to get the pregnancy nutrients you and your baby need if you're not very hungry early on: Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsNutrition During PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsNutrition During PregnancySee All Sources

Drink up. Staying hydrated is more important than hitting a specific calorie target. Aim for around eight to 10 eight-ounce glasses of fluids daily from all sources, including vegetables and fruits. Warm water with lemon or ginger, ginger ale, or ginger tea can be good substitutes for plain water if you're nauseous. Always check in with your doctor before sipping any herbal tea or other drink, however, as some are off-limits during pregnancy. "I'm not nauseous per se, but I'm just not very hungry," says What to Expect Community member Stormly. "I'm focusing on staying well hydrated for now."

Eat small, frequent meals. Six small meals a day may feel more manageable than three larger ones. Eating every couple of hours can also help prevent nausea from an empty stomach.

Choose light but nutrient-dense foods. When your appetite briefly returns, prioritize protein and complex carbs to stabilize blood sugar and keep you fuller for a bit longer. Fruits such as bananas may also be easier to stomach — pair with a spoonful of yogurt for added calcium and protein.

Avoid strong smells and heavy foods. Spicy, greasy, or fried foods can worsen nausea. Instead, opt for blander options like whole grain toast, bagels, crackers, scrambled eggs, cereal, and a salad with grilled chicken or salmon, if you can stomach it. "If I think about food or what’s for dinner, I gag," says What to Expect Community mom GinaMarie1324. "Trying to get in bland foods like bagels, scrambled eggs, toast, breakfast sandwiches (for protein), cereal, peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, and fruit juices."

Use your good taste. Sure, variety is usually the spice of a good nutritional life. But if spinach makes you queasy while you can stomach iceberg lettuce, by all means eat the iceberg lettuce. You’ll get back to the spinach soon enough.

Change the temperature. Many women prefer their foods and drinks chilled when they're pregnant, while others prefer warm. Adjust your diet accordingly.

Take your prenatal vitamin. Make taking your prenatal vitamin as routine as brushing your teeth. Ideally, start taking it at least a month before conception, or at a minimum, at the time of conception, to help fill in temporary nutritional gaps.

Get additional help. To help combat nausea, talk to your doctor about taking a special prenatal vitamin with extra B6 . Or ask about prescription medications, which contain a combination of vitamin B and antihistamine that may help decrease nausea and increase your appetite.

Let your body be your guide. "I’ve started to just eat when I get hungry, even if it’s off schedule," says What to Expect Community member insuranceguru. "I just ate at 10:30 p.m. — it was the only time I didn’t feel sick."

Loss of appetite in the second trimester

What causes loss of appetite in the second trimester?

Many women find that this is the golden period of pregnancy — you’re showing and glowing but without the trademark pregnancy waddle yet. Nausea often eases, energy returns, and appetite usually rebounds, sometimes with surprising intensity.

But not everyone experiences a surge in hunger. Some women still feel mildly queasy or simply uninterested in food.

"OMG I was so confused, I thought I'd have the biggest appetite, but everything sounds so meh, zero appetite. But hopefully it'll come back," says What to Expect Community member Ammukinz in her second trimester.

As your uterus grows toward the end of the second trimester, you may also feel full quickly or short of breath while eating.

"I literally do not get hungry and when I eat, I feel full for hours," says What to Expect Community mom babypopper. "I normally love eating and feel so weird not craving anything."

How can I meet my nutritional needs in the second trimester if I've lost my appetite?

If you're still experiencing appetite loss, continue those first-trimester rituals:

Drink plenty of water.

Eat smaller, more frequent meals.

Stand up while eating.

Avoid strong-smelling, fatty and spicy foods.

Make smart nutritional swaps.

Take your prenatal vitamin daily to ensure you're getting all the nutrients you and your baby need .

"At 20 weeks, zero interest in food," says What to Expect Community mom avaa312. "By 23 weeks pregnancy hunger finally kicked in."

Once your tummy settles and your appetite is more normal, it's a good time to focus on getting enough of the most important nutrients, including:

Calcium: 1,200 mg daily (including what you get from your prenatal vitamin)

Protein: At least 75 grams daily

Folate: 400 to 600 mcg daily (if you choose high-fiber foods like legumes and green leafy veggies, it may help with pregnancy constipation )

Omega 3s: 200 to 300 mg daily (from pregnancy-safe fish or other sources)

Struggling with appetite loss or food aversions? The What to Expect app can help you track symptoms, log meals, and get expert-backed tips to help you eat well — even when nothing sounds good.

Loss of appetite in the third trimester

What causes loss of appetite in the third trimester?

During the final months of your pregnancy, nausea has usually faded — but your growing baby is now crowding your stomach. Your appetite may be fully back with a vengeance, but you may feel full and short of breath after only a few bites of food. To top it off, pregnancy-related heartburn and constipation can further dampen your desire to eat now.

"Third tri I had insane heartburn and NOTHING appealed to me," says What to Expect Community member mrscool. "I forced down a protein shake a day and did the best I could."

How can I meet my nutritional needs in the third trimester if I've lost my appetite?

Think small. Grazing on mini meals throughout the day is often more comfortable than eating full plates. "Later in pregnancy, I enjoy lots of snacks and smaller meals!" says What to Expect Community mom BabyDuran23. "Everything inside is being squished so there’s not as much room."

Prioritize nutrient density. Since you can't eat large amounts, make each bite count . Choose foods rich in protein, healthy fats, and fiber.

Eat fiber-rich foods. Continuing to eat plenty of fiber-rich foods, such as leafy greens, whole grain bread, avocados, asparagus, and sunflower seeds can help ease constipation.

Include healthy fats. Foods that contain healthy fats provide more calories in smaller portions (for example, nuts and raisins would be a better snack than celery and hummus).

Try standing while eating. It may be more comfortable to eat while you're standing rather than sitting because you'll be putting less pressure on your stomach.

Continue to stay hydrated.

Keep taking your prenatal vitamin. This is still very important and helps you get the vitamins and minerals you and your baby need even when you're not able to eat as much.

Appetite changes are a normal part of pregnancy — whether you’re battling first-trimester nausea or third-trimester fullness. Some days will be easier than others. Focus on hydration, small frequent meals, and steady weight gain over time. If you’re concerned about ongoing appetite loss or falling short of weight gain goals, check in with your healthcare provider.

Eating may feel like just another task on your to-do list right now, but it’s one with a powerful payoff: supporting a healthy, thriving baby.