When to Buy and Start Wearing Maternity Clothes

maternity clothes

The timeline will be different for everyone, but there's a lot to think about when it comes to adding maternity items to your closet.

When it comes to buying maternity clothing, there are no “rules.” Some moms-to-be start shopping shortly after seeing that positive pregnancy test ; others wait until their pre-pregnancy clothes become a squeeze.

Most importantly, you should simply wear what makes you feel good during pregnancy, says Sherry Ross , M.D., an OB/GYN, women’s sexual health expert and author. “Comfort is king while wearing maternity clothes,” she says.

Here are some tips to keep in mind if you choose to buy maternity clothes — such as signs it might be time to make the transition and which comfy features to look for when you do — plus pregnancy-friendly stores at every price point.

When to buy maternity clothes

How you approach maternity dressing is a personal choice, and again, there are no “rights” or “wrongs” here — when and if you choose to wear pregnancy-specific styles is entirely up to you.

But if you do intend to purchase maternity clothes, you’ll likely want to get your money’s worth out of them. For this reason, many moms-to-be start thinking seriously about maternity clothes around the end of the first trimester or beginning of the second. Though everyone’s baby bump grows at a different rate , it’s common to feel like you’re starting to “pop” around this time.

“I have been wearing maternity clothes since 14 weeks,” says one mom in the What to Expect Community. “I was surprised by how quickly I needed to start wearing them, but all my clothes felt so uncomfortable.”

Many moms-to-be find that their feelings on maternity clothing evolve over the course of their pregnancy. For example, you might be initially resistant to buying maternity clothes only to change your mind once the waistband on your pants become painfully tight. On the other hand, you may be pleasantly surprised to discover that some of your looser dresses or shirts continue to fit as your pregnancy progresses.

If you do decide to buy maternity clothes, these are a few signs it might be time to put your pre-pregnancy items into short-term storage:

Waistbands feel terrible. The classic “rubber band trick” (looping a hair tie or elastic band around your belt loop and button) or a maternity belly band or pants extender help some moms-to-be keep wearing their favorite pants or shorts for longer. But at a certain point, you may find it’s worth getting at least one pair of maternity jeans, pants or leggings — even if that’s the only item you buy.

Clothes ride up or feel painfully tight. Shirts that keep riding up in a way that makes you feel exposed or dresses that painfully pinch your waist or ribcage may need to be replaced with something roomier.

The fit is uncomfortable. As your body changes, your pre-pregnancy clothes may start to fit a little differently, even if you can still get them on. Buttons or clasps on shirts or dresses may suddenly dig into your skin at a painful angle, for example. Or you may find that fabrics you used to love now irritate your newly sensitive skin .

You’re spending a lot of time thinking about how your clothes fit (or don’t). If you're stressing about whether your pants are sliding down or whether your pre-pregnancy clothes are becoming a daily source of frustration and discomfort, it might be worth investing in at least a few maternity-specific replacements.

What to look for when buying maternity clothes

While the best maternity clothes for you will depend on your lifestyle and personal style, asking yourself these questions may make shopping for pregnancy-friendly outfits a little easier.

1. Fabric: Is it comfortable? “Soft and breathable materials are ideal for pregnancy,” Dr. Ross says. “It’s best to avoid polyester and nylon fabrics that don’t breathe well.” She recommends clothes made from fabrics such as cotton, spandex, jersey, knit, bamboo, lyocell and modal that allow for airflow without irritating skin.

2. Fit: Is it forgiving? Styles that are either very loose or made from stretchy fabrics (such as spandex) are more likely to accommodate your bump, Dr. Ross says. And expectant moms agree: “I'm almost six months and I haven't bought any actual maternity clothes,” says a mom in the WTE Community. “I've just been buying dresses and skirts with a stretchy band for the waist.”

3. Size: How big should I buy? A number of moms in our WTE Community note that they just assumed they should size up when shopping for clothes from maternity brands, only to discover that their original size was usually best.

“What I learned during my first pregnancy is to just buy whatever size you normally are in maternity,” says a WTE Community mom. “So if you wear a medium, buy a medium in maternity clothing. The maternity style clothing is meant to stretch and will fit you through any stage of your pregnancy.” When in doubt, check the brand’s sizing chart.

4. Postpartum use: Can I wear it after giving birth? You'll definitely want to think about continuing to wear roomy silhouettes and stretchy fabrics for a few months or more after giving birth, too. During this postpartum recovery stage you’ll still be craving cozier options — your uterus will be gradually returning to its pre-pregnancy size, you’ll be experiencing postpartum bleeding, called lochia , and may still have perineal pain or sensitivity around your C-section incision .

“People told me that I would only wear maternity clothes for a month or two, and that was not true,” says a WTE Community mom. “It took me a while to lose the weight postpartum, and maternity clothes were the most comfortable in the meantime.”

Still, some pregnancy-friendly styles work better for the postpartum period than others. If you’re nursing, for example you’ll probably prefer styles that give your baby easy access to your breasts throughout the day, such as tops or dresses with necklines that can be unbuttoned or pulled aside.

5. Seasonality: When am I due? If you live in a climate with four distinct seasons, you’ll want to think about the timing of your pregnancy with the weather. If you’ll be in your third trimester during the winter, you’ll likely need a maternity coat that can button or zip around your bump. On the other hand, moms-to-be with summer due dates might want to stock up on dresses that are loose or stretchy enough to comfortably expand as their bump grows, and may also want to invest in a maternity swimsuit .

6. Lifestyle: Do I need office-appropriate clothes? The type of maternity clothes you need will also heavily depend on how you spend most of your days. Moms-to-be who work in an office will likely need to stock up on more maternity pants and button-down shirts, for example. If you work from home, you may need more basics like leggings, cardigans, sweatpants and jeans.

9 maternity clothing essentials

Your lifestyle, budget, style and the season you’re due will all play a role in what’s essential for you. Here are some of the main types of maternity clothes to consider shopping for (think of it as a maternity "capsule wardrobe," if you will):

Maternity jeans: If you only buy one maternity clothing item, there’s a strong case to be made that it should be a pair of maternity jeans . “Maternity jeans are so much more comfortable than finding ways to extend use of regular jeans,” says one WTE Community memberPregnancy-friendly jeans usually have an under-the-bump band, side paneling or over-the-bump paneling to hold your bump in place and keep your jeans from sliding down.

Maternity dresses: Not only are maternity dresses designed with your bump specifically in mind, but many maternity dresses have nursing-friendly features so you can continue wearing them after giving birth if you’re choosing to breastfeed.

Maternity tops: Maternity tops are longer and roomier, and as with maternity dresses, many include nursing-friendly features.

Maternity leggings: Leggings are a go-to in pregnancy, and the best maternity leggings should feel comfortable and supportive but never too tight. Many regular leggings can still work in pregnancy, especially if you size up — but some have too much compression or seams in the waistband that can dig into your bump, so it’s important to read reviews closely or try them on in the store if you’re going the non-maternity route.

Maternity workout clothes: In addition to leggings, you may want to invest in a few other pieces of maternity activewear like tops or sports bras. Your breasts may grow during pregnancy, so you might want to head to the store for a fit check, or order a couple different sizes to try.

Maternity coats: If you’ll be in the third trimester during winter, a maternity coat is a must. Alternatively, you can try a jacket extender (insert panels that can be added to your existing winter gear) to accommodate your bump.

Maternity swimsuits: Maternity swimsuits are designed to grow with your bump — perfect if you prefer high-waisted or one-piece fits — and many moms say they’re able to wear them postpartum too.

Maternity underwear: You can continue wearing your regular underwear if it fits or purchase a few pairs in a larger size, but maternity underwear can be blissfully comfortable. Maternity underwear has a waistband that won’t dig into your bump as it expands, which also makes them super comfortable postpartum.

Pregnancy-friendly shoes: Feet can also swell when you’re pregnant, which is called edema . Pregnancy-friendly shoes are wider shoes and offer more arch support and other comfort-focused features.

There are maternity clothes for every price point

Everyone has a different budget, so to help you shop, here's a guide to stores with maternity clothes at every price point .

Maternity brands

A clothing brand dedicated to maternity-specific styles will give you the biggest selection and easiest shopping experience, as you won’t have to filter out non-maternity items or guess whether something is pregnancy-friendly. Here are a few of our favorites:

Motherhood Maternity ($)

PinkBlush ($)

Queen Bee ($)

Envie de Fraise ($)

Ingrid & Isabel ($$)

Seraphine ($$)

Kindred Bravely ($$)

Isabella Oliver ($$)

A Pea in the Pod ($$)

Blanqi ($$)

Storq ($$)

Mina Roe ($$)

Cake Maternity ($$)

Bumpsuit ($$$)

HATCH Collection ($$$)

Non-maternity retailers with maternity lines

These clothing retailers mainly sell “regular” clothes but also have maternity lines worth shopping. Others don’t have a dedicated maternity label but do have curated sections of the website with pregnancy-approved picks.

Amazon ($) (try lines like POSHDIVAH and Ekouaer)

Asos ($)

H&M ($)

Old Navy ($)

Maurices ($)

Kohls ($) (try brands like Maternity Sonoma Goods For Life and Bravado Designs)

Walmart ($) (try brands like Smallshow and Tejiojio)

Boohoo ($)

Target ($) (try lines like Ingrid & Isabel and Motherhood Maternity)

Quince ($$)

Gap ($$)

Mango ($$)

Skims ($$)

Madewell ($$)

Girlfriend Collective ($$)

Beyond Yoga ($$$)

Paige ($$$)

Reformation ($$$)

Shopbop ($$$) (try brands like HATCH and Spanx)

Clothing rental services with maternity options

If you don’t love the thought of buying lots of clothes you may not wear long term, a clothing rental service can be worth looking into. These services, which generally allow you to rent a few items per month for a membership fee, can be especially helpful if you have an event coming up or you're heading on a babymoon. Renting a dress for a wedding can be much more cost-effective than buying a new one, for example.

Le Tote($)

Nuuly ($$)

Rent the Runway ($$)

Consignment

The most affordable, not to mention sustainable, way to buy maternity clothes is often at consignment shops. “Our local thrift shop has a nice selection of affordable, gently-used gear,” shares one WTE Community mom. “I saved a ton by going this route versus buying brand new.”

Facebook Marketplace ($)

ThredUp ($)

Poshmark ($)

The RealReal ($$)

Vestiaire Collective ($$$)

Ultimately, you'll know if and when it's time to invest in a few new items to wear. Your comfort during pregnancy is most important. Everyone is on their own timeline, so doing what makes you feel good is always your best bet.

1. What to Expect When You’re Expecting, 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. 2. WhatToExpect.com, Best Maternity Swimsuits , February 2023. 3. WhatToExpect.com, 15 Best Maternity Leggings for Comfort During Each Trimester , January 2024. 4. WhatToExpect.com, Best Maternity Coats , October 2023. 5. WhatToExpect.com, Postpartum Perineum Pain , June 2021. 6. WhatToExpect.com, Postpartum Recovery Timeline , April 2023. 7. WhatToExpect.com, 11 Maternity Coats That’ll Keep You Warm Without Making You Sweat , October 2023. 8. WhatToExpect.com, 13 Best Winter Maternity Dresses to Stay Warm and Look Stylish , December 2023. 9. WhatToExpect.com, Best Cheap Maternity Clothes, September 2022. 10. WhatToExpect.com, Postpartum Bleeding (Lochia) , May 2021. 11. WhatToExpect.com, Sensitive Skin During Pregnancy , February 2021. 12. WhatToExpect.com, The Best Maternity Jeans, According to Our Community of Millions of Moms , July 2022. 13. WhatToExpect.com, Best Shoes for Pregnancy, According to a Podiatrist , January 2024. 14. WhatToExpect.com, Edema (Swelling of the Ankles and Feet) During Pregnancy , October 2022.

Your Next Read

12 Best Maternity Coats When You Can No Longer Zip Your Jacket, According to a Mom of 2 Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The 10 Best Maternity Robes That You'll Want to Wear Your Entire Pregnancy Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

The Best Postpartum Belly Bands and Shapewear, According to Moms Who've Tried Them Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

9 Times When Pregnancy "Gets Real" Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

Dressing Toddlers By Maressa Brown, Contributing Writer/Editor

6 Thoughts First-Time Moms Have When They Start to Show Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

When Will Your Baby Bump Show? Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Baby Clothes Sizes Chart and Guide Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Picture-Perfect Maternity Photo Ideas for Every Parent-to-Be Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Baby Gear Shopping: A Practical Guide to What You Really Need Fact Checked by Catherine Donaldson-Evans, Managing Editor

When to Tell People You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by Eric Surrey, M.D.

Pregnancy Symptoms: 14 Early Signs of Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

7 Things I Wish I Had Known About Finding Out I Was Pregnant Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

11 Gorgeous Winter Maternity Photos Fact Checked by Olivia DeLong, Senior Health Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window