Introducing Sweet Potatoes to Your Baby

giving baby sweet potatoes

When can babies eat sweet potatoes, and how should you prepare them if you're trying baby-led weaning? Learn more about giving your infant sweet potatoes here, plus our favorite sweet potato recipes.

From a baby’s very first solid food to a toddler’s go-to side dish or snack, sweet potatoes fit the bill. Their naturally sweet flavor is a hit with most young eaters, and they’re packed with nutrition that growing tots need.

Whether you're introducing solids in the form of purées or trying a baby-led weaning approach — when babies 6 months or older jump straight to soft, gummable finger foods as soon as solids are introduced — you might be wondering how to serve these starchy tubers.

Here are some tasty, expert-recommended ideas, plus everything you should know about putting sweet potatoes on your sweetie’s menu.

When can babies have sweet potatoes?

Your new eater can sink her teeth (er, gums) into sweet potatoes whenever she starts eating solids , which is usually around 6 months. In fact, plenty of parents opt to serve the tubers as their baby’s very first food.

How to prepare sweet potatoes for your baby

The key to serving sweet potatoes is making sure they’re thoroughly cooked. Whether they’re sliced into strips or grated and incorporated into baked dishes, sweet potatoes should be soft enough that you can easily smush them with your fingers — a sign that your baby can mash them with her gums or emerging teeth.

As for peeling? Leaving the skin on makes sweet potatoes easier to grip, but skin can pose a possible choking hazard, even for toddlers. If you opt not to peel, keep eagle eyes on your little one while she eats and remove peels from her tray or plate as soon as she’s finished eating the flesh.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve sweet potatoes at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare sweet potatoes for a 6-month-old

6-months

Mashed or puréed sweet potatoes are a great option if you're spoon-feeding. If you're trying baby-led weaning, roast whole sweet potatoes until they’re very soft, then slice into thick spears for your baby to palm. You can roll the spears in baby cereal if they’re too wet or slippery for her to grasp.

How to prepare sweet potatoes for a 9-month-old

9-months

Roast or steam bite-sized rounds or longer spears. If you’re feeling creative, add some seasoning to expose your little nosher to new flavors. Try tossing sweet potato pieces in cinnamon, ground cumin or even Parmesan cheese.

How to prepare sweet potatoes for a 12-month-old

12-months

Roasted or steamed pieces are still a great way to go. As your newly minted toddler begins getting the hang of utensils , you can try offering mashed sweet potato for her to practice scooping with a spoon.

How to prepare sweet potatoes for an 18-month-old

18-months

Roasted or steamed wedges, oven-style fries or mashed sweet potato are all great choices for your 18-month-old.

Sweet potato recipes for babies and toddlers

One of the best things about these orange tubers? They take well to both sweet and savory twists — meaning there’s lots of opportunity for variety. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Some sweet potato recipes that will have your little one asking for more:

Toss steamed or roasted sweet potato wedges with a sprinkling of spices or spice blends, like cinnamon, cumin, za’atar or even chili powder.

Stir puréed sweet potato into whole grain pancakes or mini muffins.

Make mini veggie patties with mashed sweet potato and black beans.

Fold shredded sweet potato into mini beef or turkey meatballs.

Mash sweet potato with butter and flavor with a squeeze of fresh orange or lime juice.

Try baked potato latkes using sweet potato instead of white potatoes.

Add puréed sweet potato to a smoothie or freeze and make sweet potato smoothie pops.

What are the benefits of sweet potatoes for babies and toddlers?

Sweet potatoes are loaded with vitamin A, which keeps your child's immune system in fighting form and promotes healthy vision. They’re also a rich source of potassium, a mineral that plays a key role in building strong, healthy muscle tissue and supports nerve and brain function.

Other sweet potato perks? They contain complex carbohydrates, which are a good source of fuel for your baby or toddler’s brain, as well as fiber to help stave off constipation .

Can babies be allergic to sweet potatoes?

Good news: It’s rare (although still possible) for your little one to have an allergy to sweet potatoes. Even so, it’s always a good idea to look for signs of a possible reaction — especially when you’re serving sweet potatoes for the first time.

Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, within moments or an hour or two after eating, she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are sweet potatoes a choking hazard for babies?

Sweet potatoes are not considered a common choking hazard for babies. However, prepare them safely by making sure they're fully cooked and very soft, removing the skins (which babies can choke on) and serving them in an age-appropriate size.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never offer food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Sweet potatoes can be a sweet — or savory! — addition to your little eater’s ever-expanding menu, starting with her very first bite. And however you decide to prep them, you might want to make extra. Chances are, you’ll want some for your plate, too.