Introducing Asparagus to Your Baby

Asparagus offers tons of nutritional benefits for babies and toddlers, but preparing this vegetable for little eaters can be tricky. Here's when you can introduce asparagus to babies, plus how to prepare it safely.

Cooking up a side of asparagus for dinner? Make a little extra for your baby. Even though the spears don’t typically show up on lists of first veggies for new eaters, there’s no reason why your cutie can’t dig in as soon as he starts trying solid foods

The key is making sure your asparagus is well cooked and served in age-appropriate pieces to avoid a possible choking risk. Here’s how to prep it, plus ideas for adding asparagus to your tot’s menu.

When can babies have asparagus?

It’s perfectly fine for your baby to try asparagus shortly after starting solids — usually sometime around 6 months. If you’re following baby-led weaning , an approach that introduces solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods instead of purées, you can offer asparagus to your child after at least the 6-month mark, when your little one is more capable of self-feeding.

That said, the safest way to serve asparagus to babies is cut into small, pea-sized pieces — so new eaters who haven’t yet gotten the hang of their pincer grasp might need some help getting the veggie into their mouths.

How to prepare asparagus for your baby

Asparagus can be fibrous and stringy and the small, round shape of whole spears or long pieces can pose a choking hazard for babies and toddlers. Even so, there are ways to make the veggie both manageable and safe for your mini muncher.

Always cook asparagus until it’s very tender — think roasted or steamed. It should be soft enough for you to smush between your fingers.

Remove any thick or woody ends and discard. They can be tough for little mouths to manage even when cooked.

Slice asparagus into small pieces for babies or offer the whole stalks for toddlers. Avoid serving longer pieces of chopped asparagus.

How to prepare asparagus for babies 6 to 12 months

preparing asparagus for 6-month-old

Steam or roast asparagus spears until very soft and tender, and chop into pea-sized pieces. Examine for any stringy or fibrous strands and remove before serving. You can also purée asparagus, just make sure you strain it to remove all strings.

Babies who have mastered their pincer grasp (usually around 9 months) can practice picking up the asparagus pieces with their fingers. For younger babies who aren’t quite there yet, you can offer asparagus pieces as part of a dish that’s easier to pick up, like frittata strips.

How to prepare asparagus for toddlers 12 months and older

preparing asparagus for 12-month-old

Your toddler can start to practice picking up small pieces of chopped asparagus with his fork. But with sturdier chewing skills in tow, he may also be ready to move on to whole asparagus stalks.

Continue to cook the stalks until very soft and tender and remove any tough or woody ends. Stalks that are very thick can be sliced into strips, but don’t cut across the spear to make disc-like shapes, which could lead to choking.

Asparagus recipes for babies and toddlers

No matter your new nosher’s age or ability to pick up small bits of food, there are plenty of tasty ways he can enjoy asparagus. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood. Some to try:

Asparagus and cheese frittata. Fold small pieces of well-cooked asparagus and shredded cheese into beaten egg. Bake until puffy and slice into strips.

Asparagus toast. Gently mash well-cooked asparagus, taking care to remove any tough bits or strings. Spread on whole grain toast and slice into strips.

Pasta with peas and asparagus. Cook whole wheat pasta until very tender and toss with steamed peas and steamed diced asparagus, butter and Parmesan cheese.

Creamy asparagus soup. Sauté onions, peeled diced potato and chopped asparagus until tender; blend with low-sodium chicken or vegetable broth. Serve on a preloaded spoon or with whole grain toast strips for dunking.

Asparagus quesadilla. Fold cooked and diced asparagus into a whole wheat quesadilla before pan-frying. Slice into strips, cubes or wedges and serve.

Asparagus scrambled eggs. Fold cooked and diced asparagus into scrambled eggs just before they’re finished cooking. Top with chopped dill or chives for extra flavor.

Lemony asparagus bites. Toss steamed diced asparagus with a drizzle of olive oil and fresh lemon juice.

What are the benefits of asparagus for babies and toddlers?

It might not get much attention as a superfood, but asparagus is chock-full of important nutrients that babies and toddlers need. Two biggies are vitamin K, which promotes healthy blood clotting, and folate, a B vitamin that your tot’s body needs in order for his cells to grow and divide.

Asparagus is also rich in prebiotics — plant fibers that promote the growth of healthy bacteria in the gut to encourage healthy digestion.

On the downside? In large quantities that fiber can cause gas and potentially make your little one uncomfortable. If you notice asparagus seems to trigger tummy troubles, try cutting back and asking his pediatrician for advice.

Also good to know: Don’t worry if your sweetie’s diapers seem especially stinky after a meal with asparagus. Asparagus contains a naturally occurring compound that can temporarily give urine a sulfur-like odor. Getting a whiff isn’t fun for you, but it isn’t bothersome or harmful to your baby.

Can babies be allergic to asparagus?

According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), any food can be an allergen. Luckily, asparagus allergies are rare, and surprisingly, reactions are more likely to happen from touching asparagus than from eating it.

Though the risk is low, it’s always worth knowing the signs of a possible allergy, especially if your little one is eating the veggie for the first time. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), he experiences:

Hives

Itching

Redness on his fingers or hands

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Itchy or watery eyes

Runny nose or congestion

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Is asparagus a choking hazard for babies?

Asparagus can be a choking hazard for children if not prepared correctly. Serve this vegetable safely by cooking it until very soft and tender, then chopping into small, bite-sized pieces that are appropriate for your child's age. You should always make sure to remove the woody ends and any stringy or fibrous strands, all of which can pose a choking risk. Also be mindful not to cut across the spear to make disc-like shapes.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when he's eating, sit him upright during mealtimes and never serve food while he's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Asparagus needs a little bit of prep to make it work for your baby or toddler’s menu. But as long as you cook it thoroughly and stick with serving either very small pieces or long stalks or strips, it’s perfectly safe for your tot to try.