Introducing Cucumber to Your Baby

When can babies eat cucumber, and how should you safely prepare this veggie? Here's everything parents need to know.

When it comes to serving cucumber to your baby, this cool, crisp veggie works well as a finger food . But it’s important to know the right way to prep it.

Whether you’re starting solids with baby-led weaning or shaking up your spoon-feeding routine, here’s when to offer cucumber to your child, how to prepare it, plus creative cuke serving ideas.

When can babies have cucumber?

Your cutie can eat cucumber anytime after she starts solids , usually sometime around 6 months.

If you're introducing solids in the form of purées, your baby can try cucumber puréed along with other fruits and veggies. But if you're following baby-led weaning (which introduces solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods), you'll need to take steps to safely prep this veggie, since cucumber's firm texture can make it a choking risk.

purées, your baby can try cucumber puréed along with other fruits and veggies. But if you're following baby-led weaning (which introduces solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods), you'll need to take steps to safely prep this veggie, since cucumber's firm texture can make it a choking risk.

How to prepare cucumber for your baby

Cucumbers have a firm, crunchy texture that, depending on how they're served, can pose a choking risk for young eaters — raw, hard fruits and veggies are one of the top choking hazards for young children. Always serve cucumber sliced in age-appropriate pieces and supervise your child closely while she's eating.

Pay attention to the type of cuke you’re tossing in your cart. Look for softer, juicier varieties that your child can suck on or mush. English cucumbers have a thin skin that you don’t need to bother peeling, but you’ll want to peel regular cucumbers to prevent your little one from potentially swallowing a big piece. Scoop out any large or firm seeds, too.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve cucumber at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills, or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare cucumber for a 6-month-old

Preparing cucumber for a 6-month-old

Long, thick spears (about the size of two fingers) work best for new eaters. Peel regular cucumbers thoroughly and scoop out any large or firm seeds. Most likely, your cutie will simply suck the refreshing juices out of the cuke at this age, but that’s okay!

Wary about serving cucumber spears to your baby? You can also grate the veggie and stir it into something sticky or scoopable, like Greek yogurt or hummus.

How to prepare cucumber for a 9-month-old

Since your sweetie still only probably has a few teeth at this point, stick with mostly the same prep methods you used at 6 months. Continue peeling regular cucumbers.

How to prepare cucumber for a 12-month-old

Preparing cucumber for a 12-month-old

Thick spears or grated cucumber are still good choices. Now’s also a good time to try introducing dips for cucumber spears, like hummus or homemade ranch dressing. Modeling dipping for your toddler will help her learn to get the hang of it.

How to prepare cucumber for an 18-month-old

Preparing cucumber for a 18-month-old

Your 18-month-old can likely handle bite-sized pieces of cucumber now, thanks to more choppers and stronger chewing skills. When in doubt, check with your pediatrician.

Cucumber recipes for babies and toddlers

The cool green veggie makes for a refreshing side dish all on its own. But there are plenty of other ways to work cucumber into meals and snacks, too. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Veggie snack plate. Serve cucumber spears with small pieces of beefsteak tomato or thin slices of cherry tomato, hummus and strips of soft cheese like mozzarella.

Cucumber-carrot avocado toast. Top avocado toast with grated cucumber and grated carrot. Sprinkle with a spice blend like za’atar for more flavor, if you’d like.

Tzatziki-style dip. Stir grated cucumber, chopped fresh dill, chopped garlic, olive oil and fresh lemon juice into Greek yogurt. Spread on pita wedges, offer as a dip or serve as a side to baked salmon or baked potato wedges.

Open-faced cucumber tea sandwich. Spread cream cheese on whole grain toast. Top with grated cucumber (for younger babies) or thinly sliced cucumber (for older toddlers).

Cucumber-mint cooler. Purée peeled, grated cucumber with fresh lime juice and fresh mint leaves until smooth, adding water as needed to make a sippable consistency. Serve in a straw cup or pour into popsicle molds for a frozen treat.

What are the benefits of cucumber for babies and toddlers?

Cukes might not deliver megadoses of vitamins and minerals like some other veggies. But they’re still a good source of vitamin K, which promotes healthy blood clotting. Also good? Their sky-high water content can help your sweetie stay hydrated.

Can babies be allergic to cucumber?

It’s possible, but not very likely. Raw cucumbers have the potential to trigger oral allergy syndrome — a condition caused by cross-reaction in allergens found in both pollen and raw fruits and vegetables. But kids under 3 aren’t typically affected.

That said, it’s always a good idea to know the signs of a possible allergic reaction, especially when you’re serving a food for the first time. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Is cucumber a choking hazard for babies?

Raw, firm vegetables like cucumber are a top choking hazard for young children. Always prepare cucumber in an age-appropriate size and remove the skins and seeds on regular cucumbers.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and offer serve food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Cucumber’s the kind of cool, crisp treat your cutie will love to sink her gums into. And she can dig in early on — just be sure to slice it into safe pieces and keep a close eye while she eats.