Introducing Carrots to Your Baby

when can babies eat carrots?

When can babies eat carrots, and how should you prepare them for baby-led weaning? Everything parents need to know about serving this nutritious veggie to their little ones.

Brainstorming veggies to introduce to your new eater? With their hard, crunchy texture, carrots might not seem like the best fit. But it only takes a little prepwork to turn the orange root into a tot-friendly purée or finger food.

And the effort is worth it, since your new nosher will likely be a fan of carrots’ sweet, mild flavor right away. Here’s everything you need to know about serving carrots to your child.

When can babies have carrots?

Carrots can make it onto your little muncher’s menu any time after she starts solids , usually around 6 months.

Mashed or puréed carrots are a popular option for families who are spoon-feeding. If you prefer to introduce carrots as a finger food once baby graduates from purées or as part of a baby-led weaning approach (which involves introducing solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods instead of spoon-feeding her purées), hold off until at least her half birthday. By the time she's 6 months old, your baby is more likely to have the capacity to start trying to self-feed.

How to prepare carrots for your baby

Carrots are one of the easiest veggies to purée, which makes them a good early candidate if you're going the spoon-feeding route. But if you're trying baby-led weaning, you'll need to prep carrots a little more carefully to make sure they're not a choking hazard.

Carrots, especially when raw, can pose a choking risk until your sweetie ages into the preschool set. Larger pieces of carrot should be steamed or roasted until they’re soft enough for you to smush with your fingers — a sign that your baby can smush the carrot with her gums.

It’s okay to serve raw carrot as your cutie gets more experienced in the eating department. Just be sure to keep the pieces very, very thin — first grated, and eventually sliced into slim matchsticks. You'll want to avoid serving large or thick pieces of raw carrot or whole cut baby carrots until age 4.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve carrots at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare carrots for a 6-month-old

when can babies have carrots 6 months

Start off with long, thin carrot strips that have been steamed until soft and smushable. There’s a good chance your baby can palm or grab the bigger pieces, but if they’re too slippery, you can roll them in finely crushed baby cereal to make them easier to grip.

How to prepare carrots for a 9-month-old

carrots 9 months

Now’s a good time to offer little clumps of grated raw or cooked carrot, since it’ll give your baby a chance to perfect her budding pincer grasp . Steamed carrot also remains a great choice, but now you can do slightly smaller pieces — think thin half-moon slices.

How to prepare carrots for a 12-month-old

carrots 12 months

You can continue to follow the same prep methods you used at 9 months. Or you can dice cooked carrot pieces and encourage your new toddler to try picking them up with her fork. The pieces can be steamed or roasted — roasting makes for a slightly firmer texture, but one that your little one can likely handle by now.

How to prepare carrots for an 18-month-old

carrots 18 months

All of the above preparations are still fair game. By 18 months, your toddler may be ready to try raw carrot sliced into very thin matchsticks. (Pair them with hummus or ranch for dunking!) Serving raw carrot increases choking risk, so make sure to keep an especially close eye on your little one while she eats.

Carrot recipes for babies and toddlers

Once your baby is gobbling up simple steamed carrots, try these no-fuss ways to make the eating the orange veggie even more fun. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Buttery cinnamon carrots. Toss warm steamed carrot strips or half-moons with butter and sprinkle with cinnamon for a sweet-savory side.

Cumin roasted carrot fries. Roast carrot matchsticks with olive oil and a sprinkling of ground cumin until soft and caramelized.

Carrot cake pancakes. Give whole grain pancakes a flavor boost by folding grated carrot into the batter before cooking.

Carrot-hummus toast. Spread hummus on whole grain toast and top with a thin layer of grated carrot. Slice the toast into strips for younger eaters.

Carrot apple smoothie. Blend steamed carrot with grated apple, milk, peanut butter and cinnamon for a naturally sweet sipper.

Mini carrot black bean burgers. Fold raw grated carrot into mashed black beans, adding enough whole wheat breadcrumbs to hold the mixture together. Form mixture into mini patties and pan-fry or bake until golden.

Carrot noodles. Toss boiled spiralized carrots with butter, peas and Parmesan cheese for a fun take on pasta. (Many supermarkets sell ready-to-cook spiralized carrots in the produce section.) Be sure to cut the noodles into bite-sized pieces before serving.

What are the benefits of carrots for babies and toddlers?

Carrots are a top source of vitamin A, which is a must for your sweetie’s developing eyes and immune system. They’re also rich in antioxidants to support your baby or toddler’s rapidly developing brain .

Another perk? Carrots are a great way to introduce your tot to the world of vegetables. It’s common (and totally normal) for babies and toddlers to be wary of bitter veggies like crucifers and leafy greens, at least on the first several tries. But the naturally sweet flavor of carrots makes them an easy sell.

Can babies be allergic to carrots?

According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), any food can be an allergen. However, the chances of your child having a carrot allergy are pretty slim. But of course, it’s always smart to watch for signs of a possible reaction — especially when you’re putting carrots on the menu for the first time.

Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, immediately or within an hour or two after eating, she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are carrots a choking hazard for babies?

Raw, firm-fleshed veggies like carrots are a common choking hazard for babies. Make sure you're preparing them safely by cooking carrots until they're very soft and smushable for younger babies, cutting them into bite-sized pieces and serving them very thin (such as by grating them) once you do start introducing them raw to older babies.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never offer food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

From steaming to grating to roasting, there are plenty of ways to serve carrots that go beyond the usual purée (although that's always a fine way to serve them, too!). And whether they’re served as a finger food or from a spoon, they’re guaranteed to be a tasty early veggie for your new gourmand.