Introducing Eggs to Your Baby

Eggs are packed with protein and other all-important nutrients for early eaters. Here's how to prepare eggs for babies and toddlers, plus the best time to introduce them to your little one.

Eggs tick all the boxes when it comes to nutrition, taste and being easy to prep. And since there are so many ways to turn them into finger foods, they’re also one of the best menu additions for babies and toddlers.

On the other hand? They’re also a common allergen, which means you might have questions about the right way to introduce eggs to your baby. Here’s everything you need to know about when babies can have eggs, the safest way to serve them the first time, plus plenty of ideas for making them delicious.

When can babies have eggs?

Eggs are a common allergen , so they shouldn’t be the very first item on your new eater’s menu. On the other hand, you don’t have to wait too long before introducing them.

Your pediatrician will likely give you the green light to start introducing solids around 6 months. Once your baby has tried and tolerated several less-allergenic foods (like fruits, veggies or baby cereal), your pediatrician will let you know if it's okay to move on to allergens like eggs.

While experts used to think that introducing allergenic foods later reduced the risk for reactions, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) now says there’s no reason to wait. In fact, some findings show that babies who start eating eggs between 4 and 6 months are less likely to develop an allergy compared to those who don’t have eggs until 10 to 12 months.

Still, consult your pediatrician before putting eggs on the menu for the first time. When you first serve them, plan to do so at home (versus at day care or in a restaurant). That’ll make it easier to keep an eye on your baby for the first hour or two after eating so you can watch for any potential allergic reactions. You’ll also know for sure about all of the ingredients she ate at mealtime, making it easier to pinpoint eggs as the culprit if there’s a problem.

How to prepare eggs for your baby

Although eggs don't exactly work in purée form, you can still introduce them early on, especially if you're following baby-led weaning , an approach that introduces solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods when babies are capable of self-feeding.

Stick with soft preparations that are easy for your growing gourmand to gum or chew — think boiled eggs, scrambled eggs or baked egg dishes over fried eggs, which can be too tough around the edges. Always make sure eggs are well cooked.

When serving eggs for the first time, keep it super simple. Plain eggs without any added ingredients (other than ones your baby has already tried and tolerated) are best. That way, if you spot signs of a possible allergic reaction, you won’t be wondering which food triggered the problem.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve eggs at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare eggs for a 6-month-old

Preparing eggs for a 6-month-old

Hard-boil eggs and slice them into quarters. They’ll be big enough for your baby to grasp. (If the slices are a little slippery, you can make them more grippable by rolling them in infant cereal.) You can also bake eggs in mini muffin cups (far right) or make frittatas (center), then slice them into thick strips.

How to prepare eggs for a 9-month-old

Preparing eggs for a 9-month-old

Try offering scrambled eggs cut into small pieces. Working to pick up the bite-sized bites will help your emerging epicurean practice her budding pincer grasp .

How to prepare eggs for a 12-month-old

Preparing eggs for a 12-month-old

All of the above are still great options. These days, small pieces of cut-up egg are also a great way for your new toddler to start practicing with a fork, since the soft texture is easy to stab.

How to prepare eggs for an 18-month-old

Preparing eggs for an 18-month-old

As your tot’s motor skills grow more coordinated, try folding eggs into a whole grain tortilla or whole grain toast to make a breakfast taco or sandwich. (Smearing the tortilla or bread with some mashed avocado, melted cheese or even hummus can help the eggs adhere better.) It’ll definitely be messy, but still delicious!

Egg recipes for babies and toddlers

Eggs earn their rep as incredible in part because they’re so versatile. While you can’t beat a simple scramble, these easy prep ideas are winners, too. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Baby-friendly omelet. Fill with cheese and slice into thin, easy-to-pick-up strips.

Mini egg muffins or frittatas. Fold diced peppers or thinly sliced baby spinach into beaten eggs and bake in mini muffin cups.

Tot French Toast. Dunk slices of whole grain toast into beaten eggs, milk and cinnamon and pan-fry. Cut into strips and serve.

Better egg salad. Swap the usual mayo for mashed avocado or hummus. Serve with toast strips. (Leave out the diced raw celery, which could be a choking hazard.)

Easy pancakes. Mix eggs with baby cereal and mashed banana to form a thin batter, then pan-fry.

Deconstructed breakfast tacos. Serve chopped scrambled eggs alongside black beans, diced avocado, salsa and strips of whole grain tortilla.

Eggy pasta. Fold chopped scrambled egg or chopped hard-boiled egg into whole grain pasta and top with Parmesan cheese.

What are the benefits of eggs for babies and toddlers?

They might be small in size, but nutritionally speaking, they’re pretty mighty. Eggs are packed with high-quality protein to support your little one’s growth and supply her with plenty of energy.

They’re also rich in nutrients that can be tough for tots to get from other foods. Eggs deliver vitamin D, which is a must for building strong, healthy bones. And it’s one of the few food sources of choline, a mineral that’s essential for brain development and memory function.

Can babies be allergic to eggs?

Eggs are one of the most common baby food allergens, along with cow’s milk and peanuts. (Though thankfully, most kids outgrow their egg allergies by age 5.) That means it’s extra important to watch for signs of a possible reaction when you introduce them.

Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, immediately or within an hour or two after eating, she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

If you suspect that your baby or toddler has an egg allergy, take them off the menu and touch base with her pediatrician to discuss her symptoms. Her doctor might recommend allergy testing to confirm the diagnosis.

An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are eggs a choking hazard for babies?

Eggs are not considered a common choking hazard for babies. However, you should still prepare them safely by making sure they're soft and easy to chew (such as by scrambling them or serving them in a frittata), then cut into small, bite-sized pieces that are manageable for your baby's age.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never serve food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Eggs earn their reputation as being incredible in terms of versatility and nutrition. And serving them to your baby sooner rather than later is a smart move. So once she’s got a few other foods under her belt, go ahead and get cracking.