How to Help Your Child Drink From an Open Cup

drinking from an open cup

Transitioning from the breast, bottle or sippy cup to a big-kid cup is an important — if sometimes tricky — milestone. Here’s when you can make the switch to an open cup and how to do it.

Ready to make the move to an open cup? Whether introducing an open cup as an alternative to the breast or bottle, or transitioning from a sippy to an open cup, doing it earlier rather than later has its advantages.

For one, as a baby, your child will learn that there’s a route to liquid refreshment other than the breast or bottle, an alternative that will make it easier to wean him from either or both. The ability to drink from a real cup also helps your little one gain mastery over his mouth muscles, while fostering his motor skills and coordination.

Here's more about when you can introduce an open cup and some easy ways to make the transition.

When should you introduce an open cup?

There's no absolute "best" time to introduce drinking from an open cup with no lid, but by 16 to 17 months most toddlers possess the motor coordination to drink from an open cup (mostly) dribble-free, with enough practice.

As for when to start? Aim to introduce some open-cup sessions between 6 and 12 months, and look out for the following milestones:

At 6 months: Most children can take small sips from an open cup that’s held by a caregiver.

By 12 months: Most children can start to use objects like a cup correctly, and may hold an open cup and take sips (expect some spills!).

As for whether to transition to an open cup directly from bottle or breast or to start by introducing a sippy cup , that's a matter of parental preference. Some experts advise against the sippy cup habit and instead recommend introducing an open cup right from the start. But if you prefer to ease the transition with a spill-proof cup, or if sippy cups have already become a firm fixture in your home, don’t worry that your child has missed a milestone. You can still make the transition to the big-kid cup.

Many children are able to drink from a sippy cup at around 6 to 9 months, and by 12 months, your tot will probably be ready to give the bottle the boot. It's good timing, too, because the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends weaning from a bottle between 12 and 24 months.

The reason? Bottles may contribute to tooth decay over time, especially if they're used for comfort at bedtime and naptime when the milk (or juice or whatever is inside them) can pool in a child's mouth while he sleeps, causing bacteria to grow and cavities to start.

As you work to transition your baby or toddler to an open cup, shop for one that doesn’t have a valve. No-spill cups are too much like bottles and require a sucking motion, rather than sipping. You can either introduce a cup with a tight lid and a spout or a simple plastic cup with an open mouth.

Cups with a handle on each side help your tot to grip the container in a stable way and cups that are weighted or heavier on the bottom keep them level and prevent spills (though of course you should expect a bit of mess as you train with open cups).

As for how much to put into your toddler’s cup, start with small amounts lest he get a face full of milk each time he tries to sip. Over the course of a day, toddlers who are 12 to 24 months old can drink 2 to 3 cups of milk; at age 2, children can drink 2 to 2 1/2 cups of milk.

Tips for making the transition to an open cup

Whether you’re moving from the breast, bottle or a sippy cup, know that it’ll take your child some time to master the combination of fine motor skills and mouth-muscle control required to drink from an open cup. Your best bet: Give him lots of practice and let the milk or water fall where it may!

Make the cup special. If you're helping a toddler transition to an open cup, letting him choose the cup will give him that sense of control most toddlers crave (show him two at a time and let him pick one). And don't underestimate the power of whimsical characters or magical gimmicks, like cups that change colors.

Demo how it's done. Tiny tykes want to do what their parents are doing, so if you point out that you’re drinking from an open cup, chances are your little one will soon want to try it for himself. “See? This is how Daddy drinks. Mmm, good! Now you try it.”

Let others serve. If you’re weaning from the breast, have your partner or another caregiver work with your toddler on this transition too. The reason? Your tot knows you used to nurse him — and he may balk when given an open cup from you.

Switch it up. If you're trying to encourage your toddler to swap a sippy for an open cup , it may help to let him switch off between the two. For example, let him use his sippy for water, but reserve the open cup for his favorite drink.

What not to worry about when introducing an open cup

If there’s some difficulty or your 2-year-old can’t seem to drink well from an open cup, try a few different strategies. You might fill it with less liquid so it doesn’t spill, try different sizes and various weighted cups, which are easier to hold and tip forward.

Keep up the positive talk with your toddler and add more practice sessions, no matter how messy they are — and soon he’ll be a cup connoisseur.

As for what's next? Once your toddler can handle a regular cup without too much spillage, he’ll start to make the connection between spoon (or fork), bowl (or plate) and mouth. Between 18 to 24 months, it’ll be hard to pry the utensils from your kiddo’s hand — not that you should try!

Be ready to don a bib and lay down a splat mat as your toddler hones his open-cup drinking skills. With practice and encouragement as he tries, your little one will nail the cup trick fast.