When Do Babies and Toddlers Start Dancing?

Major update to include additional information about when babies and toddlers learn to dance by age, as well as safety tips.

when do babies and toddlers learn to dance?

Dancing can be a great way to bond with your little one and get her creative juices flowing — so turn up the tunes and get your tiny dancer moving!

There’s good reason to encourage baby and toddler dancing: Simply listening to music helps children think and express themselves more creatively, a skill that’s sure to help your child later in school.

Plus, getting her groove on by dancing improves your toddler’s coordination and sense of how her body fits into her surroundings. And toddler dancing helps set the stage for an active childhood filled with all types of movement. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsMusic and MoodSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsMusic and MoodSee All Sources

Ready to bust a move? Here’s what parents need to know to help encourage their little ones to dance, plus when you may notice this fun milestone .

When will my baby or toddler start dancing?

All children are naturally attuned to sound and rhythm. Your baby will start responding to music by smiling , swaying and perhaps even clapping her hands by her first birthday.

Around the 1-year mark , she may also be able to start playing some musical games, such as participating in the rhyme “Patty-Cake” with you or on her own.

Then, around 15 to 18 months — once your toddler is walking on her own two feet, which typically happens sometime between 12 and 15 months — she’ll finally have enough control over her body to do some dancing. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology InformationThe Origins of Dance: Characterizing the Development of Infants' Earliest Dance BehaviorSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology InformationThe Origins of Dance: Characterizing the Development of Infants' Earliest Dance BehaviorSee All Sources

Just don’t expect her moves to match Beyoncé’s yet. Chances are, your child’s dancing will initially look like simple bopping up and down with her feet planted to the floor.

As she approaches 18 months, your child will likely gain more confidence to expand her choreography by moving side to side and spinning in circles.

And once your child gets closer to age 2 , she’ll start getting her arms in on the action too!

Tips for helping your child learn how to dance

All that’s required for a dance party is a terrific tune and space to wiggle.

Does your little have a favorite tune? Let her choose which song she wants to dance to! Then take turns and share some of your favorite songs that get you grooving too.

No Spotify? No problem. Just make your own music by singing (off-key is totally fine) and clapping your hands. Not only is singing a nice way to bond with your little one, who loves the sound of your voice, but it also helps her distinguish individual sounds and syllables — in turn, promoting her developing language skills .

While most toddlers don’t need much encouragement to get moving, you can help by joining in. Dancing along with your tot helps inspire your little hip-hopper to get bopping. Got two left feet? Not to worry — your dance partner won’t notice!

Incorporate music throughout the day to help your child express herself. Find music that matches the energy of what she’s feeling. For example, encourage her to shake it out to upbeat tunes if she’s feeling extra wiggly, or put on lullabies for quiet time.

Dancing games for your baby or toddler

Ready to switch your dance party into high gear? These games can help you get things moving and shaking, and encourage your baby or toddler to dance.

Freeze dance. Turn on some lively music and boogie down together. When the music stops, freeze in place and make a silly face. Your toddler will love the dancing part — even if freezing is hard for her to pull off.

Play interactive songs. Teach your mini-me songs with corresponding movements, like “Head, Shoulders, Knees and Toes,” “Hokey Pokey," the “Chicken Dance” or even the “Cha-Cha Slide” so you can bust a choreographed move together!

Dance like an animal. Change things up by mimicking different animals while moving to the music. Bounce like a bunny, slither like a snake, and waddle like a duck to keep toddler moving and grooving.

Change the beat. Experiment with different musical genres and watch how your tot learns to mix up her moves to match the rhythm. Sway slowly to classical, rock out to pop, and bop along to country music together to help your toddler get her groove on.

Bring on the props. Incorporating egg shakers or musical instruments can help your little one bring all sorts of movement into a musical number. Even better? Dress up and role-play as a part of your dance routine!

Dance safety tips for babies and toddlers

As with any fun toddler activity, safety comes first. Keep these considerations in mind before your next toddler dance party: Trusted SourceJohns Hopkins MedicineCommon Dance Injuries and Prevention TipsSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceJohns Hopkins MedicineCommon Dance Injuries and Prevention TipsSee All Sources

Encourage dancing in a room with plenty of open space, keeping an eye out for sharp corners or fragile objects that could get knocked around as your little one practices a new move.

Make sure your dance floor is clear of clutter to prevent unnecessary bumps and bruises.

Take steps to avoid slipping by having your tot wear shoes or take off her socks.

Don’t forget to take breaks to rest and rehydrate!

Should I enroll my baby or toddler in dance classes?

Toddler dance classes can be a great source of exercise and provide ample opportunity for socialization . For younger children, try to find a dance class that focuses on fun (think playing movement games vs. heavily emphasizing technique). Consider parent-and-child classes where you take part together.

These tips can help you find the right class:

Ask around for recommendations. Chat with parents in your area to see which dance classes they’ve enjoyed taking their kids to.

Vet potential options. Once you’ve narrowed down your list of classes, contact the studio and ask any questions you may have about each one, such as how involved parent participation is and what the policy is for missed and make-up sessions.

Schedule a visit. Ask to visit before you enroll. Make sure the space is clean, well-lit and large enough for kids to move around freely. Some facilities may even offer a trial class, which is a great option to see if the class and teacher are a good fit for your tot.

Gear up. While most toddler dance classes won’t require a specific dress code, you may need to invest in items like leotards and tights.

Should I be concerned if my child isn’t dancing by a certain age?

Most toddlers are dancing it up by the 18-month mark, but every child develops at her own pace. After all, some little ones don’t walk until around this age, so it’s natural that some may take longer to start dancing too.

If you’re concerned about the timing and nature of any developmental milestones, don’t hesitate to check in with your pediatrician for guidance.

In the meantime, keep pumping the jams and encouraging your tot to tear it up!