Introducing Beans to Your Baby

When can babies eat beans, and how should you safely prepare them for your little one? Here's everything parents need to know about introducing this protein-rich food to early eaters.

There’s no question that beans are packed with nutrition. But they can also be big time gas makers. So should you hold off on serving them to your baby?

Here’s when your new nosher can dig into lentils, black beans, chickpeas and more (and what you can do to keep stomach discomfort in check).

When can babies have beans?

Whether you're introducing solids in the form of purées or trying baby-led weaning (an approach that introduces solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods instead of spoon-feeding your baby purées), there’s no need to keep beans on the backburner. Your baby can hop on board with beans any time after starting solids , usually around 6 months.

Just be sure to introduce them slowly, starting with a mere 1 or 2 tablespoons, to keep the high fiber content from making her gassy or uncomfortable.

How to prepare beans for your baby

The naturally soft, squidgy texture of cooked beans works well for new eaters. But since very young babies likely won’t be able to pick whole beans up, you’ll have more success serving the beans mashed or smashed (either on another food like toast or a preloaded spoon), or incorporated into another dish (think hummus or meatballs ).

Once your baby has mastered her pincer grasp , she’ll have an easier time picking up whole beans, and you can encourage her to do so. The big exception is whole chickpeas: Their larger size and more spherical shape pose a potential choking hazard, so always mush or smash them before serving.

Also important: Most canned beans are high in sodium, which isn’t healthy for your baby. That doesn’t mean you have to spend hours cooking dried beans from scratch (though you certainly can, if you want to!). Just stick with low- or no-sodium canned beans whenever possible, and if you can’t find them, drain and rinse your beans extra well to get rid of as much salt as possible before serving.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve beans at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare beans for a 6-month-old

Preparing beans for a 6-month-old

Serve mashed beans on another food (once your child has been introduced to bread, whole grain toast strips are a good choice) or offer them on a preloaded spoon for your baby to pick up and try feeding herself.

How to prepare beans for a 9-months-old and up

Preparing beans for a 9-month-old

Once your baby can pick up individual beans, she may be able to eat them whole — just make sure they are cooked until very soft and can be mushed easily, or flatten them prior to serving. Continue to smash whole chickpeas through at least 18 months to reduce choking risk.

Bean recipes for babies and toddlers

Picking up plain, individual beans is good fine motor skill practice , but your mini muncher will have more flavor fun eating beans as part of a bigger dish. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood. Some easy ideas to try:

Homemade hummus. Combine cooked chickpeas, tahini, lemon juice, garlic and olive oil in a food processor and process until smooth. Don’t be afraid to get creative with add-ins like roasted red pepper, peeled roasted beet or a big handful of baby spinach. (Add them with the other ingredients before processing.)

Easy refried beans. Sauté cooked black or pinto beans with diced onion, chopped garlic, and cumin and chili powder to taste. Add a few tablespoons of water or low-sodium broth and mash to form a semi-smooth paste. Serve with tortillas, diced tomato and shredded cheese for deconstructed tacos.

Avocado-black bean toast. Top avocado toast with mashed black beans and a squeeze of lemon or lime juice.

Lentil meatballs. Swap some of the meat in your favorite meatball recipe for cooked, mashed lentils.

Sweet potato bean cakes. Combine mashed sweet potato, egg and breadcrumbs to form a patty-like texture. Fold in cooked black or white beans. Shape into mini patties or burgers and pan-fry or bake until golden.

Cheesy pizza beans. Sauté cooked white beans with low-sodium tomato sauce and finely diced carrot. Transfer mixture to an ovenproof dish, top with shredded mozzarella cheese and bake until bubbly.

Simple lentil stew. Sauté finely diced onion, carrot and celery until softened. Add dried lentils, canned crushed tomato and low-sodium vegetable broth or water and simmer until lentils are softened. Purée soup to give it a thick, stew-like texture that your baby can eat from a preloaded spoon or your toddler can try scooping up herself.

What are the benefits of beans for babies and toddlers?

Beans serve up plenty of complex carbohydrates, which are one of the best sources of fuel for your baby or toddler’s brain. They’re packed with protein to support your little one’s rapid growth, too. Beans — especially chickpeas and black beans — are also good vegetarian sources of iron .

It’s also no secret that beans are also full of fiber. That’s a good thing, since the right amount of roughage can help combat constipation . But too much fiber, especially if your sweetie’s system isn’t used to it, can lead to gas and bloating. Starting off serving very small quantities — just 1 or 2 tablespoons — and upping the serving size gradually can help sidestep the problem.

Can babies be allergic to beans?

Allergies to legumes — the family of foods including peanuts, soy and beans — are common, but the vast majority are caused by peanuts or soy. Allergies to lentils and chickpeas aren’t all that common, so chances are, your little bean will be able to dig in without a problem. Allergies to beans like black beans, white beans or kidney beans are very rare.

All that said, it’s always a good idea to be aware of the signs of a possible allergy, especially when you’re serving a food for the first time. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are beans a choking hazard for babies?

Depending on their size and your baby's age, beans can be a choking hazard for babies and toddlers. Serve beans safely by offering them mashed as part of other foods for younger babies, and do not serve chickpeas in their whole form.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never offer food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

There are plenty of reasons to help your baby become a bean lover. Just start off serving them in small amounts to keep her tummy from getting overloaded. Before you know it, she’ll be saying, “More hummus, please!”