When Can My Toddler Start Climbing Stairs?

when can babies and toddlers learn how to go up and down stairs?

Teaching your child to walk up stairs and come down again may sound like asking for trouble — but it's actually one of the best ways to keep him safe.

As your baby graduates to toddlerhood, he goes from mastering life on the ground to exploring the word vertically — from crawling and cruising to walking and, yes, climbing stairs.

Your toddler’s ability to climb objects might make you understandably nervous, but there’s no need to squelch your little climber’s desire for upward mobility. Climbing is more than just a new way for him to experience life from new and exciting vantage points — it also promotes coordination, boosts confidence and fosters independence.

Childproofing your home by anchoring heavy furniture to the wall and installing baby gates is a must. But so is taking the time to teach your tot how to navigate stairs safely. While your parental instincts may tell you to whisk your tot away when he teeters towards a staircase, the truth is, schooling him in stair safety means he’ll know what to do if he encounters a set of steps when you’re not around. What better way to learn than under your watchful wing?

When can children climb stairs?

As with other developmental milestones, the exact age your little one starts to take an interest in stairs may vary. Be on the lookout for these stair climbing milestones.

By 12 months: If your baby is crawling or cruising, he’ll start to explore more of his environment, including any stairs he encounters. By his first birthday, your newly minted toddler may start to climb up the stairs on his hands and knees. Once he masters going up, it’s typically just a matter of weeks before he starts to climb back down — typically by scooting or sliding down.

By 18 months: Once your tot has started walking and is a bit more steady on his feet, he may be ready to walk up steps. At this age, he’ll be taking it one step at a time with two feet on each step — and also with the help of the railing (and probably holding your hand).

By 2 years: By his second birthday, your child should be able to walk up and down stairs on his own. He may still hold on to the railing at this age.

By 3 years: Around the 3-year mark, your toddler will be walking up the stairs just like adults do — alternating feet for each step. He'll likely still rely on a non-alternating step pattern when going down.

By 4 years: At this point, your preschooler has mastered the stairs — he can alternate feet for each step when going both up and down, and may not need to use the rail.

How do I keep my child safe on stairs?

While stairs can be a source of parental anxiety, there’s plenty you can do to ensure your toddler's safety. From installing baby gates to giving him time to practice under supervision, here’s how you can help.

Childproof your home

When babyproofing, block off any staircase by installing hardware-mounted safety gates at the top and bottom of the stairs. If you want to give your baby or younger toddler room to practice safely, leave the bottom three steps ungated.

What type of safety gate is best for your newbie climber? Look for ones that meet rigorous standards — the gates should be at least 22 inches high, with no more than 2 inches between any vertical bars and no spaces where little tootsies might gain a foothold (and climb up and over before you know it). It should also have no more than 2 inches between the bottom of the gate and the floor.

Look for a product that's certified and has a sticker on the frame or packaging from the Juvenile Products Manufacturer's Association (JPMA), which means the gate meets certain voluntary safety standards.

Maintain a clutter-free path

Keep the steps in your home free of potential tripping hazards like toys or shoes. While carpeting on the stairs can help improve footing and cut down on bumps and bruises, make sure it’s secured tightly to each step so it’s not a tripping hazard.

Start off slow

Give your munchkin a safe place to become a stair-master by letting him practice on the bottom three steps. To keep him even safer, show him how to hold onto the banister while climbing up and going down.

Since it’s easier for a tot to learn how to walk up stairs — walking down steps requires greater balance (especially for toddlers, who are typically top-heavy) — let him scoot down on his belly (feet first) for a while if he wants.

Practice on the stairs

Now that you’ve created a safe space, give him plenty of opportunities to practice walking up the stairs. Stick around within eye- or ear-shot — just in case he loses his footing and gives himself a scare.

No stairs at your house? Practice at Grandma’s or the library so your tot can get some stair-stepping experience.

Climb to the top

Once he’s mastered the three bottom steps, open the gate to let him try his hand (er, feet) at going all the way to the top. Repeat the rule about holding onto the rail and stay a step or two behind should he tumble.

Once he’s reached the top, let him come down. Stay a couple of steps in front of him in case he needs a spotter.

Keep baby gates in place

Once your toddler can walk up and down stairs independently, it’s still best to keep safety gates on the stairs. This is especially true if your little one is a night wanderer or has a tendency to run down the stairs when he gets excited (or hears your voice).

Give it time

Keep in mind, your tot won’t master this skill overnight. With a lot of practice (and equal amounts of patience), your child will be walking up and down stairs safely before you know it.