Introducing Strawberries to Your Baby

Ripe, juicy strawberries are sure to become one of your child's favorite foods. Here's when you can introduce strawberries to babies, plus how to safely prepare them for little eaters.

Chances are, your baby will break out a look of pure delight when she takes her first bite of a ripe, juicy strawberry. So when can you add these berries to the menu — and what are the best ways to serve strawberries for young eaters?

Here’s everything you need to know, including when serve strawberries, how to prep them for your baby’s age, plus what a rash after eating strawberries might mean (good news: it may not be an allergy).

When can babies have strawberries?

Strawberries are sweet, nutrient-packed and easy to prep, making them a great food to serve your new nosher early on. You can offer strawberries whenever your baby starts solids, usually around 6 months.

How to prepare strawberries for your baby

If you're going the spoon-feeding route, you can serve up strawberries in purée form by blending them until smooth.

Families following baby-led weaning (an approach that involves introducing solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods instead of purées) will need to prep strawberries as a finger food. Luckily, that's easy to do: For babies 6 months and up, ripe, juicy strawberries are soft enough that you can serve them raw. All you really need to do is hull them and slice into age-appropriate pieces. (Watch for underripe ones, though. Aside from not being all that tasty, their firm texture could pose a choking hazard.)

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve strawberries at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare strawberries for a 6-month-old

Preparing strawberries for a 6-month-old

Cut strawberries into sheet-like slices — they should be thin enough for your baby to gum but still big enough for her to palm. If the slices are very slippery, you can dust them with baby cereal to make them more grippable.

How to prepare strawberries for a 9-month-old

Preparing strawberries for a 9-month-old

Once your baby has a few teeth in, she can handle slightly smaller pieces of strawberry. Cut smaller berries into quarters or larger ones into eighths.

How to prepare strawberries for a 12-month-old

Preparing strawberries for a 12-month-old

Strawberries with a fork? It might seem odd to you, but small pieces of cut-up strawberry are ideal for helping your new toddler practice eating with a utensil.

How to prepare strawberries for an 18-month-old

Preparing strawberries for an 18-month-old

By 18 months, your mini muncher can probably handle whole strawberries as long as they’re small and very ripe. For bigger or firmer ones, cut them in half.

Strawberry recipes for babies and toddlers

They’re a yummy treat all by themselves, but there are plenty of ways to incorporate strawberries into meals or snacks. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Some tot-approved ideas to try:

Strawberry yogurt melts. Stir puréed strawberries into plain yogurt until combined. Spoon the mixture into a resealable bag and pipe bite-sized dots onto a parchment paper-lined baking sheet and freeze until solid.

Quick strawberry compote. Simmer quartered strawberries with a splash of orange juice until they reach a soft, jammy consistency. Stir into oatmeal or yogurt or spread on toast, pancakes or waffles.

Strawberry smoothie. Blend fresh or frozen strawberries with a banana plus milk or yogurt for a naturally sweet sipper.

Peanut butter and strawberry popsicles. Blend strawberries with peanut butter and milk, pour into popsicle molds and freeze.

Strawberries ‘n cream sandwich. Spread cream cheese on a slice of whole grain toast and slice toast in half. Place sliced strawberries on one half of the toast and top with the other half slice. Cut the sandwich into thirds or quarters to make it easier for your little one to hold.

Strawberry yogurt dip. Blend strawberries and plain yogurt to make a sweet, protein-packed dip for fresh fruit or toast strips.

Unsweetened strawberry applesauce. Simmer chopped strawberries with chopped peeled apples until soft and mash well.

What are the benefits of strawberries for babies and toddlers?

Strawberries are loaded with vitamin C to support your little one’s immune system. Vitamin C also plays a key role in the absorption of iron (a mineral babies and toddlers don’t always get enough of ), so consider pairing iron sources like meat or beans with a side of strawberries.

Like most fruits, strawberries are packed with fiber — so they can help keep your little one regular. The fact that they’re water-rich means they’ll help toddlers stay hydrated, too, which can be helpful if you’re always struggling to get her to sip.

Can babies be allergic to strawberries?

Notice a red rash or hive-like bumps around your little one’s mouth after she eats strawberries? There’s a chance it could be an allergic reaction, but more likely her skin is slightly irritated from the fruit’s acidity. The rash isn’t typically harmful, so you don’t need to steer clear of strawberries if your baby doesn’t seem bothered. But it’s worth discussing with your pediatrician, especially if it seems to make her itchy.

According to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), any food an be an allergen. As for actual strawberry allergies? They’re not common, especially in kids under 3. Rarely, raw strawberries can trigger oral allergy syndrome — a condition caused by cross-reaction in allergens found in both pollen and raw fruits and vegetables. But babies and toddlers typically aren’t affected.

All that said, it’s always a good idea to be on the lookout for signs of a possible allergic reaction. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, immediately or within an hour or two after eating, she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are strawberries a choking hazard for babies?

Whole or big chunks of strawberries are a choking hazard for young children. Make sure you're preparing them safely for your child by puréeing or cutting them into very fine strips for the earliest eaters, then chopping them into small, bite-sized pieces that are appropriate for your child's age.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never serve food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Juicy red strawberries are always a treat. So whether you serve them alone or as part of a bigger snack or meal, chances are, your growing gourmand will gobble up her first serving with gusto.