When Should Your Baby Get a Flu Shot? What to Know About the Influenza Vaccine

Copy and sourcing updates.

A baby lies in a crib with a red patch on the leg

Children should get the flu shot every season starting at 6 months old. Here's what else you need to know about flu vaccines in babies and toddlers.

Influenza (aka the flu ) is a seasonal illness caused by a respiratory virus and is spread mostly through sneezing, coughing, and even talking and breathing by people who have the infection. Less often, a person may also catch the flu by touching a surface that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, eyes, or nose.

Flu symptoms include fever, sore throat , coughs, runny or stuffy nose, headaches, chills, fatigue, and muscle aches. (Some of these signs are the same as those of COVID-19 in children . If your child has symptoms like these, ask your pediatrician if your little one should get tested for COVID-19.)

Flu complications can range from ear and sinus infections to pneumonia and even death — which is why a seasonal flu shot provides invaluable protection.

KEY TAKEAWAYS

The flu can be dangerous for young children, but giving your little one a seasonal flu shot every year can help lower the risk.

Yearly flu vaccination is recommended for children beginning at 6 months old. Some children may need two doses of the influenza vaccine if they're getting it for the first time.

It's critical to get the flu vaccine every year. That’s because the influenza virus is always changing, so immunity acquired one year may not protect against future influenza viruses.

When should my baby get a flu shot?

Yearly flu vaccination is recommended for children beginning at 6 months old. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsRecommendations for Prevention and Control of Influenza in Children, 2025-2026: Policy StatementSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsRecommendations for Prevention and Control of Influenza in Children, 2025-2026: Policy StatementSee All Sources

Children 6 months through 8 years of age who are getting the flu vaccine for the first time should receive two doses of influenza vaccine at least four weeks apart. After that, they should get one shot annually. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicFlu shot: Your best bet for avoiding influenzaSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicFlu shot: Your best bet for avoiding influenzaSee All Sources

Why do some children need to get two flu shots?

The first dose "primes" the immune system and the second dose provides immune protection.

If your child needs two doses, begin the process early enough to ensure that your little one is protected before the flu starts circulating in your community. Children who only get one dose but need two doses can have reduced or no protection from influenza.

Your pediatrician can tell you if you're still not sure whether your child needs two doses. After the initial double dose, children need just one annual dose of flu vaccine, ideally given before the end of October. Kids who are 9 years old or older only need one dose, regardless of vaccination history. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsRecommended Child and Adolescent Immunization Schedule for Ages 18 Years or YoungerSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsRecommended Child and Adolescent Immunization Schedule for Ages 18 Years or YoungerSee All Sources

When can children get the nasal spray flu vaccine?

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends either the flu shot or the nasal spray vaccine and says both are effective against the flu virus. But only children 2 years old and up can receive the nasal spray form of the flu vaccine, not toddlers and babies under 2.

The flu mutates every year, so a new shot protects against three or four strains that will most likely to be seen that year.

Gina Posner, M.D.

Why is it so important for children to get the flu shot every year?

Influenza is different from some other vaccine-preventable diseases because the viruses are always changing, meaning that immunity acquired one year may not protect against future influenza viruses . That's one reason a yearly vaccine is recommended. (The other is that immunity provided by the flu vaccine wanes over time.)

"The flu mutates every year, so they put out a new shot with protection against three or four strains that they think are most likely to be seen that year," explains Gina Posner , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician practicing at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California, and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. "The flu shot also only offers short-term immunity, so we have to get it yearly even if the shot is similar to the year before."

"My daughter has received her flu shot every year, and we also get our flu shots every year," says What to Expect Community parent bk50220. "She is in day care and my husband and I are teachers, so any extra protection we can get is good."

Are there situations when my child should not get the flu vaccine?

You should talk to your child's doctor before getting a flu vaccine if:

If your child has an allergy to eggs or any of the ingredients in the vaccine. It's important to tell your child's doctor about any severe allergies your little one may have, as most, but not all, types of flu vaccine contain a small amount of egg. Most of the time, children with egg allergies can get the flu shot with no problem, but check with your pediatrician just to be sure.

If your child has ever had Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS). GBS is a severe, paralyzing illness. Some people with a history of GBS should not be vaccinated.

If your child is not feeling well. If your child is under the weather, tell the doctor, as they may suggest waiting until your little one feels better before giving the flu shot.

And in case you're wondering, if your child is eligible for both a flu shot and a COVID-19 vaccination , it's perfectly safe to get them at the same time — and give your child protection against two serious viruses in one go.