Introducing Apples to Your Baby

When can babies start eating apples, and how should you prepare this fruit for baby-led weaning? Everything parents need to know about introducing apples to baby, plus the best apple recipes.

Wondering when you can introduce apples to the little apple of your eye? Though they’re packed with nutrients and have a sweet taste that appeals to babies and toddlers, this crunchy fruit can pose a choking hazard.

That means you’ll need some safe serving ideas, especially if you’re going the route of baby-led weaning — a practice where babies jump straight to finger foods as soon as solids are introduced — instead of offering purées.

Here are easy options to try, plus when it’s okay to put apples on the menu for young eaters.

When can babies have apples?

As long as they're prepared safely (more on that later), apples are fair game as soon as your mini muncher starts on solids, usually sometime around 6 months.

If you’re introducing apples à la baby-led weaning, you’ll want to wait until your baby is at least 6 months old. That’s the age when experts say babies may be capable of beginning self-feeding.

How to prepare apples for your baby

Apples need to either be steamed and puréed or roasted until they have a smoosh-able texture, or served raw in thin enough pieces that they won’t pose a choking hazard — think grated or very thinly sliced.

If you’re offering bigger pieces that are steamed or roasted, either peel them or, if the peel helps your baby get a better grip, watch her closely while she eats and take the peel off her tray or plate as soon as she’s finished with the flesh.

Large, raw apple pieces are a choking hazard for kids under 4 — so steer clear of snacks like apple wedges with peanut butter. Avoid handing your baby or toddler a whole apple, too.

As for apple juice? Experts like the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) say that juice is not appropriate for babies , who should be getting all of their nutrition from milk or formula, and then solid foods. After age 1, it's okay for your toddler to have up to 4 ounces of 100 percent fruit juice per day, but keep in mind that whole fruit is still a better choice and juice should be an occasional treat. The natural sugars in apple juice might also irritate your tot’s tummy .

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve apples at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills, or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare apples for a 6-month-old

preparing apples for a 6-month-old

Large wedges that have been steamed until very soft are easy for very new eaters to palm. Up for getting extra messy? Make your own unsweetened applesauce and spoon-feed it to your baby, offer it on a preloaded spoon or let her scoop it with her fingers.

How to prepare apples for a 9-month-old

preparing apples for a 9-month-old

Help your older baby hone her pincer grasp by serving little mounds of finely grated apple. Steamed wedges and unsweetened applesauce are still good, too!

How to prepare apples for a 12-month-old

preparing apples for a 12-month-old

Now that your newly minted toddler has more teeth, you can start offering very thin slices of raw or steamed apples. She can practice her spoon skills with unsweetened applesauce, too.

How to prepare apples for an 18-month-old

All of the above serving options remain great choices. Even though your kiddo may now feel like a big kid compared to the days when she first started solids, resist the urge to serve large raw apple pieces or whole apples until her fourth birthday.

Apple recipes for babies and toddlers

Apples might be a symbol of simplicity, but they definitely don’t have to be boring. There are plenty of fun ways to incorporate apples into your baby or toddler’s menu. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Apple pie wedges. Roast apple wedges with butter and cinnamon until softened and caramelized. (It really tastes like pie filling!)

Sweet apple yogurt. Stir unsweetened oatmeal into plain yogurt.

Apple nut butter toast. Spread a thin layer of almond or peanut butter on whole grain toast and top with a sprinkling of grated apple.

Fruity frittata. Add grated apple to frittatas for a sweet-savory flavor combo.

Apple mini muffins. Fold peeled and diced apple into your favorite whole grain mini muffin recipe.

Apple-potato pancakes. Add grated apple to potato latkes.

Apple pancake wedges. Dunk steamed small bits of apple in whole grain pancake batter and pan-fry until golden.

What are the benefits of apples for babies and toddlers?

Colds are a guaranteed part of baby- and toddlerhood, so an apple a day probably won’t keep the doctor away completely (sorry!).

Even so, apples are loaded with vitamin C for a healthy immune system along with antioxidants that support a healthy brain . Their fiber can help stave off constipation , too.

Can babies be allergic to apples?

Apples generally aren’t a common allergen. Rarely, raw ones can trigger oral allergy syndrome — a condition caused by cross-reaction in allergens found in both pollen and raw fruits and vegetables. But kids under 3 aren’t typically affected.

That said, any food can possibly be an allergen, so it’s always a good idea to be on the lookout for signs of a possible allergic reaction when you serve your child apples. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, within an hour or two after eating, she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Are apples a choking hazard for babies?

Raw apples are one of the top choking hazards for children under 4, so you'll want to make sure to prepare this fruit safely for your little one by steaming or roasting it until very soft, serving appropriately-sized pieces for your child's age and only offering raw apples if they are extremely thin, such as by grating them.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never serve food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Apples are a sweet treat your baby can enjoy as soon as she starts on solids. Just be safe about how you prepare and serve them, and hold off on offering any big, crunchy pieces until age 4.