When Will Your Baby Bump Show?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting, and new medical review

Pregnant belly shape

Can’t wait for your bump to pop — or wondering why it already has? Here’s the real deal on belly growth during pregnancy and why every bump is different.

Maybe you’re wondering when your tummy will finally look like it has a baby inside. Or perhaps you’re plagued by people insisting that you must be having twins (when you definitely aren’t). Or your belly just doesn’t look like the woman’s next to you in prenatal yoga , even though her due date is only a few days before yours.

It’s normal to have questions about your bump. Is it too big? Too small? Too wide? Too high? The truth is, while maternity models and movie moms all sport a similar basketball-under-the-shirt look, every bump is different.

Here’s when you might notice your belly start to pop, how you’ll grow throughout pregnancy, and why baby bumps aren’t one-size-fits-all.

Key Takeaways

Every bump is unique. When and how your belly starts to show depends on factors like your frame, core strength, age, and whether you’ve been pregnant before.

Belly size doesn’t equal baby size. A bigger or smaller bump doesn’t necessarily mean a bigger or smaller baby. Only your provider’s measurements and ultrasounds can reliably track your baby’s growth.

Your bump will change trimester by trimester. Most first-time moms notice a belly between 16 and 20 weeks, with steady growth in the second trimester and a major pop in the third trimester as baby gains weight quickly.

When will you start to show during pregnancy?

Eager as you might be to start showing off that bump, it can be hard to pinpoint exactly when it will appear. First-time moms often start to show sometime between 16 and 20 weeks, though for others, a bump might not be noticeable until later into the second trimester.

If you’ve been pregnant before , you may see signs earlier — even in the first trimester — since your abdominal muscles are more relaxed.

And sometimes what looks like an early bump is actually bloat from pregnancy hormones like progesterone, which slow digestion and cause gas. All of it’s normal.

“I’m a very petite person and always bloat a ton before a period,” says What to Expect Community mom lexieleese. “I feel like I’ve been bloated like period bloating but for a month and a half straight . . . I think this is more hormone related than the actual baby!”

What factors affect the size and shape of your pregnant belly?

Just as no two pregnancies are the same, no two bellies are exactly alike either. The size and shape of your bump can be influenced by:

Frame: If you’re smaller or more petite, your growing belly might be more noticeable earlier on.

Core strength: Toned abs can hold shape longer before a bump pops.

Weight gain: Overall gain affects belly size. The amount you should gain during pregnancy depends on your starting weight. If you’re concerned that you’re not on track, talk with your doctor.

Baby’s position: How your little one is lying inside affects outward shape.

Previous pregnancies: Most women’s ab muscles tend to be more relaxed after having their first baby. That can mean they tend to show earlier.

“My first pregnancy you couldn’t even tell I was pregnant until the month before I delivered,” says What to Expect Community mom gdiderri2. “And with each pregnancy I have had I start showing sooner and sooner. This is my fourth pregnancy, and I feel like I look massive. Every pregnancy is different.”

Why you shouldn’t compare bumps

You can’t judge a baby by its cover. A belly that looks small or large usually reflects your body shape, bone structure, and muscle tone — not baby size.

So, while you might not be able to resist checking out other bumps, try not to let someone else’s shape or size affect how you feel about your own belly. The only assessments that matter come from your provider.

“I am chubby and had to accept that I’m not going to have that cute perfect round belly,” says What to Expect Community mom Risingmoon83. “But my body is just as strong and just as worthy to be pregnant! And I refuse to let anything steal my joy.”

What is fundal height and what does it tell you about your baby?

Starting around 20 weeks, your provider will measure your fundal height — the distance from your pubic bone to the top of your uterus — to check that your baby’s growth is on track.

They may also palpate your abdomen to feel your baby’s size and position, or they may order ultrasounds for more detail. Your doctor can also assess the amount of amniotic fluid in your uterus and whether you have too much or too little (which can indicate a concern).

What might your belly look like in different trimesters?

Everyone’s timeline is a little different, and again, your belly probably won’t look exactly the same as another mom-to-be’s, even if you share the same due date ! That said, you can certainly count on your bump becoming rounder and more pronounced as your pregnancy progresses and your baby gets bigger. Here’s what that might look like:

First trimester pregnant belly size

You may not feel quite like your pre-pregnancy self during your first trimester . But as far as your belly goes, it will probably look a lot like it did before you got that positive test result. At 3 weeks pregnant , your baby is only the size of a vanilla seed!

But she won’t stay that tiny for long. By the end of your first trimester, at week 13, your baby will have grown to about the size of a lemon — weighing roughly 3 ounces. Still, at this point, your belly might look less like a bump and more like you went back for seconds at dinner.

Again, keep in mind that every woman is different. You might look noticeably pregnant by the end of the first trimester, or you may still have no sign of a bump. Both are normal.

Second trimester pregnant belly size

Size-wise, things are probably starting to take off now. (So have the maternity clothes ready!) Even though it’s not yet super prominent, by week 14 you might be able to feel the top of your uterus between the top of your pelvic bone and your lower abdomen.(As your pregnancy progresses, the top of your uterus will rise upward toward your belly button and then all the way up to your rib cage.)

Around week 20 , your enlarging uterus will have swollen enough to push your abdomen forward, likely giving you a little bump. If you normally have an innie belly button , you might notice it starts to pop out around the same time as the rest of your tummy. (It should go back to its old shape — albeit a little stretchier — after you give birth.)

All those changes to the look and shape of your belly are signs that your baby is growing by leaps and bounds. At week 14 she’s about the size of a navel orange, but by the end of the second trimester at week 27 , she’s reached the size of a cabbage and weighs around 2 pounds.

“I’m 22w with our second and I’ve only really just popped, started showing around 17/18 w but it’s obvious now,” says What to Expect Community mom kayleighwithbaby.

Third trimester pregnant belly size

This is when your belly really blossoms. Early in the third trimester, you may no longer see your feet when standing. Around 34 to 35 weeks, your baby is roughly as big as a 5-pound bag of flower, and your belly is continuing to expand.

You may feel like you can’t grow any bigger, but chances are you will! Most babies gain another 1 to several pounds between 35 and 40 weeks, and your belly will likely show it.

Can the shape of your pregnant belly predict your baby’s sex?

Has a well-meaning relative (or stranger in the supermarket) insisted they’ve got the inside scoop about your baby’s sex just by looking at your bump? Some people claim that moms of girls have lower, wider bellies while moms of boys have higher, rounder bellies. However fun it is to guess, this is just an old wives’ tale.

Ultimately, any gender prediction method has a 50/50 chance of being right. The only way to know your baby’s sex for certain is through genetic testing — or meeting your baby on delivery day.

Your growing belly is as unique as your pregnancy. One day soon, that bump you’re watching so closely will be the place where your little one kicks hello — and eventually, the place where you’ll hold her in your arms.