How to Spot Fake Baby Products

fake baby products

Here's how to know when you can compromise on price without compromising on safety.

When building a baby registry , it's so easy to get overwhelmed by the products, brands, choices and — maybe most of all — the cost. If one bouncer is $200 and another is $60, what's the big difference? Sometimes it's nothing but the name. (A Fisher-Price bouncer can be just as safe and functional as the $200 BabyBjörn one!) Other times, it's less clear. Is a $65 BabyBjörn knockoff you found on Amazon from a third-party retailer you don’t recognize just as safe as the real thing?

If you're tempted to go for the affordable dupe, you're not alone. More than half (51 percent) of women who are pregnant or have at a child up to 5 years old own or plan to buy knockoff baby products, a What to Expect poll of 403 respondents found. Trusted SourceEveryday Health Group Pregnancy & ParentingTalk to Moms Monthly PollSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceEveryday Health Group Pregnancy & ParentingTalk to Moms Monthly PollSee All Sources

The problem, however, is when parents unknowingly purchase non-compliant and counterfeit items from popular online retailers. Since the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) does not regulate these products, they come with serious safety risks. Here's how you can recognize and avoid fake baby products, according to experts.

How to recognize fake or unsafe baby products

Different types of fake baby products exist, explains Lisa Trofe, the executive director of the Juvenile Products Manufacturers Association (JPMA).

Counterfeit products are intentionally marketed and sold under legitimate brand names. Bad actors will make their counterfeit products look and operate like the original.

Non-compliant products could be counterfeit or legitimate. Regardless, they haven't undergone safety testing.

"It is not safe to knowingly purchase or use a counterfeit or non-compliant product," Trope says. "The cost may be lower, but it is not worth the risk of putting your baby in harm's way, especially if the product is lacking in quality materials and components."

Companies that invest in better materials often have robust research and development and quality control to ensure that their products are safe. The brands that choose to pay less attention to quality may produce items that aren't safe for children.

"Dupe" or "knockoff" can mean very different things. Some dupes are counterfeit products that do not undergo testing or safety requirements. (Think: a third-party Amazon listing for a "4 in 1 baby car seat and stroller" that wants you to think it's a Doona). Alternatively, other dupes come from legitimate retailers; they have similar features to the original with legitimate safety testing, but sell for a lower price (e.g., the Target diapers dubbed a Coterie dupe ).

51 percent of women who are pregnant or have at least one child up to 5 years old own or plan to buy knockoff baby products

In order to ensure you're buying a safe baby product, Trope recommends the following.

Look for valid certifications

Check for product descriptions that have labels or certifications such as "meets Consumer Product Safety Commision (CPSC) safety requirements" or "JPMA Certified." (You can also find JPMA-certified products directly using the organization's online database.) Trusted SourceJuvenile Products Manufacturers AssociationJuvenile Products Manufacturer Association Certification DirectorySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceJuvenile Products Manufacturers AssociationJuvenile Products Manufacturer Association Certification DirectorySee All Sources

"Products that are missing these labels are often made of cheaper and flimsier materials, and they are unable to protect your child," explains Julia Lentini, director of quality and compliance at Mockingbird, a popular stroller brand. "This can be hard for parents to recognize when purchasing online."

Professional organizations like the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) also maintain lists of legimate products .

Check for warning labels, a registration card and user manual

Beyond certifications, keep an eye out for additional important safety information.

"Look out for products that are missing warning labels," Lentini says. "Additionally, all of the products sold in the U.S. must have an attached registration card and printed user instruction manual, so if a [branded] product arrives without either of these, it may be a counterfeit."

Read the fine print

Check the seller's return policy and the manufacturer's warranties on the product. It's a red flag if a seller does not have a return policy (or the product is on final sale), makes it difficult to process returns or omits key information.

Review customer support information

Legitimate brands and sellers will have accurate contact information on their websites and social media platforms. Ensure the seller provides a physical address, email and phone number for customer support.

You should have enough info to reach out to the brand if you have any questions about how to use an item or concerns about a broken or altered product. Avoid sellers who only offer generic email addresses or do not respond promptly to inquiries.

What to do before you buy a baby product

Recognizing and avoiding unsafe baby products is crucial to ensure the well-being of your child.

"There are an increasing number of products in the market available from online retailers today that don’t meet any safety standards," Lentini says. Here's what to do before adding something to your cart:

Research reviews

Look for genuine customer reviews from multiple sources, including websites, social media and parenting forums. Be wary of products with only positive reviews or an unusually high number of reviews in a short period, as this can signal that they're fake.

Verify prices

Check the product's price against other outlets. "If the price is significantly lower on an ecommerce platform than it is in a brick-and-mortar store or other purchasing platform, steer clear," Trofe says.

A price that seems too good to be true can indicate a counterfeit or low-quality item. Popular platforms like Amazon, Walmart and eBay have experienced an influx of cheap counterfeit products by third party sellers.

See if the product has been recalled

If you are considering buying or using a secondhand children's product, do a quick search on the Consumer Product Safety Commission's website to see if it's been recalled. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionRecall DirectorySee All Sources [3] This also applies when you've saved hand-me-downs from a previous baby for future siblings.

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionRecall DirectorySee All Sources

Buy products directly from the brand website

The best way to guarantee you are buying a certified product is to go straight to the source, explains Trope. Sites that host third-party retailers, like Amazon or Walmart, will tell you if the product is sold directly from the manufacturer.

When in doubt, read the website and look for clear product descriptions. Skip refurbished products not in the original packaging. Numerous grammatical errors or text that seems to come from other websites can also be red flags.

When possible, avoid resale sites like Facebook Marketplace. Person-to-person sales can skip important safety checks — you could end up buying a damaged or expired car seat , for example — and enable scams. (If you'd like to buy safe and sustainable used baby gear, check out verified resale sites like GoodBuy Gear .)

Avoid international marketplaces like Wish, AliExpress, and Temu (amongst others) too. Customers frequently receive items that look different than they did on the website or of lower quality than they expected.

Is it ever safe to buy a dupe or knockoff baby product?

Parents should think twice about buying counterfeit or knockoffs when it comes to items such as strollers or car seats. Though these big-ticket items can cost more, their safety is incredibly important. There are other ways to save money, such as looking for brand deals, taking advantage of price-match guarantees or getting used (but still safe) gear .

As for more seemingly safe dupes, such as clothing, some reports have found they contain excess lead levels. Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionBentex Recalls Children's Clothing Sets Due to Violation of the Federal Lead Paint and Lead Content Ban; Lead Poisoning HazardSee All Sources [4] Instead, stick with generic store brands from affordable retailers like Target or Walmart, or ask friends for hand-me-downs. It's typically safe to accept pre-used and cleaned clothes or toys from a trusted family member or neighbor. Follow your instincts when shopping, and seek out budget-friendly options from reputable stores that won't compromise safety.

Trusted SourceConsumer Product Safety CommissionBentex Recalls Children's Clothing Sets Due to Violation of the Federal Lead Paint and Lead Content Ban; Lead Poisoning HazardSee All Sources

When in doubt, consult with fellow parents, read reviews and do your research to make informed decisions. If you look a little closer at that $65 Baby Bjorn bouncer knockoff, you'll see why. As one reviewer succinctly wrote, "I don't think it's safe for a baby."