When Do Babies Roll Over?

Updates throughout to expert sources, text, guidelines and formatting.

rolling over

Rolling over is a big milestone for your baby. Learn more about when babies roll over, how it happens, and how to keep your little one safe.

When your baby rolls over for the first time, it usually comes as a surprise for both your little one and her parents. But rolling from tummy to back may soon turn into one of your little one's favorite tricks.

With growing strength in baby's arms, back and neck, your child is beginning to discover new ways of moving her body — rolling included.

“Rolling over is a gross motor skill that is necessary for baby to build core strength, head control and weight shifting,” says Dr. Lauren Crosby , a pediatrician at La Peer Pediatrics in Beverly Hills, California, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

Be sure to keep her safe on the changing table and in other places where all those exciting new moves that accompany this milestone could result in a fall or other hazard.

When do babies roll over?

Babies often start rolling over when they're around 4 months old (though it varies), and most babies can roll in both directions by 6 months. Before your baby rolls over, she may start to roll or rock to one side in preparation for rolling onto her tummy or back.

Some newborns will actually roll onto one side to sleep during those early days after birth, but most babies seem to lose the ability to roll onto their sides independently within the first month.

“Babies have what’s called the "archer reflex": If they turn their head to the left, their left arm will go out, and that prevents them from rolling over,” says Dr. Tina Feeley , a pediatrician at Chestnut Hill Pediatrics in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . “When that reflex goes away, that’s often when they start officially start to roll over.”

Here's when to expect baby's various ways of rolling over:

Rolling from tummy to back: By about 4 months of age , a ccording to the American Academy of Pediatrics, Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsMovement Milestones: 4 to 7 MonthsSee All Sources [1] your little one will have developed sufficient upper body strength and muscle to propel herself up and over from the belly-down position to her back. In fact, it's usually an unintended result of one of baby's mini push-ups during tummy time . Your baby may even demonstrate this ability as early as 3 months .

Rolling all the way over: Though many 4-month-olds get pretty adept at rolling over, by 6 months , Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Baby By Six MonthsSee All Sources [2] most babies have mastered not only the stomach-to-back roll but also the reverse back-to-stomach maneuver.

How to help your baby roll over

Making sure your baby gets plenty of tummy time helps her build the strength in her back, neck and arms that she'll need for the big push to roll over (a major step in baby development).

You'll want to start tummy time as early as the first week. Put your infant face-down and play or interact with her for three to five minutes a few times a day during alert wakeful periods, the AAP advises .

with her for three to five minutes a few times a day during alert wakeful periods, the AAP advises .

As baby's first month progresses, help your little explorer work her way up to 15 to 20 minutes on her tummy every day (always under your watchful eye).

If your baby's really indignant about being on her belly, start with shorter sessions of tummy time — one to five minutes will do the trick — and build gradually to longer tummy-play sessions. Even if your baby doesn't like tummy time, you should keep doing it so she can learn to roll over, says Feeley.

so she can learn to roll over, says Feeley.

An activity mat with tantalizing toys is great motivation for your baby to learn to roll over. Try placing some "belly bait" nearby so she can reach for it, which will help your little one build arm strength and muscle, and may also result in a side roll. (Halfway there!)

Another way to keep her engaged: “Face the baby to entertain and encourage them, or have a sibling join in,” suggests Crosby.

Show your sweetie how it’s done by gently rolling your baby from side to side and then onto her back. Or get down on the floor with your little one to do a few rolling maneuvers yourself.

What should you do if baby rolls over in her sleep?

Once your baby starts rolling from tummy to back and back to tummy, she may start rolling over in her crib at night too. It’s not cause for concern, but you should continue to put your baby to sleep on her back , even if she doesn't stay in that position all night.

Because your little one has developed the strength and mobility to roll onto her stomach, she's also developed the ability to sense trouble when she's sleeping — which means she's far less likely to become trapped in a position where her breathing is compromised.

After 6 months, she's also past the high-risk stage for SIDS , which peaks when baby is between 2 and 4 months before tapering off, , according to the National Institutes of Health .

, according to the National Institutes of Health .

If you're really worried about your baby rolling over to sleep on her stomach, you might try placing your little one down in her crib on her back or side with one of her arms extended. That way, if she rolls, it’s more likely to be onto the side with her arm out in front of her chest — and then she’ll be slightly less likely to flip fully onto her tummy.

Remember, too, that all babies hit developmental milestones like rolling over at their own pace. It may take months of tummy time before your baby gets the hang of pushing up on her forearms and rolling onto her back, and weeks more before she figures out how to tuck her arm under her body or over her head to roll back onto her stomach.

Just give her plenty of opportunities to practice, preferably on a blanket or a mat that will cushion the occasional (and, sadly, inevitable) head-bonk on the floor. And be sure to offer lots of praise, cheering and encouragement when your little one finally does her first flip.

What milestones are next after baby rolls over?

Once baby gets the hang of rolling over and her neck muscles are strong enough to lift her head , both important motor development skills, she'll soon be sitting up — first with a hand from you, then unassisted.

“Rolling over is that first gross motor skill that then helps baby achieve their next milestone,” says Feeley.

From there, she may start crawling , and later master standing up. After that, she'll be ready to take her first steps and start walking on her own two feet.

As always, check in with your pediatrician if you're at all concerned about the timing and nature of any baby milestones. And don't forget to enjoy the ride! This first year of baby rolls, smiles, coos and steps is one of the most fun.