When Do Babies Start Playing With Toys?

when do babies start playing with toys?

Your baby will graduate from rattles to stacking toys during the first 12 months, but there’s one thing that will never change: His favorite toy will always be the box.

During his first few months of life, the only toy your baby really needs is you. But before long, your little one will start to become curious about the world around him — and then, everything becomes a toy.

Here's what caregivers need to know about introducing toys to babies, including some of the best playtime options during the first 12 months.

When do babies start playing with toys?

Although younger infants can interact with age-appropriate playthings, such as by shaking a rattle, it isn’t until after 6 months that babies really start to play with toys in the more conventional sense of the word — knocking over blocks, rolling a ball or snuggling with a teddy bear, for example.

By 9 months, your baby may have favorite toys and can interact with them by moving items from one hand to another or searching for a toy he sees you hide.

Here are the different stages you'll notice as your baby starts to engage more with toys, as well as the different types of playthings that will keep him entertained from the newborn months to toddlerhood.

Birth to 2 months old

Newborns can only see objects that are 8- to 12-inches away at this age, so one of the most interesting things your baby looks at will be your smiling face as you hold him. In the newborn stage, playtime and quality time are one in the same, and your baby gets all the entertainment he needs as you hold, touch and talk to him .

Babies also learn about the world through their senses — touch, sight, hearing — so some of the best toys for a 1-month-old might include playthings with contrasting colors, soft sounds and different textures. Think mobiles in bold patterns, playmats with hanging toys to gaze at and multi-textured rattles.

You can play with your newborn by lightly shaking a rattle near him to see if he looks for the sound. Or hold a brightly colored toy 8 to 10 inches away from his face and let your newborn follow it with his eyes. Another great (supervised) game: Place baby on his stomach for tummy time , which will help build up those tiny muscles in his arms and legs.

2 to 4 months old

Your baby will still enjoy many of the same toys he did as a newborn, so that mobile and the playmat with bright contrasting colors will continue to hold their appeal. But by the time he reaches the 4-month mark, he’ll likely enjoy holding and shaking toys like a rattle, as well as swinging at dangling toys from his playmat (as opposed to just staring at them).

Other toys he'll love around this age include soft, multi-textured rattles; cloth or board books ; and unbreakable, baby-friendly mirrors . He won’t know that he’s gazing at his own reflection, but he’ll smile at it anyway.

Another way to play with your baby at this stage: Have him shake the rattle (with your help). That will begin to teach him cause and effect — he moves the rattle and it makes a noise. Pretty soon, he’ll be shaking it on his own.

4 to 6 months old

Your baby now has more control of his head, hands and legs. He’s able to roll over , push himself onto his arms and even kick at an object. Compared to newborns, 4- to 6-month-olds also have better hand-eye coordination; by month 6, he'll likely be able to pass toys from hand to hand.

Activity mats will still appeal to 4- and 5-month-olds, but you can also introduce multi-textured books and toys that make sounds when your baby presses, squeezes or shakes them. He’ll especially love playthings that are easy for him to grasp and hold onto (plus, they’re easier for him to maneuver into his mouth) like sturdy board books, soft balls and teething toys .

He’ll also get a kick out of stuffed animals (and might even pick one to be his constant companion), an activity center or a busy box with levers and sounds, which will help teach cause and effect (“I do this, the toy does that!”) and give him a newfound sense of independence. Simply show him what to do and watch him go.

A heads up: This is the time when babies are doing lots of exploring with their mouths , so you’ll want to keep choking hazards like tiny toys, marbles, magnets or any other small objects out of his reach.

6 to 12 months old

Your growing baby will check off some major milestones during the second half of his first year. Between 6 and 12 months, he’ll master sitting up , stand up on his own, cruise (walk while holding on to furniture) and maybe even take his first steps — all of which gives your baby a brand-new perspective on his toys (and how he plays with them).

He’ll also start to understand object permanence , the concept that when something disappears from his line of vision, it’s not gone for good. And he'll graduate from raking a toy towards him with his palm to picking objects up with his thumb and forefinger (known as the pincer grasp ).

You can offer your 6- to 12-month-old anything that’s safe for him to explore, even if it’s not technically a “toy.” This is the age when babies may start playing more independently , although your little one might need to follow your lead at first (“This is how you roll a cup.”) Good options include toys that play music when your baby pushes or presses a button, as well as cars or balls that will encourage him to crawl after them.

Particularly good for 7- and 8-month-olds are standing toys like activity tables and stacking rings that your baby can push and balance upright.

As your baby gets older, you can introduce toys that encourage problem-solving: Some of the best toys for 9-month-olds include shape sorters, and for 10- to 12-month-olds, simple puzzles, stacking toys and puppets.

Of course, some old favorites from the earlier months will continue to delight your baby, including stuffed animals and board books. And don’t forget that items around the house can also be repurposed into toys: Measuring cups, wooden spoons and plastic containers are always a hit.

Some of your child's 12-month favorites will entertain him well into his second year, especially the push- and pull-toys that he can use to fine-tune his walking skills. Now is also the time to invest in toys that will be good for pretend play , like toy strollers, shopping carts and play food.