When Can Babies Have Fruit Juice?

when can babies have juice?

Is it okay to give your baby or toddler fruit juice? Here’s what experts recommend.

Now that your baby has tried a few types of whole fruit, is it okay to offer some fruit juice? Hold that carton.

While 100 percent fruit juice can be part of a healthy diet, it’s not the best choice for tots under 1. And even after your little one’s first birthday, it’s worth serving the sipper in moderation. Here’s what experts recommend when it comes to offering juice to toddlers.

When can babies have fruit juice?

Juice isn’t appropriate for babies under 1, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). While a fruity drink might seem wholesome, fruit juices are often loaded with sugar. Not to mention, fruit juice — even 100 percent fruit juice — is not as nutritious as whole fruit, and juice can displace the calories your cutie should be getting from milk and solid foods.

When your little eater turns 1 and officially becomes a toddler, small amounts of juice are okay in moderation. But you should only offer 100 percent fruit juice and limit the sipper to an occasional treat.

In other words? A splash of juice is okay, but the less you offer it, the better.

How much fruit juice can toddlers and children drink?

When serving fruit juice to children, experts now recommend the following:

1 to 3 year olds: No more than 4 ounces a day (that's a little more than half of a standard-sized juice box).

4 to 5 year olds: No more than 4 to 6 ounces a day.

A heavy juice habit can up your toddler’s risk for tooth decay. It can also train her tastebuds to prefer ultra sweet flavors — making less-sweet foods like fresh fruit less appealing.

What is the best type of fruit juice for toddlers?

Provided you’re sticking with the recommended serving amount of fewer than 4 ounces per day, your tot can enjoy some 100 percent fruit juice. You can also add a splash to sweeten up plain yogurt, oatmeal, homemade smoothies or homemade popsicles in place of sweeteners like sugar or honey.

Little kids love sweet flavors, so chances are you won’t have to work hard to get your sweetie to drain her glass (and likely, ask for more). That said, it’s worth setting up some ground rules about how you serve juice to ensure your toddler is sipping the right stuff — and isn’t taking in too much.

Stick with 100 percent fruit juice. Check the nutrition label to confirm that a sipper contains only fruit juices and is free of added sweeteners. Steer clear of juice drinks made with just a small percentage of fruit juice — including ones enriched with vitamins.

Only offer pasteurized juice. Non-pasteurized or raw fruit juices can contain harmful bacteria that could make your child sick.

Don’t let your tot walk around with her juice cup or box, and don’t offer juice at bedtime. Sipping small amounts for long periods keeps your cutie’s teeth coated in sugar, which can up the risk for tooth decay. Instead, offer juice as part of a meal or snack and remove the cup when she’s finished eating.

Dilute juice with water. Offering half juice/half water is an easy way to keep your toddler’s juice consumption in check and prevent her from getting used to ultra sweet flavors. If already prefers undiluted juice, gradually up the amount of water you add in to give her time to adjust to the reduced sweetness.

Mix it up. Toddlers tend to love apple juice, but too much can be tough on her tummy and potentially trigger diarrhea. Try exposing her to different flavors like orange, papaya, pineapple or white grape.

What are the benefits of fruit juice for toddlers?

It’s worth pointing out that fruit juice doesn’t offer any nutritional benefits over whole fruit, which contains fiber and other nutrients that juice doesn’t have. So if your toddler eats fresh fruit or vegetables and isn’t asking for juice, there’s no reason to start offering it.

That said, 100 percent juice can deliver some extra nutrients to picky eaters who turn their noses up at fresh fruit. Most 100 percent fruit juices serve up vitamin C, and some also offer potassium, folate, magnesium and iron. Fortified juices like orange juice can also be a source of bone-building calcium and vitamin D.

Also good to know: 100 percent fruit juice can be a good option to help your toddler stay hydrated when she’s sick, especially if she’s vomiting. If she can’t stomach the idea of plain water or rehydrating solution like Pedialyte, try offering half water/half juice and encouraging her to take small, frequent sips.

Your pediatrician might also recommend a small amount of juice for your child if she is having a bout of constipation. The sugars in some fruit juices draw fluid into the intestines to help make it easier for little ones to go to the bathroom.

Can toddlers be allergic to juice?

If your child is allergic to a particular fruit, she might also be allergic to juices made from that fruit.

It's always a good idea to know the signs of a possible allergic reaction. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Juice can have a healthy place in your toddler’s diet, provided you stick with 100 percent fruit juice, keep serving sizes in check and don’t offer it carte blanche. Try to water it down — it’ll cut the sugar, but chances are your sweet sipper will still love the flavor.