Introducing Zucchini to Your Baby

When can babies eat zucchini, and how should you safely prepare it for early eaters? Here's everything parents need to know.

Squash purées are par for the course when it comes to spoon-feeding solids. But if you’re doing baby-led weaning or starting to encourage more self-feeding and finger foods, when should you add zucchini to the mix? Here’s the scoop on serving the green squash as a finger food, plus easy ideas for giving zucchini some zip.

When can babies have zucchini?

Naturally soft and a little, well, smooshy, zucchini is an ideal early veggie for babies. Your cutie can take her first bite (er, gum) whenever she starts solids . That's usually around 6 months.

If you're following a baby-led weaning approach (which involves introducing solids in the form of soft, gummable finger foods instead of spoon-feeding purées), you'll want to wait until at least the 6-month mark. By this age, your child is more likely to have developed the capacity to self-feed.

How to prepare zucchini for your baby

Cooked zucchini is the best choice for babies and young toddlers, since raw squash is too hard to gum or chew. You can steam, roast, sauté or bake the versatile veggie — no peeling needed! — just make sure it's soft enough for you to squish between your fingers.

Stick with larger, thicker slices for younger eaters. As your baby gets more experienced (and her fine motor skills grow stronger ) you can start cutting zucchini into very small pieces and mixing it into other dishes.

The tips below can help parents determine how to serve zucchini at different stages, but keep in mind that all babies develop at their own pace. Speak with your pediatrician before beginning baby-led weaning, and talk to him or her if you have any concerns about your child's oral-motor skills, chewing skills, swallowing skills or if you're unsure whether or not your baby is ready for certain food preparations.

How to prepare zucchini for a 6-month-old

Preparing zucchini for a 6-month-old

Slice zucchini into thick spears, about the size of two adult fingers. Cook until soft, adding seasonings like herbs, spices or fresh lemon juice, if you’d like, and let your baby palm and gum at the pieces.

How to prepare zucchini for a 9-month-old

Preparing zucchini for a 9-month-old

With her pincer grasp emerging , your older baby is ready to practice picking up pea-sized pieces of diced zucchini with her index finger and thumb.

How to prepare zucchini for 12 months old and older

Preparing zucchini for a 12-month-old

Your newly minted toddler can try picking up small pieces of diced zucchini (no bigger than half an inch in any direction) with her fork.

Zucchini recipes for babies and toddlers

Zucchini’s ultra mild flavor can definitely benefit from some zhuzh-ing up. Happily, there are plenty of easy, delicious ways to dress up zucchini and work it into other tot-friendly dishes. Just remember to always introduce one food at a time, especially top allergens like eggs, peanuts, soy, wheat, dairy and seafood.

Cheesy zucchini fries. Brush zucchini strips with olive oil and roll in a mixture of panko breadcrumbs and Parmesan cheese. Bake until soft and golden.

Zucchini pancakes. Grate zucchini and squeeze out as much of the water as possible. Fold into your favorite whole grain pancake batter recipe.

Herby zucchini fritters. Grate zucchini and squeeze out as much of the water as possible. Combine with beaten egg, flour or breadcrumbs, shredded cheese and chopped fresh herbs so the mixture holds together. Form small patties and bake or pan-fry until golden.

Zucchini frittata. Add diced cooked or raw grated zucchini to your favorite frittata recipe and bake until golden and puffed.

Zucchini pizzas. Slice long strips of zucchini lengthwise and roast until softened. Top with a thin layer of tomato sauce and shredded mozzarella cheese and broil until bubbly.

Zucchini hummus. Add raw zucchini (unpeeled is fine) to your favorite hummus recipe, processing until smooth.

Zucchini meatballs. Grate zucchini and squeeze out as much of the water as possible. Fold into your favorite beef or turkey meatball recipe.

Pesto zucchini noodles. Toss steamed spiralized zucchini “noodles” with pesto. Cut the noodles into small pieces for your older baby or toddler to pick up with her fingers or a fork.

What are the benefits of zucchini for babies and toddlers?

Like most fruits and veggies, the green summer squash is a good source of vitamin C, which supports your sweetie’s immune health and helps her body absorb iron.

That’s not all zucchini has to offer. It’s also rich in vitamin B6, which plays a critical role in immune function and brain development during infancy. And it contains plenty of potassium, a mineral that plays a key role in building strong, healthy muscle tissue and supporting healthy nerve and brain function.

Can babies be allergic to zucchini?

Any food can be an allergen, but in this case, the chances of a reaction are low. Raw zucchini has the potential to trigger oral allergy syndrome — a condition caused by cross-reaction in allergens found in both pollen and raw fruits and vegetables. But kids under 3 aren’t typically affected. Not to mention, cooked zucchini is the best choice for babies and toddlers.

All that said, it’s still a good idea to know the signs of a possible allergic reaction, especially when you’re serving a food for the first time. Your baby or toddler might have a food allergy if, soon after eating (within minutes to a few hours), she experiences:

Hives

Itching

Skin, lip or tongue swelling

Sneezing

Wheezing

Throat tightness or trouble swallowing

Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain or diarrhea

Trouble breathing

Call your doctor right away if your child experiences symptoms of an allergic reaction. An allergic reaction may be more severe or possibly life-threatening (called anaphylaxis) if multiple areas of the body are affected. In the rare event that your child shows signs of a life-threatening allergic reaction like trouble breathing or swallowing, call 911 right away.

Is zucchini a choking hazard for babies?

Chunks of raw vegetables are a top choking hazard for children under 4. Prepare zucchini for your baby or toddler by always cooking it until it's very soft and can be squished between your fingers, and cut it up into small, age-appropriate pieces.

Make sure, too, to always supervise your young child when she's eating, sit her upright during mealtimes and never serve food while she's reclining, walking, sitting in a car seat or playing.

Zucchini makes for a fantastic early finger food all on its own, and its mild flavor is a good fit for adding to all kinds of other dishes later on. So go ahead — say yes to summer squash!