Introducing Cow's Milk

toddler drinking milk

Confused about what kind of milk — and how much of it — your growing toddler needs? Here’s when your baby can officially start drinking cow's milk, how to make the transition from formula or breast milk, and how much to serve.

Now that your child has turned 1 — hooray! — he’s ready to make the big switch from formula or breast milk (if you choose to stop breastfeeding) to cow’s milk. But with so many different milks — and milk alternatives — on the market, the big question is, what kind should you choose?

Read on to learn which — and how much — milk your toddler should drink.

When can babies start drinking cow's milk?

Twelve months is the legal drinking age — for cow’s milk, that is. Once your child is 1 year old, you can start offering him whole (or in some cases, reduced fat) milk to drink .

Babies who are younger than 1 year old shouldn’t drink cow’s milk because their digestive systems are too sensitive to handle large amounts of the proteins in moo juice. Unlike breast milk or formula, cow's milk also doesn't have all the nutrients (such as vitamin E and zinc) infants need to grow and develop during their first year.

In May 2022, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) updated their guidance on navigating the baby formula shortage to say that whole cow's milk might be a short-term option for babies 6 months and older if you can't find infant formula in stock. While it should not become routine to serve your infant cow's milk, it is a better alternative than offering diluted or homemade formula , the AAP says. Consult your pediatrician for guidance.

How should you transition from formula or breast milk to cow's milk?

Breast milk and formula are sweeter than cow's milk, so while some new 1-year-olds take to cow's milk right away, others need a little help acquiring a taste for it.

If your toddler is struggling to make the transition from formula or breast milk to cow's milk, try serving it mixed: Offer breast milk or formula blended in with cow's milk to help your little one get used to the new taste and consistency, gradually increasing the amount of cow's milk in his sippy cup. You can also try sneaking cow's milk into your child's meals throughout the day, such as by pouring some over cereal (make sure he slurps up what's left in the bowl), adding it to oatmeal or smoothies, or stirring milk into soups or mac and cheese.

How much milk should a toddler drink?

In general, toddlers should drink about 2 to 3 cups (16 to 24 ounces) of cow’s milk each day. As well as being a source of fat, milk provides the nutrients — such as protein, zinc, and vitamins A and D — that your little one needs to grow.

If your child has a milk allergy or can’t drink cow’s milk for other reasons, he may be able to drink a milk alternative, such as soy milk, or eat dairy foods such as yogurt and cheese.

It’s a good idea to only offer your child milk from a cup during meals or snacks. Drinking from a sippy cup all day can bathe a tot’s teeth in sugary liquids, which can increase their risk of cavities.

How much milk should a 1-year-old drink?

Tots who are 1-year-old should drink about 2 to 3 cups of cow’s milk (the equivalent of about two servings of dairy) each day. Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, stick to the whole milk variety, which contains the fat content that babies need to grow.

How much milk should a 2-year-old drink?

Toddlers who are 2 years old should drink about 2 to 2.5 cups (16 to 20 oz) of cow’s milk each day. At this age, you can start to switch your child from whole milk (which contains 4 percent fat) to low-fat (or 1 percent) or nonfat (skim) milk.

To make the transition, you can offer your child reduced-fat (2 percent) milk for a few weeks in between milks.

How much milk should a 3-year-old drink?

At 3 years old, your toddler should be drinking about 2 to 2.5 cups (16 to 20 oz) of low-fat (1 percent) or nonfat (skim) milk each day.

Can a toddler drink too much milk?

Yes, there can be too much of a good thing. Toddlers who fill up on milk may not be hungry enough to eat as much solid food as they need — and that could cause them to miss out on important nutrients, such as iron . (Cow’s milk isn’t a source of iron.)

Toddlers who are too low in iron can develop iron-deficiency anemia, in which the body doesn’t produce enough healthy red blood cells. Symptoms of iron-deficiency anemia include fatigue, dizziness and developmental delays or behavioral problems, although not all toddlers with anemia will show signs of it at first.

What’s the best type of milk for toddlers?

The best type of milk for (most) 1-year-old children is whole cow’s milk, which contains more fat than reduced-fat (2 percent), low-fat (1 percent) or nonfat (skim) milk. That said, if your child is overweight or you have a family history of obesity, heart disease and high blood pressure, you may want to talk to your pediatrician about giving your child reduced-fat milk.

Starting at the age of 2, you can make the switch to reduced-fat cow’s milk.

Whole milk: Whole cow’s milk contains about 4 percent fat. At this age, children need a little more fat in their diet to help them grow and develop properly. Cow’s milk also is a key source of the nutrients that toddlers need, including protein, calcium and vitamins A, D and B12.

Reduced-fat milk: Reduced-fat milk contains less milk fat than the whole variety, and includes reduced-fat milk (2 percent), low-fat (1 percent) and nonfat (skim) milks. Starting at the age of 2, you can transition your child to low-fat or non-fat milk, and encourage him to drink about 2 to 2.5 cups each day.

Can toddlers drink alternative or non-dairy milk?

If your little one has a milk allergy (or milk intolerance), he may need to drink an alternative milk. But not all milk alternatives are created equal.

Non-dairy milks are made from plant ingredients like rice, almonds, coconuts, oats and more. The amount of nutrients in these drinks can vary from milk to milk (and brand to brand) and many of the sweetened varieties contain added sugars — something your toddler doesn’t need at this age. For this reason, experts don’t recommend that children under the age of 5 drink milk alternatives.

The exception to this rule is fortified soy milk , which is nutritionally similar to cow’s milk (and an acceptable substitute for moo juice). If your child has a milk allergy or intolerance, or your family doesn’t eat animal products, ask your pediatrician if soy milk is right for him.

What should you do if your toddler doesn’t like milk?

If your child doesn’t take to cow's milk, you may have to resort to some stealthy tactics to help him acquire a taste for it. Here are some tricks to try.

Mix cow's milk with breast milk or formula. With time, you can gradually increase the amount of cow’s milk until all you have is milk, straight up.

Experiment with different temperatures. Your little rebel may take to milk better if it’s warm as opposed to cold.

Add some fruit. Toss some milk in a blender with your child’s favorite fruit to change the flavor, color and texture. Giving your toddler a “princess pink drink” could make all the difference. Another bonus: You’ll boost the drink’s fiber and vitamin content.

Best calcium-rich foods for toddlers who don’t like milk

If your little one doesn’t like cow’s milk, don’t, well, have a cow. As long as he’s getting healthy fats from other foods, you’ll just need to make sure he also gets enough vitamin D (ask your pediatrician about a supplement or multivitamin) and calcium.

In the meantime, here are some of the best calcium-rich foods for milk-averse toddlers:

Yogurt

Cheese (mozzarella, cheddar, cream cheese)

Tofu

Salmon

Fortified breakfast cereals

Kale

Chia seeds

Bok choi

Sour cream

Broccoli