Which Vaccines Should New Parents Get?

Copy changes throughout; updates to sourcing, formatting, image, and headlines; and new medical review for accuracy.

vaccines for new parents, syringe with hearts in it

These are the vaccines all new parents should get, plus where to go to get them.

With all the shots your baby needs, it can sometimes be hard for new parents to keep up with their own. But making sure you stay up-to-date on your vaccines is critical, since when you’re protected, you keep your little one safe too. That's especially important for newborns who haven’t yet received all of their shots.

Here are the vaccines all new parents need, as well as what to know about staying on top of them while sticking to your baby's immunization schedule .

What vaccines do new parents need?

Newborn immune systems aren't fully developed, so they're particularly vulnerable to infections.

"Staying up-to-date on your vaccines helps cocoon your child from getting the disease before they can get vaccinated themselves," explains Gina Posner , M.D., a board-certified pediatrician at MemorialCare Medical Group in Fountain Valley, California, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . In other words, surround your newborn in a circle of protection and only expose her to people who are vaccinated.

Adults should be up-to-date on all vaccinations, but there are a few that are especially important to check off your list before the arrival of your little one. They include:

Tdap : The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends that all women get a tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis (Tdap) vaccine during every pregnancy. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMaternal ImmunizationSee All Sources [1] But if you didn’t get it for any reason while you were expecting, you can do so after baby’s arrival. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also recommends that all of a new baby's family members and caregivers, including parents, siblings, grandparents, and nannies, should make sure they're up-to-date on their vaccines too, including Tdap. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionVaccines for Family and CaregiversSee All Sources [2]

The flu vaccine : ACOG recommends that all moms-to-be get a flu shot during every pregnancy , but if you didn’t get it yet — say you were pregnant outside of flu season — make an appointment after your baby is born. Anyone who will be interacting with your baby should also get their flu shot too.

The COVID-19 vaccine : The COVID vaccine is considered safe and effective during pregnancy. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCOVID-19 Vaccine Frequently Asked QuestionsSee All Sources [3] Anyone 6 months or older, including women who are pregnant or breastfeeding, should be up-to-date on their shots to prevent serious illness, ACOG says.

RSV : If your baby is due between November 1 and April 1, it's also important to get the RSV vaccine , Dr. Posner says. This vaccine protects against respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), a common virus that nearly all adults and young children are affected by sooner or later, but can be particularly dangerous for newborns and older babies.

Where can parents get the vaccines they need?

For the flu shot, you can ask your OB/GYN, primary care doctor, family physician, a registered nurse, or even your child's pediatrician (who may provide vaccines to parents as well as kids). Some clinics, pharmacies, local health departments, supermarkets, health clubs, and workplaces also offer the flu vaccine.

For other shots, like the MMR, varicella, or Tdap vaccines, your primary care doctor or family physician may be your best bet, since they're the most likely to have all the vaccines on hand (though your OB/GYN is also likely to carry Tdap). They keep track of your health from year to year, so they'll know whether you actually need a shot or if you're already covered. And to find a COVID-19 vaccine near you, visit Vaccines.gov .

Keep in mind that if you're due for the MMR or varicella vaccines, you should get them before you get pregnant if needed, since they're live virus vaccines and can't be given during pregnancy, Dr. Posner says.

If you do get a vaccine from an OB/GYN, don't forget to tell your primary care doctor or family physician during your next visit so it can be recorded in your medical chart.

"With my first, we requested our immediate family have the Tdap shot," recalls What to Expect Community user Okaachan. "Most already had it due to a previous pregnancy in the family or working in the medical field, but the couple who weren’t up-to-date got it done no problem."

Want to know how other parents have handled asking relatives and caregivers to get vaccinated before visiting their babies? Connect with them on the What to Expect app .

Staying up-to-date on your vaccines helps cocoon your child from getting the disease before they can get vaccinated themselves.

Dr. Gina Posner, a pediatrician in California and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

Do you have to ask for vaccines in advance?

It's a good idea, since different doctors keep different shots in stock. Again, primary care and family doctors are more likely to keep most shots on hand. OB/GYNs are less likely to have certain vaccines that don't apply to their specialty.

If you're going to any doctor to get a shot, it's best to let the receptionist know when you make the appointment so the vaccine can be ordered if necessary. That way you can avoid having to make another trip if they don't have the shot you need on hand.

Does insurance cover shots?

Yes! Insurance plans can be confusing, but one thing they pretty much all agree on is vaccine coverage. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionHow to Pay for VaccinesSee All Sources [4] Virtually all plans pay for vaccines, as long as they're recommended for you by the CDC. Most insurance plans do not charge a co-pay or coinsurance when the vaccines are provided by an in-network provider.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionHow to Pay for VaccinesSee All Sources

Key Takeaways

If you’re not already, you’ll soon be busily scheduling all your baby’s vaccines . But it’s also critical for parents and caregivers to be up-to-date on their own vaccinations, ideally before a baby arrives or shortly after.

you’ll soon be busily scheduling all your baby’s vaccines . But it’s also critical for parents and caregivers to be up-to-date on their own vaccinations, ideally before a baby arrives or shortly after.

Your newborn’s immune system isn’t fully developed , so she’s particularly vulnerable to infections. When you’re vaccinated, you help “cocoon” your baby against diseases that could make her very sick.

isn’t fully developed , so she’s particularly vulnerable to infections. When you’re vaccinated, you help “cocoon” your baby against diseases that could make her very sick.

Adults should be up-to-date on all their vaccines , but a few are especially critical to check off your list before your little one is born. That includes the tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis (Tdap) vaccine, a flu shot, and the COVID-19 vaccine.

but a few are especially critical to check off your list before your little one is born. That includes the tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis (Tdap) vaccine, a flu shot, and the COVID-19 vaccine.

Ask your OB/GYN, primary-care doctor, or family physician about getting these shots. Some clinics, pharmacies, local health departments, supermarkets, health clubs, and workplaces also offer the flu vaccine.

about getting these shots. Some clinics, pharmacies, local health departments, supermarkets, health clubs, and workplaces also offer the flu vaccine.