Which Spa Treatments Are Safe During Pregnancy? Here's What to Pick (and Skip)

Updates to copy and formatting.

women at spa pregnancy

Need a little TLC during pregnancy? Of course you do! Here's what's soothing (and safe) at the spa when you are pregnant.

If there's ever a time when you need a little (or a whole lot) of pampering, pregnancy is it. With so much going on, you deserve to unwind, recharge, and polish yourself up.

But before you book a spa day while pregnant, it's important to know whether your usual go-to beauty treatments are safe when you're expecting. Some common ones, including most facials, gentle scrubs, and waxing , are perfectly fine. Others are okay too, with the proper precautions.

Some spa treatments, though, are best left alone until after you deliver. Here's a breakdown of which spa treatments are safe and which ones are not recommended during pregnancy.

Key Takeaways

Many spa favorites are safe. Most facials and standard manicures and pedicures are generally fine during pregnancy — just be sure the spa uses pregnancy-friendly products.

Prenatal massages require extra care. Be sure to choose a therapist trained in prenatal techniques, and check with your provider before booking the massage.

Some treatments should wait. Hot tubs, saunas, and facials with ingredients like retinoids aren't recommended during pregnancy, so save these pampering appointments for after delivery.

Prenatal massage

If you've ever had a professional massage, you know just how relaxed you feel afterward — physically and mentally. Fortunately, a prenatal massage is generally safe during pregnancy, with some caveats.

Check with your practitioner to ask when it's okay to get a massage — especially if you have morning sickness , high blood pressure, diabetes, preeclampsia, or abdominal pain or bleeding.

Massage during the first trimester may cause dizziness or increase morning sickness. After that stage, you should be good to go.

Choose a massage therapist who has training and experience in the special precautions necessary for prenatal massage. And always make sure that the therapist knows you're expecting.

A massage during pregnancy is quite different from your typical experience, and it may be less comfortable. For one, you won't be lying on your back or stomach. A face-down massage can be difficult when you have a huge belly. And pregnant women should limit time on their back because the weight of the baby and uterus can compress blood vessels and reduce circulation to the placenta.

For all those reasons, your masseuse will likely have you lie on your side with cushions, pillows, or bolsters supporting you. There are also some spots your therapist won't and shouldn't massage, such as your stomach (which can be uncomfortable for you).

Your masseuse will also likely skip the pressure point between your ankle bone and heel because there's a belief that it can trigger contractions. There's no definitive proof of that, but it's better to stay on the safe side and avoid it all the same.

You might also wonder if it's okay to get a hydromassage, which uses warm water and pressurized jets, during pregnancy. It's not recommended for some expecting women, so check with your practitioner before you book an appointment.

Facials

If you missed out on the whole pregnancy glow thing, you may be hoping that a facial during pregnancy can give you a little boost. Most facials are safe during pregnancy, with a few exceptions. Try booking one of the following:

Hydrating facials, which are essentially a massage for your face using a super-moisturizing serum

Collagen facials, which use a special cream to boost collagen production so the skin looks plumper and smoother

Oxygen facials, which use a small wand to deliver high-pressurized oxygen to the surface of the skin to promote cellular renewal, increase circulation, and decrease the appearance of fine lines and wrinkles

Steam facials, which use steam to cleanse the face, open the pores, and improve product absorption

Fruit acid peels and extractions, which can clear pores and improve acne

LED facials, which use LED light to boost collagen production and help clear acne

You should avoid facials that use retinoids and salicylic acid, which can enter your bloodstream through the skin.

And while some experts say microdermabrasion and any laser treatment are off-limits during pregnancy, others say they can be safe in some instances (i.e., if it's a low-level laser or the microdermabrasion isn't too aggressive). Check with your practitioner to find out what's best for you.

Manicures and pedicures

If you're a mani-pedi type of girl, there's good news. Manicures and pedicures — including regular polish, no-chip polish, gel polish, and acrylic nails — are generally safe during pregnancy.

For even safer nail care during pregnancy, look for polishes that are "free" (3-free, 5-free, 8-free, etc.), which means they aren't made with some of the chemicals other brands may contain.

That said, the smells from the different products may cause a headache or nausea. Always have your nails done in a well-ventilated area. If you're doing them at home yourself, sit outside or near an open window.

Even if you're at a salon, most will accommodate you if you ask. Wearing a mask can also help protect you from the fumes.

If you ever experience dizziness , nausea, or a headache while getting your nails done, stop and go outside for some fresh air.

As far as getting the polish off, use an acetone-free polish remover. If you do use an acetone product, wash your hands and feet afterward to avoid irritation to your skin.

Aromatherapy

Aromatherapy is the use of essential oils extracted from plants to improve health and well-being. To try aromatherapy during pregnancy , you might get a massage with essential oils, use a diffuser to breathe in the aroma of the oils, or take a warm soak in the tub with a few drops of an essential oil added to the water.

It's not really known what the effects of many plant oils are during pregnancy, so exercise caution.

Ask for an essential oil at a concentration that's half the standard usage, which will reduce the amount of the oil absorbed by the skin. It also might help your heightened sense of smell , which may be extra sensitive to strong scents.

Some essential oils that are generally safe during pregnancy are lavender, jasmine, rose, tangerine, chamomile, neroli, ylang-ylang, and lemon. Those to avoid include rosemary, sage, basil, peppermint, oregano, thyme, juniper, and pennyroyal.

Some aromatherapy oils may stimulate contractions, so it's important to know what oil you're using. To be on the safe side, check with your practitioner first before you use any aromatherapy.

Hot tubs and saunas

As good and relaxing as it may feel, you should skip hot tubs and saunas while you're expecting. During pregnancy, anything that raises your body temperature over 101 degrees Fahrenheit and keeps it there for a while can be harmful to your baby, especially in the early months.

Limited research has suggested that exposure to the high temps of hot tubs and saunas may increase your baby's risk of rare neural tube defects, which affect the brain and spine. So it's best not to take any chances.

Although you may have to wait on some spa services (or make changes to others), it's totally possible to enjoy some much-needed pampering. Whether your thing is a nice back rub, pretty nails and toes, or a fantastic facial (or all the above), go ahead and indulge yourself!

Have more questions about what's safe and what's not when you're expecting? Get personalized tips for every week of your pregnancy in the free What to Expect app .