Due in December? Congratulations! Here are great things to love about December birthdays, including the fun traits of their zodiac signs (Sagittarius and Capricorn).

Having a baby in December means rounding out the year in the best way possible. After all, December babies arrive during the most festive season, when everything glows and good cheer (and cookie aromas!) fill the air.

On top of that, December babies have other benefits: two birth flowers, a lucky birthstone, and a who’s who of celebrity birthday twins, including an NBA legend, A-list actors, and a musician you just may have heard of (spoiler alert, it’s Taylor Swift !).

December kids also have an out-of-this-world zodiac sign: friendly Sagittarius or loyal Capricorn. Ahead, other fun facts you’ll want to know about this stellar birthday month.

Key Takeaways

December babies have a birthstone with serious meaning. It’s turquoise, linked to peace, protection, and good fortune.

December has two birth flowers, not one. Babies born this month get fragrant paperwhites and festive holly — two winter plants packed with positive meaning and cozy tradition.

December birthdays have main character energy. Your December baby may be an adventurous Sagittarius or a determined Capricorn.

December’s birthstone is turquoise, a stone that represents luck and peace (no wonder it’s prized in many cultures around the world!). Turquoise is the national gem of Tibet.

Your December baby is lucky enough to have two birth flowers. One is the paperwhite narcissus, a bulb flower that blooms indoors in winter and represents good fortune. Paperwhites have a musky-sweet fragrance and produce dozens of blooms. (One downside to note: They’re poisonous.) The other flower for December birthdays? Holly, that holiday classic with red berries and glossy serrated leaves. Holly is said to ward off evil spirits. It’s a native plant to the U.S. and its berries provide food for birds. The holly plant is poisonous to humans and dogs, though.

Babies born in December are either a Sagittarius ( Nov. 22 - Dec 21 ) or a Capricorn ( Dec 22 - Jan 19 ). Sagittarius kids are honest, optimistic, and enthusiastic. “My Sag boy is a firecracker,” says What to Expect Community member penyylane. “ He makes us laugh all day long… He raises his eyebrows in excitement and I can just tell he’s going to be a very adventurous little boy.” Capricorns are honest, fearless, and natural leaders. What to Expect Community member KatrinaN is a Capricorn and so is her little one. “She was supposed to be born December 18th and decided to make her grand entrance December 24th on my 27th birthday, so we are birthday twins,” she shares. “She’s such a joy.” Have fun discovering the astrological traits of your December baby with the What to Expect app — and track the weeks up to the big day!

Many big names were born in the final month of the year. Your December baby might share a birthday with Zoë Kravitz ( Dec 1 ), Lucy Liu ( Dec 2 ), Nicki Minaj ( Dec 8 ), Taylor Swift ( Dec 13 ), Adam Brody ( Dec 15 ), Steven Yeun ( Dec 21 ), or LeBron James ( Dec 30 ).

December is famously festive: Your little one might arrive on one of the eight days of Hanukkah, or on Christmas Day. Or, she might share her big day with another celebration like World Conservation Day ( Dec 4 ), National Slime Day ( Dec 7 ), or Bacon Day (Dec 30).

Discover the fun astrological traits of your December baby with our free Birth Chart Calculator .

See all December due dates

December 1 | December 2 | December 3 December 4 | December 5 | December 6 December 7 | December 8 | December 9 December 10 | December 11 | December 12 December 13 | December 14 | December 15 December 16 | December 17 | December 18 December 19 | December 20 | December 21 December 22 | December 23 | December 24 December 25 | December 26 | December 27 December 28 | December 29 | December 30 December 31 | |

Gem Institute of America, December Birthstone . The Old Farmer’s Almanac, December Birthstone: Turquoise , November 2025. University of California Agriculture and Natural Resources, Through the Garden Gate: Paperwhites , February 2023. The Old Farmer’s Almanac, December Birth Flowers , November 2025.