Why Does My Toddler Keep Pulling Her Own Hair?

Light copy updates and updates to sourcing, fact-checked for accuracy.

hair pulling, child plucking petal off a daisy

It can be concerning to see as a parent, but toddlers usually find this habit soothing, just like thumb sucking.

Many kids are infatuated with hair from a young age. Babies tug on their mom's tresses for a reaction, and toddlers yank on their friends' hair during playground disputes. It's an expected part of development — and a reminder for people with long hair to keep it tied back around little ones with super grabby hands.

But what if your child starts pulling out her own hair? It can be nervewracking and confusing for parents and make them wonder if their tot is anxious or stressed. Here's what you should know about toddler hair pulling.

Key Takeaways

Toddler hair pulling is usually a self-soothing behavior. In young children, this is often a body-focused repetitive behavior (like thumb sucking) your tot might do when she's bored, fatigued, or stressed.

Gentle management often works best for hair pulling. Avoid punishment, try using blocking or sensory alternatives (like toys, gloves, and soothing activities), reward non-pulling, and model calm coping skills for your little one.

Most kids outgrow hair pulling. While this behavior often resolves on its own, a pediatrician or behavioral specialist can help rule out other causes and provide support.

Why do toddlers pull their own hair?

It can be scary to see bald spots on your little one's head. You might worry that she's super stressed or anxious.

But in reality, hair pulling in toddlers is similar to thumb sucking in that it is a self-soothing behavior. Kids who are prone to hair pulling typically do it when they're sedentary or bored — like lying in bed, sitting in the car seat, or watching TV. In these moments of down time, hair pulling can act as a soothing sensory moment to help them settle down and relax.

Also like thumb sucking, hair pulling might help a toddler navigate common, everyday stresses of life, such as being tired, hungry, frustrated, or nervous about changes in routine. It does not necessarily mean that your child is inherently anxious or depressed, or that her home life is stressful.

That said, just like not every child sucks their thumb, not every kid engages in hair pulling. It also sometimes runs in families.

What is hair pulling or trichotillomania?

Trichotillomania is a condition where people feel an uncontrollable urge to pick at or pull out their own hair. People with trichotillomania often pull out hair on their head, but they can also pull out their eyelashes, eyebrow hair, or hair on other parts of their bodies — anywhere that the body grows hair. Trusted SourceChild Mind InstituteQuick Guide to TrichotillomaniaSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceChild Mind InstituteQuick Guide to TrichotillomaniaSee All Sources

Hair pulling is a type of body-focused repetitive behavior (BFRB), where people pick, scrape, bite, or pull on their hair, skin, nails, lips, or cheeks. BFRBs like hair pulling are considered to be OCD-related behaviors, meaning that they share some similar characteristics as obsessive-compulsive disorder (while not being the same or treated the same). Trusted SourceInternational OCD FoundationDisorders Related to OCDSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceInternational OCD FoundationDisorders Related to OCDSee All Sources

In general, hair pulling can be automatic — where a person isn't aware of it, and does it while bored or not paying attention — or focused, where a person is aware of the pulling and intends to do so. Most people with trichotillomania engage in both behaviors, rather than exclusively one or the other. Trusted SourceThe TLC FoundationWhat Is a BFRB?See All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceThe TLC FoundationWhat Is a BFRB?See All Sources

Research shows that an estimated 1 to 3% of the population has experienced trichotillomania, with the typical age of onset being around 10 to 13 years. Unfortunately, there isn't a ton of reliable data on how prevalent it is in very young children, or whether a larger proportion of children versus adults experience it. Trusted SourcePediatric DermatologyPediatric Trichotillomania: Review of ManagementSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourcePediatric DermatologyPediatric Trichotillomania: Review of ManagementSee All Sources

However, younger children can experience hair pulling, albeit slightly differently than their older peers. (Some professionals call it "baby trich" because it occurs under the age of 5.)

For example, younger children are typically less aware (or focused) in their hair pulling. It's also typically not associated at that age with depression , anxiety, OCD, or other mental health conditions. (However in older children and in adults, there is a strong association between mental health conditions like anxiety and hair pulling.)

Additionally, younger kids typically aren't bothered by hair pulling, but it can be distressing for their parents — in part because there are so many negative misconceptions about what causes hair pulling.

Hair pulling symptoms

Many babies and toddlers go through periods where they like to touch and play with their hair, and sometimes pull it. But if your child cannot stop, or the habit is consistent over time, that's when you might be dealing with trichotillomania.

You might not actually see your child pulling out her hair, especially if she does it primarily in her crib. But common symptoms of hair pulling in younger children include:

Uneven hair loss, bald patches or sudden hair loss

Finding lots of hair in your child's room, crib, or bed

Constantly having her hands in her hair or near her head

How to stop toddlers from pulling their own hair

While trichotillomania in children younger than 5 years can resolve itself on its own, you might want to seek help from your pediatrician to rule out other causes of hair pulling and get referred to a pediatric behavioral specialist for help.

In older children, hair pulling is often treated with habit reversal therapy, a type of cognitive behavioral therapy that helps kids understand the emotions that lead them to pull and teach them skills to replace or stop the behavior.

However, treatment looks a little differently for toddlers, who don't quite have the cognitive skills yet to be aware of their behavior. A therapist might help you employ what's called "blocking techniques" to prevent your kid from hair pulling — like having your child wear special gloves during times where she's prone to pulling — and providing incentives like stickers, high-fives, or other small prizes to reward her for wearing them.

The therapist might also ask you to help provide an alternative way for your child to engage her senses at times where she's more likely to pull her hair, like introducing special toys just for the car, or tickling her face and arms with a baby brush before bed. (Researchers have also found that giving kids a toy with hair also gives them a safe outlet to pull. Trusted SourceSkin Appendage DisordersTrichotillomania in ChildrenSee All Sources [5] These techniques help your child learn that there are other ways to get fulfilling, interesting sensory experiences without pulling or playing with her hair.

Trusted SourceSkin Appendage DisordersTrichotillomania in ChildrenSee All Sources

It can also be a good idea to model for your child stress reduction techniques like deep breathing or simple yoga moves. Learning these techniques will help her be able to calm herself down in the moment when she's feeling stressed or experiencing uncomfortable emotions without having to resort to hair pulling.

Most importantly, you don't want to punish your child for hair pulling, or negatively call attention to it. The hair pulling is not her fault (or yours!) but singling your child out for it might reinforce the behavior.

"My daughter used to pull out handfuls of her hair at bedtime and naptime," says What to Expect Community parent onegirlsmom. "It was a self-soothing thing. I tried EVERYTHING to deter it, but nothing really worked. Eventually she learned to be more gentle."

Have more questions about other toddler behaviors? The What to Expect app is your guide to the toddler years, with expert-backed articles and tips from other parents.

When to call a doctor

As mentioned, hair pulling in toddlers often goes away on its own. But if it's bothersome and stressful to you (which is very understandable), it's worth talking to your doctor about getting help from a behavioral therapist who specializes in very young children and who is knowledgeable about BFRBs like trichotillomania.

It's important to note that while hair pulling may cause temporary changes in your child's hair — like bald spots, irregular regrowth, or texture changes — hair usually grows back.

In more extreme cases, hair pulling can lead to skin damage and scarring on the scalp. Some adults and children eat the hair they pick, which can cause an intestinal blockage called a trichobezoar that requires immediate medical treatment. If your child pulls hair and starts having stomach pain, nausea, constipation, or "failure to thrive" symptoms, that could be a sign she has a blockage and should get medical help ASAP.

Hair pulling is a frustrating and stressful thing for parents to grapple with. But it's important to remember that it's very treatable, and does not necessarily mean that there is anything wrong with your child — or with your own parenting. Think of it as thumb sucking: kind of a nuisance, but something that she'll learn to manage or stop.