Why Toddlers Sometimes Prefer One Parent Over the Other

Light copy updates, updates to sources, and fact-checked for accuracy.

toddler only wants one parent

There's a reason why your child favors one parent over the other — and don't worry, it's not personal. Here's what's behind the attachment and how you and your partner can share the spotlight.

You're oh-so-glad to have a partner during this journey called parenthood. But then your toddler loudly makes it known that she wants only one parent to pour her milk, tuck her in, and make her boo-boos feel better. What gives?

Key Takeaways

Toddlers often prefer one parent as a way to assert independence or stick to comforting routines, and it isn’t a sign of better parenting or deeper love.

These preferences are normal and temporary, and children often switch favorites over time.

Parents can ease the phase by redistributing fun tasks, giving the less-preferred parent more solo time with the child, staying positive if rejected, and building new one-on-one routines to strengthen both bonds.

Why a child only wants one parent

Sometimes when your child favors you or your partner, this is a way of showing toddler independence. She wants to prove that she can make her own choices (in the same way she insists on The Runaway Bunny every night or the green sippy cup every time she has something to drink).

It may also be a matter of familiarity and comfort with her routine . She demands that you do it (or your partner does) because that’s what she’s used to and it helps her feel in control.

"My toddler just turned 3 and is a total momma's girl," says What to Expect Community user hmercer24. "But for the past year, my husband's feelings have been getting hurt because she always will want me if I’m around. And now being older she flat-out says 'I don’t want Daddy.' She never wants to give him hugs or kisses, and I try to explain we love Daddy and you should be sweet to him. I feel so bad about it."

What you need to know when your child always wants one parent

It’s hard not to feel rejected (and kind of dejected) when your child favors your partner — or to feel a bit guilty or smug if you’re the one being worshiped. But playing favorites is common with toddlers (for example, her attachment to a lovey) and has nothing to do with one of you being the better parent or being loved more. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsEmotional Development: 2 Year OldsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsEmotional Development: 2 Year OldsSee All Sources

In fact, pretty soon you may find that the tide has turned. A toddler once fiercely glued to one parent may suddenly become stuck on the other.

Have more questions about toddler challenges? Open the What to Expect app for your complete guide to the toddler years, plus tips from other parents who have been there.

What to do when a child always wants one parent

Like all other phases of toddler behavior (remember when she’d eat only grilled cheese?), this too will pass. In the meantime, these tips can help level the playing field when a child favors you over your partner:

Spread the wealth. If you’re the chosen one, make sure you’re not hoarding all the fun parenting tasks. By putting your partner in charge of some things your toddler looks forward to (flipping pancakes on Saturday, going to the park, reading bedtime stories), you give your mate a turn in the spotlight.

Bow out (temporarily). It’ll be easier for your understudy to win over a little critic if you regularly offer up center stage. Run an errand, take a walk, or have lunch with a pal while your partner runs the show at home. Everyone wins — you get some me-time, your partner gets to shine. And given the opportunity, your tot may discover that your partner's singing-waiter routine more than makes up for sorry sandwich-cutting skills.

Get busy. Even when you’re all spending time together, you can fade into the background by telling your child to go ask your partner for help. Then step aside — and resist the temptation to direct the show from the sideline.

And if you're the one getting snubbed? Here's how to help grow your bond: Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsTop Tips for Surviving TantrumsSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsTop Tips for Surviving TantrumsSee All Sources

Show your love — even if she spurns it. It stings when a child favors your partner over you. But if your toddler is resisting affection from you, whatever you do, don’t let your hurt feelings show and don’t withdraw. That’ll make your tot only cling more to the favorite. Instead, stay positive and let your little one know that you’re still into her even if she’s just not that into you (at the moment).

Blaze a new trail. One-on-one time with each of you is always a good idea, but it’s especially important when a child favors one parent. Start some new traditions that you and your tot can do together — like going to the farmers market on Sunday mornings, collecting leaves during walks, and counting the stars before bedtime.

Have a sense of humor. This prickly phase won't last forever, and just like other toddler antics, it's one behavior you both might grow to look back on and laugh at (together!).