Why Carpal Tunnel Happens During Pregnancy and How to Find Relief

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnant woman with carpal tunnel syndrome

Pregnancy can affect every part of your body, including your hands. If yours are numb, tingling, or sore, give them a little TLC to make sure carpal tunnel syndrome doesn’t slow you down.

Feeling all a-tingle these days? Chances are, it isn't excitement about the baby — it's pregnancy carpal tunnel syndrome, which may affect nearly two-thirds of moms-to-be, shows research published in Obstetrics & Gynecology .

Pregnant moms, especially those who work at computers, may begin to notice an uncomfortable tingling, pain, burning, and numbness in the wrists, hands, and fingers.

Though it's usually associated with work that requires repetitive motion such as typing or sewing, carpal tunnel strikes pregnant women for a different reason — though repetitive motion can definitely contribute to the problem.

Key Takeaways:

Carpal tunnel in pregnancy is common. Many moms-to-be notice tingling or numbness in their hands, especially during the third trimester. It's typically caused by pregnancy-related swelling.

Small changes can help you feel more comfortable. Wearing a wrist brace, stretching often, and keeping your wrists straight while typing can make it easier to manage your symptoms.

Relief is within reach. Most moms-to-be find their symptoms go away after delivery, often within weeks.

How early can you get carpal tunnel during pregnancy?

Most pregnant women who experience carpal tunnel syndrome feel the pain and numbness in the last trimester of pregnancy, although symptoms can crop up as early as the first trimester.

What causes carpal tunnel syndrome during pregnancy?

The carpal tunnel houses nerves and ligaments in your wrist. This includes the median nerve, which runs between the palm of your hand and your forearm and creates sensations in all your fingers except your pinky.

Carpal tunnel syndrome happens when the median nerve gets compressed near your wrist. The compression can be linked to any number of factors, including trauma or injury to the wrist or repetitive motions.

There are several causes for carpal tunnel syndrome during pregnancy, including:

Pregnancy-related swelling. It can put pressure on the median nerve in the wrists and causes the same aching and tingling symptoms most often associated with ergonomic strain and repetitive motion.

Less physical activity. If you've been a little more sedentary these days, circulation to your hands and other extremities is sluggish.

Doing repetitive motions that involve your hands and wrists . If you work at a desk job, for instance, you may be more likely to experience this pregnancy symptom .

Carpal tunnel syndrome symptoms often flare up at night. That's because the fluids that accumulate in the lower part of your body during the day are redistributed to your extremities when you lie down, putting more pressure on your nerves and ligaments.

So if you've been working at a computer all day long, it could make the tingly numbness more pronounced when the sun goes down.

Is numbness in the hands a sign of preeclampsia?

One common sign of preeclampsia , a pregnancy complication linked to high blood pressure, is sudden severe swelling of the hands. Since carpal tunnel syndrome is caused by swelling in the wrists, it's possible that preeclampsia swelling could also lead to tingling or numbness in your hands.

Keep an eye out for other symptoms of preeclampsia, which include swelling in the face, severe headaches that don't get better when you take a pain reliever, vision changes (blurred or double vision), sudden excessive weight gain that's not related to a change in your diet, and scant or dark urine.

If you're experiencing any symptoms that are unusual or worrying, never hesitate to contact your doctor.

Track pregnancy symptoms like tingling and numbness — and get tips to ease the ache — in the What to Expect app .

What helps carpal tunnel during pregnancy?

The more you can do now to mitigate the effects of carpal tunnel syndrome, the more likely you'll feel symptom-free after delivery. Here are some remedies:

Try a wrist brace. If your carpal tunnel is causing you a lot of pain, ask your practitioner to recommend a wrist brace (they're usually available online or in drugstores). Try to wear it as much as possible, especially at night. Up to 80% of pregnant women with carpal tunnel syndrome find relief by using one, per a review published in the Journal of Personalized Medicine .

Stretch. If you work at a computer or do any other activity that requires repetitive motions (like playing the piano or filing) take frequent hand-stretching breaks to relieve pain and tingling. If you need help ID'ing the right moves, a physical therapist can help you.

Get into position. Here's another tip if you spend your days at the computer: Type gently and make sure your wrists are straight and your elbows are higher than your hands. You may also want to look into buying an ergonomic keyboard designed to protect your hands and fingers.

Sleep freely. Don't constrict your limbs at night . Try not to sleep on your hands, and use a pillow to prop up your head and arms at night. "One thing I've found that *kinda* helps is putting tons of pillows behind me so I lay at 45 degrees. I think letting my upper extremities be above my heart helps with less swelling in the hands even though my arms are at my side," says What to Expect Community mom skate14.

Get the blood flowing. Shake your hands and wrists out frequently when doing repetitive hand or wrist motions. At night, hang your hand over the side of the bed and shake it.

Limit salt. Reducing your sodium and salt intake can decrease swelling and water retention, which exacerbate carpal tunnel syndrome.

Try alternative therapies. Acupuncture might help relieve hand pain. Ask your practitioner for a recommendation.

Ask about medication. Ask your doctor whether over-the-counter pain relievers (like acetaminophen) typically prescribed for carpal tunnel are safe to take during pregnancy. Corticosteroid injections may also be an option for severe symptoms.

Can I prevent carpal tunnel syndrome during pregnancy?

Most pregnant women experience an uptick in hand and wrist swelling during pregnancy, and for many, that can lead to carpal tunnel syndromes as you get closer to your due date.

That said, there are steps you can take that might help lower your risk. Try to minimize time spent doing intensive manual tasks such as typing, sewing, or knitting, and take breaks to move around and stretch. Scrolling on your phone counts too.

Does pregnancy carpal tunnel go away?

Symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome typically disappear after delivery as pregnancy swelling diminishes, though it can take up to six weeks postpartum for things to return to normal.

"I noticed an immediate improvement within the first week of having my daughter, and it kept improving postpartum until it went away fully within a few months," reports What to Expect Community mom LSauerbrey1.

If it sticks around for much longer, check in with your doctor.