I Breastfed 4 Kids (But the Truth Is, I Hated It)

Essay: I breastfed 4 kids but I hated it; close-up illustration of woman crying

I don't resent nursing my baby — but I do regret that it took me so long to quit breastfeeding.

Brutal honesty time: I breastfed four babies but I never loved breastfeeding . I did it because it was practical, economical and good for their health. I didn’t do it because it made me feel super bonded to my kiddos. In fact, it kind of had the opposite effect.

Before I actually had kids, I bought into the whole “breast is best” philosophy 100 percent. I was going to nurse my son no matter what it took. So when he was born, I put him up to my breast and waited for the magic to happen.

Spoiler alert: It was awful. Nursing was way more difficult than I thought it would be, super painful and really tricky to figure out. (I think it was the least “natural” thing I’ve ever done.) It took a lot of tears on both sides and an amazing lactation consultant , but eventually we got it and I nursed him for his first year of life.

Perhaps it was the rocky start, but I never really warmed up to breastfeeding . I liked that I could do it and my son seemed to appreciate it, but it took up so much of my time and energy. Plus, I hated that I was the only one who could ever feed him. Breast pumps, even the hospital-grade variety, couldn’t extract even an ounce of milk from my boobs, which meant that I had to be physically present for Every. Single. Feeding.

After a year of multiple feedings a day, I felt like we’d accomplished something together, but I was more than ready to wean him. I finally felt free. I never resented him for it; after all, doing hard things for your kids is basically the motherhood mantra, right?

But kid #2 was a completely different story.

From the very beginning, my second son was the polar opposite of his big brother, including feedings. Where my firstborn had seemed like he was trying to help the process, his younger brother fought it. Literally. From day one he was angry about everything, including my breasts. He was hungry so he’d nurse, but he’d pound on my chest with his little fist the whole time and then cry afterward. We tested him for allergies, reflux and a bunch of other stuff but the doctor eventually settled on "colic" (which just felt like baby code for “sheer orneriness.”) Son #2 had colic for a solid year. He cried relentlessly.

I told myself that breastfeeding was convenient and healthy, but I started to have seriously negative feelings about it. I talked to my doctor and he put me on antidepressants — which didn’t help at all. I wasn’t depressed. I was at the end of my rope. And then came Thanksgiving.

That year all my in-laws were coming, and I was hosting everyone for a week. With two kids under two, I was stressed already, but the day they were set to arrive everything got so much worse. Son #2, 8 months old , had been acting crankier than usual and when I sat down to nurse him for his afternoon feeding, he immediately bit down on my nipple.

That on its own isn’t unusual — nursing babies often will clench down on the breast during feeding and while it hurts, the damage is usually pretty minimal — but this was a hard bite. I screamed in pain, which caused him to jerk off my breast and start screaming too. I looked down and saw blood pouring out of my breast. He had both top and bottom teeth in already and boy, had he used them! I still wince remembering the feel of his razor-sharp baby teeth on one of my most sensitive body parts.

He was clearly still hungry, but I didn’t dare put him on the other breast. As I mopped up the blood, it quickly became clear the cut was deep. When I couldn’t get it to close, I went to the ER. I took my still-wailing baby with me. At the clinic it was determined I would need a couple of stitches to close the wound. You guys. I got stitches in my nipple. While we were there, the doctor offered to run some tests on my son as he was now running a fever. He had strep throat .

“He was in so much pain when he tried to swallow — that’s why he bit down on you,” the doctor explained.

I felt terrible that I hadn’t realized how sick he was. The doctor gave him Tylenol and prescribed him antibiotics, but before we were released the doc had one more instruction: “No matter what, you have to keep nursing him, or you’ll get mastitis ,” he cautioned.

“Even on this side?” I pointed to my Frankenstein boob.

“Especially on that side,” he said.

My phone rang. My in-laws were at my house, expecting dinner and clean beds. I sobbed all the way home.

It had been hours since he’d eaten, and I knew my baby was hungry so I clenched my teeth and took him to my bedroom to try to nurse again. (I told my husband to order pizza and to ignore any screaming.) I started with the uninjured side, but he wouldn’t take it. So I tried the stitched-up side. He latched on and I experienced a white-hot searing pain that made me see stars. It took everything in me to not drop him like a hot potato. But after a few feeble sucks, he let go and refused to nurse anymore.

Something inside me broke. I was so angry. I knew I shouldn’t be mad at him — it wasn’t his fault — but I’d tried everything and he’d rejected me. I’ve never resented anyone so much in my life. I decided right then we were done breastfeeding. The end. To hell with it all.

That week was a nightmare blur. We tried to get him to take a bottle of formula, but he refused everything, ending up with another trip to the ER for dehydration and a change of antibiotics. I did get mastitis, sending me to the ER for the third time in one week, in the middle of the night because I literally thought I was dying. Somewhere in there I managed to cook a turkey and a bunch of sides, and I think everyone got fed?

Eventually the antibiotics kicked in for both of us. The in-laws left. My boob healed. My son broke down and took formula . It took longer, but our relationship healed as well. Now that I wasn’t breastfeeding him anymore and could more readily hand him to someone else, my stress level went way down. I was finally able to sleep more than a couple of hours at a time. My hormones started to return to normal levels. I could, at last, appreciate his sweet moments. We bonded, establishing a loving relationship that continues today. It all worked out in the end.

But here’s the thing: I don’t regret nursing him; I regret not stopping a lot sooner. Ultimately he thrived on formula, and I regret letting the way I fed him make me resent him. Breastfeeding is a complicated thing — I did go on to breastfeed two more children after that — and I wish we could all be a little more gentle with ourselves.

When you’re a new mom everything can feel like a life-or-death choice with huge, long-term consequences. But nothing should take precedence over forming loving relationships. Breastfeeding should never make you resent your baby. And if it does? Quit before you get boob stitches.

This story is meant to reflect individual contributors' experiences and does not necessarily reflect What to Expect's point of view. This content is not intended to be used as medical advice, for diagnosis, or treatment.

What Our Community Is Talking About

Best pacifiers for breastfed baby?

Night lights?

How to get fattier milk?

There are 34,002 active discussions happening now in our Breastfeeding community group.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

15 Moms Share What Breastfeeding Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

11 Times Celebrities Got Real About Their Breastfeeding Struggles By Kaitlin Stanford, Contributing Writer

How Combination Feeding Helped Me Manage as a New Mom of Twins By Zayda Rivera, Contributing Writer

When Should You Stop Breastfeeding? Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Key to Making Triple Feeding Work? Knowing Your Limits Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Breastfeeding a Baby With a Toddler in the House Medically Reviewed by Kyle Monk, M.D.

Why You Might Not Be Able to Breastfeed Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

I Got Mastitis 3 Times in 2 Months — Here's What I Wish I'd Known as a Nursing Mom Medically Reviewed by Shannon Smith, M.D.

How to Stop Pumping Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

The Breastfeeding Trick That Saved My Sanity With a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfed Baby Won't Take a Bottle By Heidi Murkoff

When My Babies Arrived, the Blissful Connection Didn't. Here's the Truth No One Talks About Medically Reviewed by Nicole Taylor, M.D., PMH-C

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfeeding Toddler Doesn't Want to Wean By Heidi Murkoff

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

How and When to Wean Your Toddler Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window