I distinctly remember the day one of my high school students pointed at my belly and loudly proclaimed, "You're pregnant." I was only six and a half weeks along with my third baby and quite bloated , which is likely what she was really seeing. I joked that I ate a big burrito for lunch and continued teaching. But looking back, I realize I would have been totally fine telling her, "I sure am, isn't that exciting?" except for one thing — society's "12 week" rule.

It's a rule rooted in the previously "taboo" nature of miscarriage and loss. My mother and grandmother's generations wouldn't dare reveal a pregnancy loss, which occurs more commonly in the first trimester than later in pregnancy. So, this unofficial rule of waiting until the second trimester to share baby news was born.

I denied my pregnancy to my students not because I didn't want them to know, but because it was what I thought I "should" do. But the reality is there's no real reason to hide a pregnancy that you're otherwise ready to share.

When I did end up having a miscarriage between babies three and four of my five living children, I wanted all the support around me I could get, not shame and secrecy. That's why I decided to announce my last two pregnancies before the 12-week mark. And in some ways, the experience surprised me.

Whether you’re thinking about when to share your news or just need a safe space to process all the feelings that come with early pregnancy, the What to Expect app is here with stories, support, and community that gets it.

People were shocked it was "so early"

After my third pregnancy, I revealed my following pregnancies whenever I wanted to — especially since I bloat like I'm post-burrito chow from the minute I get a positive test. As soon as I got a positive result, I told my immediate family members — because I was excited and nervous, and I wanted all the prayers and support I could get. I announced it to more distant relatives and friends after seeing an ultrasound with a heartbeat, around 7 to 8 weeks. Yet, old norms pervaded those happy moments nonetheless: "Wow, it's still so early," someone once told me. "Have you even been to the doctor yet?"

The first trimester is hell. When is a better time to rally your people around you?

If you're going to share before the 12-week mark, know that the commentary you receive might align more with outdated "shoulds" and less with what you were hoping for. But true friends should just simply be elated for you whatever week it is — and be around for you if you need extra support.

I realized 12 weeks isn't the only important milestone

Sure, there's a reason people wait until 12 weeks, and it's research-backed: Up to 10% of clinically recognized pregnancies end in miscarriage, and the risk of miscarriage is smaller after 12 weeks. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthMiscarriageSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of HealthMiscarriageSee All Sources

But, those aren't the only numbers that matter. "Research amongst women with a history of recurrent miscarriage has shown that while those who reached six weeks of pregnancy had a 78% chance of the pregnancy continuing, seeing a heartbeat at 8 weeks increased the chance of a continuing pregnancy to 98% and at 10 weeks that went up to 99.4%. The numbers may be even more positive for women without previous miscarriages," per the Miscarriage Association. Trusted SourceMiscarriage AssociationUltrasound ScansSee All Sources [2]

Ultrasound Scans

Those facts were reassuring enough to me that I began revealing my pregnancies around week 7 or 8.

I got the support I needed earlier

The first trimester is hell. You are exhausted like never before. Everything makes you gag or puke. You bloat, your breasts hurt and you may worry about a possible miscarriage. When's a better time to rally your people around you? My work bestie would show up with Sprite when my coffee was grossing me out early in the work day. My aunt would pop over late afternoon to help with my older kids or fold laundry when I couldn't stay awake. If you speak up, your village can show up — and that's more important to me than any outdated rule.

Sources

Miscarriage

Show in the article

Ultrasound Scans

Show in the article

Miscarriage and Pregnancy

When to Tell People You're Pregnant