Why Daily Schedules Help Your Toddler — and How to Build a Routine That Works

Light copy updates and updates to sources, fact-checked for accuracy.

toddler routines and daily schedules, dad doing toddler girl's hair

Learn about toddler daily schedules and routines, understand why a set schedule and routine is so crucial for toddlers, see a sample toddler daily schedule, and more.

Your toddler might sometimes seem like an (adorable) cyclone on two little legs. But within that whirl of activity is a deep need for consistency and knowing what comes next. And the best way to provide it is with a regular daily routine and schedule.

Indeed, toddlers and routines go together like peanut butter and jelly, playgrounds and bubbles, or snow days and hot chocolate. Being able to count on a certain rhythm to her day helps your cutie know what comes next and understand where she fits in, which can translate into a confident, calmer, more cooperative kid. Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesThe Importance of Schedules and RoutinesSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Health & Human ServicesThe Importance of Schedules and RoutinesSee All Sources

Here's a closer look at the benefits of a daily toddler routine, plus examples of toddler schedules to try.

Key Takeaways

Toddlers thrive on predictability. A consistent daily routine will help your little one feel safe, confident, and in control, which often leads to calmer behavior, easier transitions, and better cooperation.

Your toddler's routine also supports healthy development. Regular schedules promote better sleep, smoother bedtimes, improved mood regulation, and opportunities to build independence, self-esteem, and family connection.

While routines are important, flexibility matters too. The best toddler routine fits your family’s needs, provides reliable anchors (such as meals, naps, bedtime), and allows room for adjustments when your life inevitably disrupts the plan.

Why daily schedules and routines are important for toddlers

Routines are, simply put, the bedrocks of family life. Not only do they keep your days running (relatively) smoothly from a logistical perspective and cut back on last-minute panicking and stress (wake-up at 7 a.m. to be at day care by 8:45!), they help your toddler thrive by supporting her need for predictability and routine. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCreating Positive Experiences for Toddlers & Preschool-Age ChildrenSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsCreating Positive Experiences for Toddlers & Preschool-Age ChildrenSee All Sources

When you establish a daily routine for your toddler, you: Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsThe Importance of Family RoutinesSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsThe Importance of Family RoutinesSee All Sources

Create a sense of safety. A regular daily schedule and routine gives toddlers (and adults) a feeling of predictability, which allows your toddler to feel comfortable and secure in her environment. There's no need to worry when she knows what's coming!

Give a feeling of control and confidence. Does your tot love calling the shots ? (Yes!) Then she'll delight in knowing what comes next — and telling you all about it. Plus, knowing her role in the family routine can give her a sense of belonging and support her developing self-esteem.

Set the stage for good sleep. Having a standard bedtime routine , in particular, can help your toddler wind down at the end of the day and generally make her less likely to protest lights out. Plus, having consistent wake-ups, naps, and bedtimes ensures that she's well-rested in the morning and neither overtired or overly revved in the evening. Bedtime routines promote not only sufficient and healthy sleep but also bolster development, good nutrition, positive communication, family time, regulation of moods and feelings, good hygiene, and well-being early on. Kids with a bedtime routine tend to go to sleep earlier and stay asleep longer. Trusted SourceMayo Clinic Is Your Child Getting Enough Sleep?See All Sources [4]

Improve cooperation and ease transitions. When your toddler knows the gist of the day because the basic structure is always the same, she'll be more willing to comply with moving from one activity to the next . You'll get hit with fewer requests for TV before breakfast, for instance, if morning screen time is never a part of the routine. Similarly, she'll be more likely to put those toys away after dinner if there's always a nightly cleanup.

Help your toddler adapt to change. It might seem counterintuitive, but having a sense of routine can actually make it easier for your toddler to cope when something shifts. If your partner suddenly has to start doing day care pickup instead of you, for example, your toddler will be able to take comfort in knowing that the other markers of the afternoon and evening (playground time, dinner, bedtime routine) have stayed the same.

Reduce your need for planning. Figuring out every day from scratch would take a lot of work on your part. Once a schedule is established, you've got a built-in flow that makes life easier. Even if you haven't nailed down specific plans for your Sunday, you know there will be outdoor playtime or a fun outing before lunch and a nap afterwards, for instance.

Have more questions about toddler schedules? The What to Expect app is your guide to the toddler years, with expert-backed articles and tips from other parents.

The best daily schedule and routine

There's no one perfect toddler schedule that's right for everyone. Rather, it's about figuring out a rhythm that meets your family's needs as a whole while filling all the cups your toddler needs to feel her best — regular meals and snacks, adequate sleep, and plenty of opportunities to play and spend time with you. "Take the bits of the day that work and build your schedule around them," suggests What to Expect Community parent aNYerinL.

For many, this may look something like this:

toddler routine chart

Weekday/day care routine

7 a.m. Wake up, quiet play

7:30 a.m. Breakfast

8 a.m. Get dressed, brush hair and teeth, play

8:30/9 a.m. Day care or preschool drop-off

12 p.m. Lunch (day care)

3 p.m. Snack (day care)

4/5 p.m. Day care or preschool pick-up

4:15/5:15 p.m. Play

5:45/6 p.m. Dinnertime

6:45 p.m. Bath, PJs, brush teeth

7:15 p.m. Bedtime stories

7:30/8 p.m. Lights out for bedtime

Weekend/at-home routine

7/8 a.m. Wake up, quiet play

7:30/8:15 a.m. Breakfast

8:30 a.m. Play

9/9:30 a.m. Get dressed, brush hair and teeth

10 a.m. Family outing or activity (playground, visit to Grandma's and Grandpa’s, library, playdate, etc.)

10:30 a.m. Snack

12/12:30 p.m. Lunch

1/1:30 p.m. Nap

3/3:30 p.m. Wake up, snack

3:30/4 p.m. Play or outing

5:45/6 p.m. Dinnertime

6:45 p.m. Bath, PJs, brush teeth

7:15 p.m. Bedtime stories

7:30/8 p.m. Lights out for bedtime

"Our routine was anchored around meals and naps," says What to Expect Community parent lex-in-tex. "We did a lot of morning walks, park visits, and outdoor time in the morning. Home for lunch and a midday nap. And then some kind of activity or play at home in the afternoon, or library, grocery store, etc. I felt like taking care of their basic needs and doing the most necessary of chores took up most of my time."

While times are listed here as a guide, know that a daily schedule doesn't have to achieve military-level precision. Just stick with your general plan. It's fine to put your toddler down for a nap a little earlier if she seems really zonked. Dinner running a little late one night? It's not the end of the world (as long as you have a healthy snack on hand in case your toddler starts to get hangry).

And if there are some days when the routine is close to flying out the window? It happens. Travel, special days or holidays, and unexpected events (like someone getting sick) can definitely upend the usual flow to some degree.

Just try to provide pockets of predictability for your toddler when you can. Even if you have to take a work trip for a few days, you can still FaceTime with your toddler to say goodnight before bed.

Days with a toddler are never totally smooth. (What fun would that be?) But a consistent routine can keep the speed bumps to a minimum while making life more predictable for your toddler and easier for you. Once you've found that rhythm, it's just a matter of sticking to the beat.