Why Pregnancy Makes Your Skin Sensitive — and What Actually Helps

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

sensitive skin during pregnancy

Is your skin a total baby these days — and not in a good way? Here's why and what you can do about your suddenly reactive pregnancy skin.

If it seems like your skin is overreacting to just about everything, you may not be imagining it. During pregnancy, some women’s skin gets extra finicky. Even the products you’ve been using successfully for years may start to cause problems.

Here’s why your skin is suddenly super sensitive during pregnancy — and how to handle it.

Key Takeaways

Pregnancy can make skin extra sensitive. Hormonal shifts can cause your skin to react to things it used to tolerate just fine. It’s normal for products, heat, or even sunlight to suddenly feel irritating.

Gentle products make a big difference. Using fragrance-free cleansers and gentle moisturizers and avoiding known triggers can help keep your skin calm.

For stubborn skin issues, loop in your doctor. If irritation sticks around or you’re not sure what’s causing it, check in with your provider. They can help rule out other conditions and suggest safe, soothing solutions.

What is sensitive skin?

Sensitive skin means that skin easily gets red or swollen, or feels itchy, irritated, tight, or tender. If you already had sensitive skin or skin problems before pregnancy, it may get worse.

Sensitive skin can strike during pregnancy — even in someone who’s never had sensitive skin in the past. You might notice that your skin suddenly looks or feels irritated or uncomfortable, even when you use products that never caused a problem before pregnancy.

“My skin has never been more angry looking,” shares What to Expect Community member ajp92. “I’m supposed to have glowing skin at this stage, and I’m breaking out like a teenager.”

These changes can catch you off-guard and leave you wondering what’s going on.

What causes sensitive skin during pregnancy?

Your raging hormones make you more sensitive to contact with substances that might not normally affect you, such as sunlight, heat, detergents, chlorine, and even certain foods.

Some parts of the body may react because they’re dry and flaky, others because of heat rash or an external irritant. And if you have eczema during pregnancy , you might experience flare-ups (or, if you’re very lucky, you might get a nine-month respite).

How can you tell if you have sensitive skin?

Some telltale signs that you have sensitive skin may include:

Your skin gets red or tender.

You develop itching, burning, stinging, swelling, or rashes after using skin care products, cosmetics, or certain detergents.

Products you’ve been using forever are now triggering irritation.

For many women, the most sensitive spot is the belly as it stretches (and stretches … and stretches) throughout pregnancy. Other potential trouble spots include your hips, thighs, and butt (always a lovely spot to scratch).

How can you treat sensitive skin during pregnancy?

If your skin tends to get grouchy after you apply a particular product, stop using it to see if the irritation goes away. You may have to put the product on hold (yes, even if it’s a fave) until after you deliver and your skin returns to normal.

For particularly itchy spots, a dab of calamine lotion should do the trick (temporarily, anyway). If any rash or irritation lasts longer than a couple of days, ask your OB/GYN or dermatologist about next steps. Avoid products that are laden with additives, dyes, or fragrances, all of which can exacerbate the problem.

Always check with your practitioner about formulas that contain hydrocortisone, a common anti-itch ingredient.

How can you prevent sensitive skin during pregnancy?

You can’t prevent sensitive skin completely during pregnancy (your hormones are to blame for that), but you can take steps to make your skin a little less sensitive:

Switch to an unscented, dye-free detergent (fragrances and dyes are big skin irritants) and stop using dryer sheets until your skin gets back to normal. Be on the lookout for all possible culprits: your perfume, fragranced lotion, even your trusted soap may now cause irritation.

Always protect your skin from the sun with a high-factor sunscreen (SPF 30 or more).

Lay off the soap. Use a gentle, non-soapy cleanser, keep face washing to a minimum, and use unbleached, all-cotton towels and washcloths.

Keep your body well moisturized. Use gentle unscented creams , lotions, or oils to keep skin supple and hydrated.

Stay ahead of sensitive skin and other pregnancy symptoms with advice from the What to Expect app .

When to talk to your doctor about sensitive skin

If you think your sensitive skin is due to a specific product, stop using it and see what happens. If the irritation continues for longer than a couple of weeks, or if you can’t identify a specific cause, see a dermatologist, who can diagnose whether you have sensitive skin or another condition such as eczema, rosacea, or an allergic reaction.

You should also check with your doctor if your skin is itchy all over and it doesn’t seem to be related to sensitive skin, or if you develop a rash on your abdomen.