Why Your Postpartum Checkup Is More Important Than You May Think

Woman holding baby

Here's how to make it happen — no matter what.

Six weeks after birth marks a major milestone for most moms. Not only is it when your baby might beam up at you with her very first gummy smile (this one’s not just gas!), but it’s when you will have face-to-face time with your OB/GYN.

For six whole weeks, your body has been recovering while you’ve been caring for your newborn. Maybe you’ve been playing doctor yourself, changing gauze from stitches after a tear or C-section surgery . Your baby has been to the pediatrician at least three times by now, not counting the checks in the hospital. But if you’re anything like most new moms in the U.S., this will be your first medical appointment since leaving the maternity ward.

If you’ve been feeling good enough (because let’s be honest, no new mom feels good), you may even think that it’s not worth the trouble to go. You wouldn’t be alone in thinking this way; 12% of moms say they’ve missed postpartum appointments for varying reasons, according to a recent What to Expect poll. And some estimates put that number even higher — for example, 2 in 5 U.S. women skip this appointment, according to a 2023 study published in Womens Health Issues. Trusted SourceWomens Health IssuesPostpartum Visit Attendance in the United States: A Systematic ReviewSee All Sources [1] According to What to Expect’s survey, more than a quarter of new moms (27%) who miss their appointment say they didn’t think it was important.

Trusted SourceWomens Health IssuesPostpartum Visit Attendance in the United States: A Systematic ReviewSee All Sources

But this six-week appointment is too critical to pass up. The scary truth is that more mothers die during the postpartum period than during pregnancy and delivery combined, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Trusted SourceU.S. Centers for Disease Control and Preventionregnancy-Related Deaths: Data From Maternal Mortality Review Committees in 36 U.S. States, 2017%u20132019See All Sources [2] And it’s far too easy to overlook the warning signs of life-threatening conditions, dismissing them as “normal” for someone who just had a baby. Even moms with no history of pre-existing health conditions risk developing severe complications, says Jessica Vernon, M.D., OB/GYN and the associate medical director at Oula Health.

Trusted SourceU.S. Centers for Disease Control and Preventionregnancy-Related Deaths: Data From Maternal Mortality Review Committees in 36 U.S. States, 2017%u20132019See All Sources

Before you panic, though, know this: It’s possible to prevent serious complications after giving birth by attending your scheduled postpartum appointment for a thorough exam. Dr. Vernon recommends keeping a log of any questions that pop up prior to your appointment so you can discuss them in person with your doctor.

Key takeaways

The routine postpartum follow-up appointment, which is often scheduled for six weeks after your baby is born, can help prevent serious complications after giving birth.

12% of moms miss this key appointment due to logistical barriers such as finances, transportation and child care.

Resources are available to help moms get access to the physical and mental care they deserve.

18% of moms who missed their postpartum appointments say it was because of financial barriers or lack of insurance

Having a baby is expensive. If you’ve recently given birth in a U.S. hospital, you likely racked up around $19,000 in medical bills, according to an analysis released by the Kaiser Family Foundation. Trusted SourcePeterson-KFFHealth System Tracker: Health costs associated with pregnancy, childbirth, and postpartum careSee All Sources [3] The idea of going to the doctor and facing another bill or co-pay while paying this off can feel like just too much. But if you have insurance, this appointment won’t cost you anything more. Most policies fully cover your appointment at six weeks postpartum.

Trusted SourcePeterson-KFFHealth System Tracker: Health costs associated with pregnancy, childbirth, and postpartum careSee All Sources

If you’re referred to a specialist by your OB/GYN after this appointment, however, you will likely face a co-pay or additional charges.

Source: KFF (formerly known as the Kaiser Family Foundation)

As for the 1 in 10 women of childbearing age in the U.S. who are uninsured? The financial strain to get care may feel too great to make the appointment. Trusted SourceMarch of DimesUninsured women: United States, 2013-2023, June 2025See All Sources [4] “Some families don't have insurance, and the cost of attending these appointments is equivalent to the cost of groceries for that month,” says Suzanne Mungalez, Psy.D., a clinical psychologist and perinatal mental health clinician based in Oakland, California.

Trusted SourceMarch of DimesUninsured women: United States, 2013-2023, June 2025See All Sources

How to overcome financial barriers to get postpartum care:

The costs may seem too high, but affordable postpartum care is possible thanks to resources designed to help new moms get the support they need after giving birth:

Find a community health center. “Community Health Centers and Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) offer postpartum medical checkups and mental health services,” says Marilyn Cross Coleman , a licensed social worker and perinatal mental health treatment specialist. They are often free if a mother is uninsured, or they may offer sliding scale coverage, Coleman says . Find a health center near you using the free Find a Health Center tool.

Apply for Medicaid. If you are eligible, Medicaid will cover pregnancy-related appointments through 12 months postpartum in 49 states — all except Wisconsin, which currently allows for coverage for 60 days postpartum. Trusted SourceKFFMedicaid Postpartum Coverage Extension TrackerSee All Sources [5] You can learn if you qualify for Medicaid at Healthcare.gov. Some states also offer sliding-scale programs for middle-income women who cannot afford private insurance.

Postpartum Support International (PSI). “If insurance is a barrier for receiving perinatal mental health support, Postpartum Support International (PSI) has many free resources available,” Coleman says.

Set up a payment plan with your provider. Even if you do have insurance, you may still get a high bill, especially if you have not yet met your deductible or out-of-pocket maximum. Ask your doctor’s billing department to set up an interest-free payment plan before your appointment. That way you will get billed smaller amounts over several months rather than one lump sum that has to be paid right away.

17% of moms who didn’t go to their postpartum appointment say it’s because of a lack of transportation

When Melissa R., a mom of two from New York City, booked her postpartum appointment while still at the hospital, she didn’t realize the time would conflict with an appointment on her husband’s schedule. “We live in a city and share one car, so I had to call my dad to pick me up and bring me to my OB’s office in the suburbs 30 minutes away,” she says. “I knew if I tried to reschedule my appointment, it could take months to get back on my OB’s calendar.”

Some moms are lucky to have a family member or partner available to drive them. However, many don’t have this support or a personal car at all and have to navigate public transportation, often with a newborn in tow, to get to their appointments.

“I have taught parents how to use the bus, which is incredibly difficult for postpartum moms,” says Christine Tran, a licensed social worker in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) at Inova Children's Hospital in Fairfax, Virginia. “It hurts to sit in a car , much less be on public transportation for an hour, one-way, to get to an appointment.”

And many new moms have much longer than an hour trip to get to their doctor: 13% of moms who missed their appointment say it was because they live too far away , according to WTE’s survey.

How to overcome transportation barriers to get postpartum care:

If physically getting to an appointment feels impossible, help is available to get you there or even come to you.

Non-emergency medical transportation (NEMT): “Some insurances, including Medicaid, have programs to [help you] get rides to your appointments,” Dr. Vernon says. Reach out to your insurance company directly to explore your options, or if your provider has a social worker or care coordinators, they can also help you with this.

Telehealth appointments. Dr. Vernon, like many OB/GYNs, can conduct postpartum mental health visits remotely. During these telehealth appointments, many physical concerns can also be addressed unless they require a physical exam, she says.

In-Home Nurse Visits. “Check with your state’s Department of Health, your insurance program and your provider’s office to see if you may be eligible for these resources,” Dr. Vernon says.

Partnering with pediatric visits. Your infant’s care team can offer you supplemental postpartum support, but keep in mind they cannot replace your own healthcare team. “Pediatricians are very good at checking in on mom’s mental health, and will also often help with breastfeeding advice,” Dr. Vernon says. “But they can not provide care for maternal health, unless they are a family practice physician or a midwife.”

10% of moms who missed the appointment say it was because they had no one to watch their child

In the What to Expect May 2025 birth club, one mom asks , “Are you all bringing your baby to your 6-week postpartum checkup? I was going to because my husband will be at work.”

Navigating child care issues is a common concern when it comes to getting to your postpartum appointment. As it turns out, your OB/GYN will likely be happy to accommodate your new baby at the visit. “Yeah! I took my baby,” one mom responded in the WTE Community. “The midwife loved seeing him and he just slept in his car seat stroller the whole time.”

Some medical offices suggest you leave older children at home so you can give your full attention to your own needs while at the appointment, Tran says. But that’s not always an option for moms.

“If the mother has no one to watch her infant or perhaps older children and it’s not appropriate to bring them to an appointment, I’ve seen mothers skip the appointment,” Coleman says. And unfortunately, postpartum depression and other perinatal mood disorders can be compounded when moms miss out on the opportunity to prioritize their own care, Tran adds.

How to overcome child care barriers to get postpartum care:

No matter which way you cut it, accessing and affording childcare is not easy at any point of parenthood. Here are tips to get to your six-week appointment.

Ask if a virtual appointment is an option. If your provider offers this, see if they can also work around your schedule — for instance, maybe you can schedule your telehealth visit early in the morning, when older kids are still sleeping, or during your baby’s nap time.

Build your community. Many moms rely on friends and family to care for their newborn during an appointment. If you do not have family nearby, look for local mom groups or community centers to build connections, which can help lay the groundwork for having friends who will help watch your children, including when you need to go to a healthcare appointment.

Call your OB. If you’re anticipating that a lack of child care could cause you to miss your appointment, call your doctor. Ask if you could bring your baby to the appointment or if they have an alternative suggestion on how to get the care you need, suggests ACOG .

The bottom line

The six-week postpartum appointment is a critical opportunity for new moms to receive both the physical and mental support they need after giving birth, Dr. Vernon says. “It is so important that new mothers understand that their mental, emotional and physical health and recovery from childbirth are important,” Dr. Vernon says. “Their baby thrives when they thrive.”

Methodology

The Everyday Health Group Pregnancy & Parenting Talk to Moms® Monthly Poll was conducted by Everyday Health Group – Pregnancy and Parenting between May 23 and 30, 2025. We surveyed 501 U.S. respondents aged 18 to 44 who have at least one child up to 5 years old. The survey was fielded among the Dynata Research Panel.

Sources

Postpartum Visit Attendance in the United States: A Systematic Review

Show in the article

regnancy-Related Deaths: Data From Maternal Mortality Review Committees in 36 U.S. States, 2017%u20132019

Show in the article

Health System Tracker: Health costs associated with pregnancy, childbirth, and postpartum care

Show in the article

Uninsured women: United States, 2013-2023, June 2025

Show in the article

Medicaid Postpartum Coverage Extension Tracker

Show in the article

Jessica Vernon

Suzanne Mungalez