Why Is My Child Always Sick With a Cold?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"It seems like every few weeks my daughter comes down with another cold. Should I be worried? Are there ways to prevent colds in children?"

Don’t worry. The common cold is very, well ... common in young children — particularly those with older siblings and those who attend day care. And not all sniffles are COVID-19 . (However, if your sick child is in day care or school, check with them about their testing protocol for returning.)

Babies and small children haven’t yet had the chance to build up immunities to the many different cold viruses out there, so each new exposure to germs has the potential to lead to a bout of illness. In fact, she'll probably catch about eight to 10 colds by the time she turns 2.

But before you throw in the towel (or tissue), know that repeated run-ins with a runny nose aren’t necessarily a bad thing. Studies show that frequent colds and other minor illnesses, like ear infections, boost your child’s immune system, making her less susceptible to infection later in life. So while your daughter’s non-stop sniffles and sneezes might be hard on her nose — and your nerves — they may make her stronger and healthier down the road.

How to stop a cold

In the short run, though, you’d probably like to minimize your child’s suffering — and those sleepless nights. Following these simple steps can help prevent your baby from catching more than her share of colds:

Wash your child’s hands regularly with warm, soapy water. Hands down, hand-washing is the best way to prevent the spread of any infection. Wash your baby’s hands often, especially after coming in from outside and before eating. Once she’s a toddler, teach her hand-washing basics , especially after she’s potty trained. Can’t get to a sink? Hand-sanitizing gels and wipes will also help prevent colds in children.

Stay away from other kids and grown-ups with colds if possible. And if you have a cold, wash your hands frequently to avoid passing it on.

Try to keep your child’s hands out of her mouth, nose and eyes. Easier said than done, of course — babies and toddlers gum or chew whatever they can get their hands on, especially if they’re teething. But to avoid giving germs a free pass into your baby’s body, especially when someone else in the house is sick, swipe her hands with a wipe regularly. That way, the hands she’s sucking on are clean — or at least, clean enough.

Introduce her to yogurt. Look for yogurt brands with “live, active cultures” — they contain probiotics, which can help prevent colds in children. Or ask your pediatrician to recommend a probiotic supplement (make sure it’s one designed for kids). Studies show that kids who take probiotics may have fewer cold and flu symptoms than those who don't.

Don’t share germs. Kids may be bad at sharing toys, but they’re pros when it comes to swapping germs. Don’t let your baby use anyone else’s utensils, plates, cups, bottles or pacifiers — and don’t let anyone commandeer hers.

Toss tissues into the trash right after you’ve used them. And when your baby is a toddler, teach her to do the same. This way, you can prevent colds and other viruses from lingering and spreading.

Keep your house and your child's toys as clean as possible. You can’t avoid germs entirely — remember, some germs do your baby’s body good — but you can help prevent colds in children by disinfecting the playroom, bathroom, changing table and kitchen regularly. Use disinfectant wipes and sprays for surfaces, toys and hard-to-reach nooks. Wash towels and bed sheets once a week, and give those plush toys an occasional spin in the washing machine too.

Follow these tips, and you may be able to prevent some of your baby’s colds. In the meantime, here’s to your daughter’s quick recovery!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Colds in Babies: Causes, Symptoms, Tips and Remedies , November 2020. WhatToExpect.com, How to Treat the Common Cold in Toddlers , October 2020. WhatToExpect.com, The Flu (Influenza Virus) in Babies and Toddlers , October 2020. WhatToExpect.com, Stuffy Nose in Babies and Toddlers , March 2020. WhatToExpect.com, Hand Washing: Teaching Kids the Basics , March 2019. WhatToExpect.com, 6 Steps to a Healthier Home for Baby , February 2019. American Academy of Pediatrics, Children and Colds , April 2018. UpToDate.com, The Common Cold: Beyond the Basics , June 2021. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, Probiotics for Prevention and Treatment of Respiratory Tract Infections in Children , August 2016. National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine, The Effect of Probiotics on Prevention of Common Cold: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trial Studies , January 2013.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Colds in Babies: Causes, Symptoms, Tips and Remedies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Treat the Common Cold in Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Stuffy Nose in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Your House Clean and Healthy for Your Baby and Your Family Medically Reviewed by Rajeev Fernando, M.D.

When Is Your Child Too Sick for Day Care? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Keep Newborn Babies Safe From Germs Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Why Does My Newborn Keep Sneezing? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Baby Actually Can Get Vaccines if She Has a Cold: Debunking 13 Vaccine Myths You Shouldn't Believe Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Can Babies and Toddlers Get Seasonal Allergies? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Flu (Influenza Virus) in Babies and Toddlers Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

When to Call the Doctor If Your Child Is Sick

How to Take Care of Your Toddler's Cough Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

What to Do if Your Baby or Toddler Has a Fever Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Prevent Car Sickness in Children Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Build A Cold and Flu Survival Kit To Get Your Baby Through Sick Season Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window