Why Your Toddler Whines — and What You Can Do About It

Light copy updates, updates to sources, and fact-checked for accuracy.

Toddler Behavior

At the breaking point? Here's how to wind down that whining.

Your little one has discovered the (excruciating) magic of whining — and if he keeps at it long enough, he might just transform a "no" into a "yes."

"My 23-month-old son is whining all the time!" says What to Expect Community member nicoledc2021. "From the time he wakes until he goes to sleep. He pitches a fit when he doesn't get what he wants, and it's a tad overwhelming these days."

Here's what to do before (or after) the whimpering and whining get out of hand.

Key Takeaways

Whining is a normal, low-level form of crying that often shows up when toddlers are tired, hungry, frustrated, seeking attention, or reacting to limits — especially between ages 2 and 6.

To respond to your child's whining, stay calm, avoid giving in, and remind him to use a “regular voice.” Offer choices, distractions, hugs, or humor — but don’t reward whining with extra attention.

Help prevent whining by providing attention before it starts, keeping routines predictable, watching for boredom or frustration, meeting your little one's basic needs, and praising your tot when he asks nicely.

Why toddlers whine

By itself, the act of whining doesn't mean your child is spoiled. Think of it more as a low-grade form of crying. And like crying , it's most likely to occur when kids are tired, hungry, bored, sick, not getting enough attention, or told "no."

Maybe your 2-year-old is experiencing some separation anxiety and doesn't want you to leave for work — cue the whining. Just like temper tantrums, whining is a toddler tactic for testing limits and dealing with hunger, fatigue, and other discomforts as your child learns to interact with you and the world around him. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsEmotional Development: 2 Year OldsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsEmotional Development: 2 Year OldsSee All Sources

What you need to know about whining

This ultra-annoying habit occurs most often between ages 2 and 6, but how long whiners continue to whine depends on their parents' reaction to it. The more often they get what they want after whining, the more likely they are to whine again.

What you can do about whiny kids

Even though it's normal for toddlers to whine, you can help head off this form of protest with some smart tactics: Trusted SourceNationwide Children'sHow to Stop Your Child%u2019s WhiningSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNationwide Children'sHow to Stop Your Child%u2019s WhiningSee All Sources

Stay calm . Don't say, "Stop that whining!" and don't label him a "whiner." To a toddler, negative attention is better than no attention, and labels have a way of becoming self-fulfilling prophecies (and you certainly don't want that!).

Don't give in. Tell your child that you'll listen only if he uses his "regular" voice. Then avoid eye contact and don't respond, no matter how torturous it is (hang tough!). If your child changes to his "regular" voice, try to satisfy his request or offer options ("I can't give you candy now, but you can have a banana or some grapes").

Try a distraction or hug. When reasoning doesn't work ("I won't buy you that toy. You have a ton just like it at home"), change the subject ("Hey, you have a playdate with Sean tomorrow!"). A quick cuddle may also brighten his mood. "Sometimes distracting [my almost-2-year-old] works," says What to Expect Community mom LEmamma1. "Something that’s helped lately has been giving him two options, and sticking with those two. I’ll say something like 'You can have this cereal, or this one.' And if he continues to throw a fit I say 'Okay, we aren’t going to have anything right now. Once you calm down, we’ll have cereal.'"

Inject humor. For example, pretend that you don't know where the whining is coming from. Ask your child to help you look for the whining under the couch, in the refrigerator, or behind the TV. Or offer to fix your toddler's "whiny" voice with "tickle" oil. Some children, however, become even more upset at the slightest hint of teasing. If that's the case with your tot, stop and try another tactic.

How to prevent whining

Getting ahead of potential whining can go along way in keeping both you and your toddler in a good mood:

Give him your undivided attention before the whining begins. When your child talks to you, make sure he knows you're listening. If you're in the middle of doing something and he needs your help, try not to take too long to respond.

Head off boredom. If you suspect your little one has reached the end of his rope when it comes to entertaining himself, involve him in an activity. "I find getting out of the house helps with [whining]," says What to Expect Community user sunrisesunday.

Look out for frustration. Make sure you're not expecting too much for his age. When he becomes overly frustrated, help him put his feelings into words, lend a helping hand, or distract him with an easier game.

Tune in to his physical needs. Try to make sure he doesn't become overly tired and that his mealtimes and snack times are consistent.

Compliment his "regular" voice. When he asks for something nicely, let him know how much you appreciate it. ("Good job! You're using such a big boy voice!")

Have more questions about toddler behavior? The What to Expect app is your guide to the toddler years, with expert-backed articles and tips from other parents.