Why Toddlers Ask Why

why toddlers constantly ask questions, funny toddler asking question

Your curious kiddo's always asking questions. Here's how to handle the constant "why's?"

Ah, the endless "why?" When questions from your inquisitive toddler seem to come without ceasing ("Sweetheart, you need to take a bath." "Why?" "Because you got dirty at the park." "Why?" "Because you were having so much fun playing." "Why?"), what's the best thing to do? Grin and bear it — and keep up an equally constant stream of answers for your kid's never-ending questions.

When do toddlers start asking questions?

At age 2, a toddler usually has around 50 words in his vocabulary — enough to say simple two- to four-word sentences. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsDevelopmental Milestones: 2 Year OldsSee All Sources [1] But it isn't until around their third birthdays that most tots start asking those "why" questions on a regular basis.

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsDevelopmental Milestones: 2 Year OldsSee All Sources

That's when your toddler is capable of holding a conversation with several back-and-forth exchanges, and his vocabulary has exploded to more than 200 words. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursCommunication and Your 2- to 3-Year-OldSee All Sources [2] Now that he's achieved these significant speech milestones, it's no wonder your 3-year-old is constantly asking questions.

Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursCommunication and Your 2- to 3-Year-OldSee All Sources

Why do toddlers constantly ask questions?

True, the "whys" can rattle your nerves and your patience, but it's important to remember that your child is not deliberately trying to drive you bonkers. (That will come later during the teenage years!) Here's what causes this barrage of questions:

Genuine curiosity

Toddlers are innately and unendingly curious about the world and want to better understand the things they see, hear and do. The constant stream of questions is just a step toward toddler learning (and your questioning kid really wants to learn).

Attention

Another reason why children are constantly asking questions (and why it's important for grown-ups to respond to "why?") is that they've discovered that this one easily articulated word — perhaps more treasured than always saying "no!" — can get your attention and (even better!) a response.

This kind of meaningful exchange is a remarkable thing to a beginning communicator (and to a little person who always wants your attention anyway) who's still mastering the art of conversational give-and-take.

How to answer your toddler's questions

Of course you answer them the best you can (with the occasional assist from Google), but what can you do if the endless cycle of "whys" starts to fray your nerves? Ignoring the questions kids ask may stifle that curiosity and desire for knowledge, something you absolutely don't want to do. So try turning the question around on your child.

Ask him why he thinks the sky might be blue, or why he thinks you don't want him to eat an ice-cream cone before dinner. Curious children who love asking questions might also love coming up with answers. It may help him learn to think about things differently, from another perspective — but don't push it if he seems upset that you aren't giving him an answer.

A response may require a moment of consideration on your part (especially if your kid's asking questions about adult topics, like when your toddler first asks you where babies come from ), but it's worth coming up with a thoughtful answer. While the constant stream of questions may test your patience now, the benefits to your toddler will last a lifetime.