Why Do I Have to Pee So Often During Pregnancy?

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Water inflated balloon in between colorful baby toy blocks symbolizing pressure

From early hormonal changes to late-stage baby pressure, here’s why frequent urination happens — and what you can do to manage it.

Gotta go all the time? Increased blood flow to your kidneys and mounting pressure on your bladder from your growing uterus (and later your baby's head) can mean an increased urge to urinate. And at night, your body absorbs fluid from your legs while you sleep, converting it to urine — and a wake-up call to head to the loo.

Read on to learn more about all the reasons why you have to pee so often and what you might be able to do to lessen the frequency.

Key Takeaways

Frequent urination is normal and starts early . It often begins in the first trimester (around week 4) and can worsen in late pregnancy (around week 35), especially at night.

Many factors contribute to the need to go. Pregnancy hormones cause increased blood flow, your kidneys are working harder, and your growing uterus (and later the baby's head) are putting pressure on your bladder.

It can't be fully prevented, but symptoms can be managed. Staying hydrated is important, but you might reduce trips by emptying your bladder completely, limiting caffeine, and avoiding fluids right before bed.

When does frequent urination start during pregnancy?

Frequent urination usually starts in the first trimester, around week 4 (or when you'd expect your period). Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSymptoms of Pregnancy: What Happens FirstSee All Sources [1] In fact, it's one of the most common early symptoms of pregnancy.

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSymptoms of Pregnancy: What Happens FirstSee All Sources

Many women find they have to pee with even more frequency late in pregnancy too, from about week 35 on. Nighttime bathroom trips also tend to increase throughout the third trimester .

Because the arrangement of internal organs varies slightly from woman to woman, urinary frequency can also differ. Some women barely notice increased frequency, or only notice it at the end of pregnancy, while others deal with it throughout pregnancy. It may also differ from one pregnancy to the next for the same woman.

"I never really experienced frequent urination with my first pregnancy," says What to Expect Community mom sunflower-mama. "I peed a little more than usual, but it was from drinking more water."

"I have to get up three times per night, and I'm only 5 weeks!" says Community member billsgirl17.

"Second pregnancy and I have to pee as much at 15 weeks as I did during my third trimester with the first," says Community mom ksklars.

What causes frequent urination during pregnancy?

Frequent urination during pregnancy is caused by a number of factors — some starting early, others later on:

Hormones . The pregnancy hormone hCG increases blood flow to your pelvic area and kidneys. While that blood flow can be good for increased sexual pleasure during pregnancy (if you're in the mood), it's not so good for long car rides.

More efficient kidneys . Your kidneys work harder during pregnancy, helping your body get rid of waste (including your baby's) more quickly.

Pressure on your bladder . As your uterus grows, it presses on your bladder, reducing how much urine it can hold. When your baby " drops " into your pelvis late in the third trimester, the pressure increases even more.

Fluid redistribution at night . While you sleep, your body reabsorbs fluid from your legs and feet and turns it into urine. If you have swelling, more urine will be produced.

"I am worse at night, up and down like a yo-yo," says Community mom Laurajean87. "I'm quite swollen in my feet and ankles, so once I lay down it gets worse."

What can I do about frequent urination when I'm pregnant?

There's no way to completely stop frequent urination — it's a normal part of pregnancy — but these tips may help reduce it:

Empty your bladder fully. Take your time and try leaning forward to help fully empty your bladder. "The struggle is real!" says Community mom Mrs-Pope. "It helps to sit on the toilet a little longer and lean forward to make sure you get it all out. That helped me during my last pregnancy."

Limit diuretics. Cut back on caffeine, which can make you need to pee more often.

Don't drink before bed. If nighttime trips to the bathroom are frequent, try limiting fluids right before bed.

Don't cut back on liquids during the day, though. Staying hydrated is essential for you and your baby, and dehydration can increase your risk of a urinary tract infection (UTI). Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsUrinary Tract Infections (UTIs)See All Sources [2] Your urine should be clear or pale yellow, not dark.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsUrinary Tract Infections (UTIs)See All Sources

Use the What to Expect app to keep track of your pregnancy symptoms, get expert advice, and connect with other pregnant moms who have similar concerns.

When will frequent urination end?

Frequent urination often lasts through the ninth month of pregnancy. It's not the most fun part of being pregnant, but it will go away when you give birth.

When should I talk to my doctor about urinary frequency during pregnancy?

If you're always feeling the urge to go to the bathroom (even after you've just peed), or if symptoms worsen, talk to your healthcare practitioner. You may need to be tested for a urinary tract infection .