It’s official: November babies are amazing. Here are fun facts about your Scorpio or Sagittarius.

Expecting in November? You’re in for a treat. November children are loyal, courageous, charming — and loads of fun.

Whether your November baby is born a charismatic Scorpio or an adventurous Sagittarius, he is sure to stand out. Your November little one will arrive — appropriately enough! — in the season for spreading joy and giving thanks.

November is such a magical month, in fact, that it’s tied with October for having the most U.S. presidents’ birthdays (six). Keep reading to discover more fascinating facts about November arrivals.

Key Takeaways

November babies are full of spark. Whether they’re passionate Scorpios or upbeat Sagittarians, November kids are known for their courage and optimism.

Their birth flower is extra meaningful. The cheerful chrysanthemum is not only a fall classic, but it also symbolizes joy and love.

Their birthdays come with built-in fun. November is packed with holidays, feel-good celebrations, and famous birthday twins.

November babies are lucky enough to have two birthstones: topaz and citrine. Wearing a topaz is believed to bring happiness, strength, and a long life. Fun fact: The name “topaz” comes from a Sanskrit word meaning “fire.” Though it’s often that trademark deep yellow color, topaz also occurs in other shades, including pink, red, violet, and green. Citrine, on the other hand, sometimes gets mixed up with topaz because it is a similar color. A type of quartz, citrine is said to bring calm (ahhh!).

Your November baby’s flower is the charming chrysanthemum — aka the mum. This hardy fall flower, which is part of the daisy family, represents loyalty, optimism, and joy. Red mums have their own special meaning: They symbolize true love.

Babies born in November are either a Scorpio ( Oct. 23 - Nov 21 ) or a Sagittarius ( Nov. 22 - Dec 21 ). Scorpios are passionate, loyal, and brave. It’s no wonder What to Expect Community member Pinklady01 was thrilled to have one on the way. “I’m a Scorpio and my baby girl will also be a Scorpio. I’m so excited!” Sagittarius kids are equally amazing. They’re honest, optimistic, and enthusiastic. What to Expect Community member nashperezs can attest to that. “ My baby is a Sagittarius and he smiles all day long,” she shared. “He wakes up smiling.”

Your November baby might share a birthday with a legend. The November birthday ranks include Colin Kaepernick ( November 3 ), Emma Stone ( November 6 ), Leonardo DiCaprio ( November 11 ), Grace Kelly ( November 12 ), Jimi Hendrix ( November 27 ), and Chrissy Teigen ( November 30 ).

November is also packed with big celebrations . Your November child might be born on Veteran’s Day (November 11), World Kindness Day ( November 13 ), Universal Children’s Day ( November 20 ), or Thanksgiving, which is the Fourth Thursday of the month.

Discover the fun astrological traits of your November baby with our free Birth Chart Calculator .

Counting down to your November due date? With our What to Expect app , you can track every week and uncover fun facts along the way.

See all November due dates

November 1 | November 2 | November 3 November 4 | November 5 | November 6 November 7 | November 8 | November 9 November 10 | November 11 | November 12 November 13 | November 14 | November 15 November 16 | November 17 | November 18 November 19 | November 20 | November 21 November 22 | November 23 | November 24 November 25 | November 26 | November 27 November 28 | November 29 | November 30

The Old Farmer’s Almanac, November Birthstones: Topaz and Citrine . Penn State Extension, November Birth Flower: Chrysanthemum , November 2021. National Day Calendar, World Kindness Day: November 13 . White House Historical Association, The Presidents .