Why You Might Lose a Little Weight at the End of Pregnancy

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Weight loss in the third trimester

A slight dip on the scale in the final weeks before delivery can feel surprising. But late-pregnancy weight loss is often a normal sign that your body is preparing for labor. Here’s what causes it and when to check in with your provider.

Steady weight gain throughout pregnancy fuels your baby's incredible growth — along with the development of the placenta , amniotic fluid, and other essentials that nourish and protect him. So it may come as a surprise (and maybe even feel a little unsettling) to see the number on the scale dip in the final weeks.

Rest assured that you're not alone. Here's what it means and what's behind late-pregnancy weight loss.

Key Takeaways

A small weight dip at the very end of pregnancy can be normal. Late in the third trimester, weight gain often slows, stalls, or even drops slightly as your body prepares for labor — and it's usually not a cause for concern.

Fluid shifts, not baby's growth, are typically responsible. Lower amniotic fluid levels, increased urination, looser bowel movements, extra sweating, and even a decreased appetite can all lead to a modest loss of water weight in the final weeks.

Keep nourishing yourself until delivery day. Even if the scale dips, your baby is still growing. Continue eating a balanced pregnancy diet, getting enough protein and DHA, and staying well hydrated as you prepare for labor.

Is it normal to lose weight at the end of pregnancy?

Yes. If you're in the late third trimester , you may have reached the end of your pregnancy weight gain . Instead of continuing to climb, the number on the scale may level off or even drop slightly during these last few weeks before your baby's arrival.

"I'm almost 39 weeks and down about 1-2 pounds over the last couple of weeks," says What to Expect Community mom Nicas.

This slowdown or small dip is usually normal. In fact, it can be one sign your body is preparing for childbirth .

"It's my third baby and I always lose some weight during the third trimester!" says What to Expect Community member mehhsomethingsomething.

What causes third trimester weight loss?

Your baby isn't behind this late-pregnancy shift. In fact, he's likely still growing right up until delivery.

Here's what may account for the change:

Lower amniotic fluid levels. As you approach your due date , amniotic fluid naturally starts to decrease — even before your water breaks . And less amniotic fluid means less water weight.

Increased urination. The increased urge to pee that you're feeling now that your baby's head is pressing down on your bladder means that you're flushing out fluids faster than ever before.

More frequent bowel movements. On the toilet a lot lately — and not just to pee? Loose stools as labor approaches can lead to fewer ounces.

Extra sweating. Your body starts shedding excess fluid as delivery nears. And sweating may increase even more after birth. During the first postpartum week, especially, your body works hard to release the fluids it's held onto for the past nine months.

Decreased appetite. You might feel less hungry and struggle to eat large meals towards the end of pregnancy. "I just find it tough to eat large meals in the third trimester — I get full so fast," says What to Expect Community mom JaidyBabysMom, who lost a couple of pounds near the end of her pregnancy.

Higher activity levels. If your nesting instinct has kicked into high gear, you may be burning more calories than before. (Did you really clean four closets in three days?)

What should you do if you're losing weight at the end of pregnancy?

Even though you're almost at the finish line, your baby is still growing and still relying on you for key nutrients , including protein and DHA , which support brain development.

Continue following a healthy pregnancy diet , make sure you're drinking enough water , and continue taking your prenatal vitamin . If your weight loss is sudden, significant, or accompanied by other concerning symptoms, check in with your healthcare provider for reassurance.

And if you'd like to keep an eye on trends, you can track your pregnancy weight with the My Journal tool in our free What to Expect app .