Why the Windi the Gaspasser Has Become a Must-Have Baby Accessory for Me

Windi the Gaspasser Review

This clever tool helped my twins with their digestive issues, and they even slept better after using it.

What is it? Fridababy Windi the Gaspasser

Why I love it: It gave my twins relief from their digestive discomfort and even helped them sleep better.

How much is it? $13

Where to buy it: Amazon

I thought I had seen and done it all when the NoseFrida Snotsucker entered my life. Little did I know, I’d hit an all new low (or high?) three kids later.

My boy-girl twins have always needed a little help in the number two department. I’ve never met a baby with more trapped gas than my son, and my daughter typically doesn’t poop more than once a week. But both of their issues have left us with the same problem: they’re constantly squirming and fussing as they try to work through their respective digestive issues.

During one of our earlier pediatrician visits, the doctor offhandedly suggested we try Fridababy’s Windi the Gaspasser ($13 on Amazon).

What is the Fridababy Windi exactly? Well, I think the packaging explains it quite well: “It’s maybe a little strange. It’s a doctor-invented hollow tube that safely, naturally, and instantly relieves gas and calms colic — no ingestible remedies or drops necessary.”

Here’s how it works:

Massage baby’s belly gently downward. (I typically use my forearm and roll it downward.)

Lubricate the tip of the Windi. (I use the suggested product: coconut oil.)

Lift baby’s legs and insert the Windi like a rectal thermometer and wait for the telltale whistle — a.k.a. baby passing gas.

Strange, indeed. But, as I’ve come to discover, it’s also very effective.

With four kids under the age of 4, I’m no stranger to a rectal thermometer, and that definitely helped my comfort level the first time I used the Windi. My nerves were also quelled by the fact that the shape of the Windi doesn’t allow you to go too far — it has a stopper that flares out to prevent you from doing just that.

So I forged ahead, starting with my gassy son. I gently massaged his belly, then proceeded to insert the tube. The Windi went in easily, thanks to the lubrication — it didn’t seem like he felt a single thing. And almost instantly, I heard a decent mass of air pass through the Windi. I wouldn’t call it a whistle like the kind a teapot might make, but there was no questioning what was happening when I heard the gentle blow.

I repeated the process a few times, with toots coming out each time. (Note: Though the packaging warns you might expel much more than a few farts — have a diaper handy, they say! — I didn’t get anything more than air.) It seemed like my son’s entire body instantly relaxed.

Wow , I thought, as I moved on to my daughter.

The Windi is disposable (and certainly shouldn’t be shared between children), so I tossed the first one, washed my hands and grabbed a fresh one.

Though I used the same amount of lubricant, it didn’t glide in quite as easily, but it also didn’t seem like it was uncomfortable in any way. (Chalk it up to a difference in bodies, I guess.) But this time, I got much more than air. I got an entire diaper’s worth of the sludgiest breast milk poop I have ever seen — at full force. Thank goodness, I took the advice and kept the diaper under her bum throughout the process! For what it’s worth, I also recommend placing baby on a muslin cloth or changing pad for extra protection. It really can get messy — I’ve even had drops of poop shoot up onto my own shirt.

It’s worth noting that it took much longer for the Windi to work it’s magic on my daughter. (And the same thing has happened with my son every so often.) The company says it should only take a few seconds, but I found that sometimes you have to be patient and sit there for a minute, stop and massage the tummy for a good couple of minutes, or ever-so-gently push down on the rectum a bit with the Windi.

One thing is for sure, though: Once the Windi does what it's supposed to, you can instantly see the relief in baby’s eyes and feel it in your little one’s belly. I’ve also noticed my kids sleep so much better when we use the Windi, since they aren’t trying to work through gas or aren’t all backed up.

The company says you can use the product up to six times a day (my own pediatrician suggested no more than three times per day to let their muscles develop on their own). From about 8 to 16 weeks, I used the product on each of them at least once per day. But now, at 5 months, their abs are strong enough to begin doing their own work. As a result, we’ve dialed it back to just once or twice a week when it seems like someone is struggling.

It’s truly a miracle worker, and one I’ll undoubtedly be gifting to any new mom I know — even if they look at me like, What in the world did you just give me . It may be strange, but trust me, it’s so worth having this little helper in your back pocket.

See more: Starting at $13 on Amazon and Target

Your Next Read

Why the Fridababy NoseFrida Snotsucker Saves My Sanity Every Time My Baby Has a Cold By Brigitt Earley, Contributing Writer

11 Prime Day Deals on Baby Gear I'd Buy Again and Again By Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

The 7 Best Baby Nasal Aspirators for Stuffy Little Noses Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

15 Products That Leave Moms Saying 'TikTok Made Me Buy It' Fact Checked by Erin Cavoto, Associate Commerce Editor

Gripe Water for Newborns and Babies Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

25+ Splurge Items WTE Parents Say Are Worth the Money By Blake Bakkila, Contributing Writer

The Best Baby Probiotics to Help Relieve Gas, Colic and More Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Have a Gassy Baby? What to Know About Infant Gas Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window