Why You're More Likely to Get Sunburned During Pregnancy (and How to Prevent It)

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Peeling red painted wooden boards symbolizing sunburned peeling skin

Did you know you're more prone to sunburn when you're pregnant? Skin experts tell us the best way to avoid burning and how to treat a sunburn if you get one.

The best way to avoid a sunburn during pregnancy — when your skin is extra sensitive — is to wear a mineral-based sunscreen and avoid sun exposure when the sun's rays are strongest. If you do get burned, try a cooling oatmeal bath or aloe cream, and for a bad burn, talk with your health care practitioner about treatment.

It's impossible to avoid the sun altogether, nor should you. Here's what you need to know about sun safety during pregnancy.

Key Takeaways

Pregnancy can make your skin more sensitive to the sun. Hormonal changes and other pregnancy-related shifts can increase your risk of sunburn, hyperpigmentation (melasma), and other skin issues, making sun protection especially important.

The best defense is a mineral sunscreen and smart sun habits. Choose a mineral sunscreen with zinc oxide or titanium dioxide, use at least SPF 30 (or SPF 50 for extended outdoor time), reapply regularly, stay hydrated, seek shade, and avoid peak sun hours when possible.

If you do get sunburned, treat it promptly and safely. Cooling remedies such as aloe vera, oatmeal baths, and cool showers are generally pregnancy-safe, but severe burns should be discussed with your health care practitioner.

Why is my skin more sensitive to the sun during pregnancy?

Women can be more prone to sunburn when they're pregnant thanks to a variety of changes happening in the body, most notably hormone fluctuations, says Michelle Henry , M.D., a board-certified dermatologist in New York City.

"A major sunburn can be problematic because many of the medications we use to treat sunburn aren't ideal during pregnancy," she says. “That's why being diligent about sunscreen use during pregnancy is especially important."

Hormones aren't the only factor. Other changes that may contribute to increased sun sensitivity include:

Immune system changes

A fluctuating metabolism

Increased blood volume and changes in heart rate and blood pressure

A higher body temperature

"I noticed that not only was I more susceptible, but it took me longer to heal as well," says What to Expect Community mom PurpleCow23.

Sunburn isn't the only skin change you may experience during pregnancy. "You might also have increased dryness , eczema , acne , rosacea flares, and increased risk of hyperpigmentation ," notes Michele Farber , M.D., a board-certified dermatologist in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

"I've had rosacea flares since I was a teenager, but the only times in recent years have been when I'm pregnant," says Community mom CopperBooom.

Why is prenatal sun protection so important?

Making suncare part of your self-care routine is best for you and your growing baby.

"A healthy mom equals a healthy baby!" says Dr. Henry. "Anything that is not putting the mom at risk, like having a bad sunburn that needs to be treated medically, is going to lead to a happy, healthy baby."

Sunburns can contribute to skin aging, hyperpigmentation, and even skin cancer. The following sun-related risks are the most important to watch out for during pregnancy:

Melasma or hyperpigmentation

Melasma or hyperpigmentation is a common skin change during pregnancy . Some people even refer to it as the "pregnancy mask" because it often appears on the upper lip, forehead, or cheeks. Exposure to UV light can trigger melasma and make it worse.

If you develop melasma during pregnancy, know that it usually fades after pregnancy and the postpartum period. Consult with a board-certified dermatologist to work on a treatment plan.

Overheating and dehydration

Pregnancy can make you more vulnerable to the heat, according to Dr. Farber. Because your body is working hard to support a growing baby, it also has to work harder to cool itself down. Heat exhaustion and heat strokes are real concerns.

It's also important to be aware of something called a vasovagal episode. "A vasovagal episode is when a pregnant woman faints from overheating as a result of blood pressure changes," explains Alicia Robbins, M.D. , a board-certified OB/GYN in Greenwich, Connecticut. "While this shouldn't have any serious long-term effects on the pregnancy, it's important to be proactive by limiting direct sun exposure and staying well hydrated ."

That said, don't worry that if you get a sunburn, your baby will, too. "A fetus cannot get sunburned while in utero," says Dr. Farber.

How can I avoid a sunburn during pregnancy?

The most obvious way to avoid sun damage is by wearing sunscreen. You may be wondering: What's the safest type during pregnancy — mineral or chemical? And what number SPF should you choose — 30, 50, or higher?

"I always suggest that my patients use a mineral sunscreen rather than a chemical one, especially during pregnancy, as they don't want to absorb the chemicals into their bloodstream," advises Dr. Henry. "For daily use, I recommend an SPF 30, but if you plan to be outside for more than an hour, use an SPF 50 — and make sure to reapply every two hours."

Look for mineral sunscreens with the ingredients zinc oxide or titanium dioxide. "Active ingredients in mineral sunscreens sit on top of the skin, so they're less likely to cause irritation or allergic reactions in skin that is already more sensitive," says Jessica Wu, M.D. , dermatologist and What to Expect Medical Review Board Member in Los Angeles, California.

The main reason to stick to mineral-based sunscreens? The chemicals in others.

"Research suggests that some chemicals found in personal care products may act as endocrine disruptors, explains Dr. Robbins. "Endocrine disruptors can interfere with the body's hormone system."

She recommends avoiding sunscreen formulas that contain homosalats, oxybenzone, and avobenzone during pregnancy.

If you find yourself outside for extended periods of time, wear a hat and other protective clothing, stay in the shade, and drink plenty of water.

Timing matters, too. "Try not to spend a lot of time outside during peak hours of UV exposure," says Dr. Henry. Depending on where you live, that can be anywhere from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.

And last but not least, don't neglect skin checks during pregnancy.

How can I treat a sunburn in pregnancy?

If you do get a sunburn, ask your practitioner what they recommend. In many cases, they may suggest an after-sun product containing aloe vera, an oatmeal bath, or a cool shower, says Dr. Robbins. These treatments are generally considered safe during pregnancy.

"I tried an after-sun lotion with aloe and it helped a lot," says Community mom ksrk2024.

For a more severe sunburn, cortisone cream may be an option, but talk with your practitioner first.

"The most important thing is to bring down the inflammation," Dr. Henry says. But remember, NSAIDS ( ibuprofen) are not recommended in pregnancy. If you feel like you need a pain reliever, you can ask your practitioner whether acetaminophen ( Tylenol ) is appropriate for you.

Try not to stress . There's a lot to remember during pregnancy, and sun protection is just one piece of the puzzle. Spending time outdoors, taking walks, and getting some sunshine can all be healthy parts of a healthy pregnancy. Just be sure to protect your skin, stay hydrated, and avoid overdoing it in the heat — especially since you're more susceptible to sunburn right now.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. Anais Brasileiros de Dermatologia , Clinical Study of Skin Changes in Low and High Risk Pregnant Women, December 2015. Cleveland Clinic, Melasma , July 2020. Alicia Robbins, M.D., board-certified OB-GYN and founder of The Elm in Greenwich, CT Michelle Henry , M.D., board-certified dermatologist and founder of Skin & Aesthetic Surgery of Manhattan Michele Farber, M.D., board-certified dermatologist at Schweiger Dermatology Group in Philadelphia, PA MotherToBaby, Spring Break Safety for Pregnant and Breastfeeding Women: Tips for a Fun and Safe Holiday , March 2025.

Updates history

June 29, 2026

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

Editors: Karen Miles/Rebekah Wahlberg

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

Should I Use Sunscreen When I'm Pregnant? Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Makes Your Skin Sensitive — and What Actually Helps Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Pregnancy Can Leave Your Skin Feeling Parched Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Skin Changes During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

How to Relieve Itchy Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Oily Skin During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Is It Pregnancy Fatigue or Heat Exhaustion? How to Tell the Difference Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Got Blotches, Patches, or Mottling? The Truth About Pregnancy Skin Darkening Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Why Your Pregnant Belly Itches (and What Actually Helps) Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Mosquito Bites During Pregnancy: Why You're a Magnet and How to Stay Protected Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Does Pregnancy-Safe Tanner Really Exist? Here’s What Dermatologists Want You to Know Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

Sunburn in Babies Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

Sunscreen and Sun Protection for Babies: What Parents Need to Know Medically Reviewed by Robin Schaffran, M.D.

10 Dermatologist-Approved Products to Relieve Your Itchy Pregnancy Skin Medically Reviewed by Jessica Wu, M.D.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window