Why Is My Baby Refusing Solids?

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"Lately, my 8-month-old daughter refuses any of the solid baby food we've been feeding her. She throws a fit if she sees a spoon coming toward her mouth, turns her head and refuses to eat. Is this just a stage she's going through or should I be worried?"

It sounds like your little girl is just acting her age. Plenty of 9-month-olds will flex their baby independence muscles by turning up their little noses at the spoon a grown-up is trying to wield their way. What’s a parent to do? Here are some tips for navigating her new feeding fussiness:

Introduce new foods

When she refuses to eat the usual purees, she may be ready to move on to new textures of solid baby food ("I'm done with mush, Mom"). So now's the time to start expanding her culinary horizons and promoting her eating independence.

How? Begin by introducing new foods like baby finger foods that she can feed herself. And really, any food becomes a finger food at this stage — even applesauce — so be prepared for a major mess!

Lay out a few nibbles for her to select from, and let her pick and choose. Little cubes of soft-cooked sweet potato or carrot, soft-cooked pasta or chunks of banana are all good baby finger foods to start with. Just be sure to introduce foods one at a time so she can get used to the flavors (and in case of an allergy).

Offer a spoon

You can also encourage your daughter's exploration into self-feeding freedom by giving her a spoon of her own while you continue feeding her solid baby food. She may not be able to do much more than wave it around at first, but brandishing a spoon may keep her content and busy enough to enable you to dish up some food into her mouth.

Plus, it's good practice for the future. The distant future, that is — expect most food to be delivered by fingers for a long time to come.

Consider other deterrents

Another factor that might be contributing to your daughter's refusal to eat is a new disdain for high-chair captivity. As babies become more active (or have new mobility skills they want to practice), mealtime is no longer the highlight of their day.

Teething can also cramp a baby's eating style and explain why she refuses to eat.

Whatever you do, don't let mealtime become battle time or you'll risk setting her up for future dinner-table duels. Be blasé no matter how much she eats or refuses to eat — and when she does feed herself solid baby food, reinforce her decision by giving her plenty of praise and encouragement.

Here's to Miss Independent,

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect the First Year , 3rd edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Baby Self-Feeding , March 2021. WhatToExpect.com, Best Finger Foods for Babies , December 2020. WhatToExpect.com, Introducing Solid Foods to Your Baby , December 2020. WhatToExpect.com, When Do Babies Start Teething? , June 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, Starting Solid Foods , March 2021. American Academy of Pediatrics, Food Allergies in Children , November 2018. Mayo Clinic, Solid Foods: How to Get Your Baby Started , May 2021.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Baby Self-Feeding Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Encourage Your Baby to Eat Finger Foods Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

Introducing Solid Foods to Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Homemade Baby Food Recipes Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby Feeding Schedules & Baby Food Chart for the First Year Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

Common Baby Feeding Problems After You Introduce Solids Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Baby-Led Weaning Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Nutritional Needs of Babies: the First 12 Months Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Best Finger Foods for Babies Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Friedman, M.S., R.D.

8 Foods to Avoid Feeding Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

Here’s How to Bottle-Feed Your Baby Medically Reviewed by Marvin Resmovits, M.D.

How Much Should My Baby Eat? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Feeding a Sick Baby Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Help Me, Heidi! My Breastfed Baby Won't Take a Bottle By Heidi Murkoff

How to Wean Your Baby Off the Bottle Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window