Why I Chose to Exclusively Pump Twice

mom pumping breast milk while smiling at her baby

Having exclusively pumped not once but twice, I’ve noticed that EPing is often not seen as breastfeeding. Here’s why that’s not true — and why it was the right choice for my family.

I had just welcomed my firstborn and felt thrilled that he was finally here. But as soon as it was time to feed him, things became difficult.

While I had been intent on at least trying to breastfeed, I struggled to get my baby to latch and felt frustrated by the constant push to nurse. Lactation consultants and nurses came in every three hours to help me breastfeed, telling me things like, "Just keep trying, mama, we’ll get there."

They meant well, but the process resulted in extreme exhaustion for me (when I was already drained from just giving birth) and a cranky baby who just wanted a little snack and a snuggle from his mom. It soon became clear that nursing wasn’t going to work for us.

This isn’t a slight on the nurses at my hospital — they were just trying to help, and it’s been shown that moms are more likely to continue breastfeeding if they have this kind of support. This also isn’t a slight on parents who nurse their little ones, which is a beautiful path to take. Rather, I hope my story helps give other new moms permission to choose another way of breastfeeding — exclusive pumping — if it turns out to be the right choice for them.

Exclusive pumping (often referred to as "EPing" for short) means feeding your baby breast milk that you express or pump with a bottle, NG tube or other means. Having exclusively pumped not once but twice, I’ve come to realize that pumping is often not considered breastfeeding. But how a family chooses to feed their baby should be no one else’s business but their own. There’s no one “correct” way to nourish your little one.

I chose to exclusively pump because I didn’t love having my baby at the breast. It was painful and did a number on my mental health. So, I started exclusively pumping before I even knew there was a term for it. As I got into a groove of pumping and bottle-feeding , I became hungry for more information. How many times should I pump each day, and for how long? How long was breast milk good for if I put it in the fridge immediately? What if I left it out at room temperature? What about cleaning all of those pump parts ?

In those first few weeks when I was searching for answers, I quickly discovered that there is a serious lack of resources for those who exclusively pump. I tried a lot of tips and tricks and made notes of the strategies that seemed to work. For example, I learned that using an electric pump with a hands-free pumping bra was absolutely key, since I needed my hands to hold and feed my baby or, let’s be honest, scroll through Instagram.

In the beginning, I pumped every three hours to fit in up to eight pumps per day, but quickly decided that wasn’t going to work for my mental health. I went down to six pumps every four to five hours, and eventually found a schedule that worked well for my baby and me.

As the weeks went by, I became more confident in my exclusive pumping routine but wondered why this information had been so hard for me to find. Why didn’t this feeding path feel as celebrated and supported as other options? Why was I being made to feel like exclusive pumping was weird, or didn’t count as breastfeeding?

While it can be taxing, there are a number of positive aspects that come with exclusive pumping. For starters, pumping means you can build a stash that allows your partner or a loved one to help with middle-of-the-night feeds. Exclusive pumping also means you’re able to know exactly how much milk your baby is drinking — if you have a Type A personality like me, this feels super helpful.

I also reject the notion that bottle-feeding your children doesn’t allow you to bond with them. (I can’t manage to go to the bathroom without both children following me in, so I would say we are wonderfully bonded.)

Not to mention, one of my favorite things about exclusive pumping is the ability to donate breast milk if you so choose. With my second baby, I produced an oversupply of milk and filled our freezer within a month. Since we didn’t have the space for another freezer, I looked into donating my breast milk. For eight months, I was able to donate this extra supply, and it left me feeling powerful and proud of my body.

No matter how you choose to feed your baby — breastfeeding, pumping, formula-feeding or some combination of all three — know that your feeding journey doesn’t necessarily have to be black or white, and what's right for you may also change as time goes on. My journey included a lot of ands that worked for my babies and me.

Do what works for you, your mental health and your family. A fed baby and happy parents are what matter most.

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Exclusive Pumping Guide , July 2020. WhatToExpect.com, Pumping Breast Milk Guide , September 2020. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Hospital Support for Breastfeeding , October 2015.

What Our Community Is Talking About

Best pacifiers for breastfed baby?

Night lights?

How to get fattier milk?

There are 34,002 active discussions happening now in our Breastfeeding community group.

Go to Your Baby's Age

Your Next Read

Moms Who Exclusively Pump Reveal How They Make It Work Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

Exclusive Pumping Guide Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Stop Pumping Medically Reviewed by Rebecca Amaru, M.D.

Pumping Breast Milk Guide and Tips for Success Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Finding the Right Power Pumping Schedule for You Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The Key to Making Triple Feeding Work? Knowing Your Limits Medically Reviewed by Tina Feeley, M.D., M.P.H.

Cluster Pumping vs. Power Pumping — What’s the Difference? Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Common Pumping Problems and Solutions Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

15 Moms Share What Breastfeeding Really Feels Like Fact Checked by Caroline Picard, Deputy Editor

How Combination Feeding Helped Me Manage as a New Mom of Twins By Zayda Rivera, Contributing Writer

How to Power Pump to Boost Your Milk Supply Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Pumping Breast Milk for Twins Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The Breastfeeding Trick That Saved My Sanity With a Newborn Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

Best Pumping and Milk Storage Essentials By Cassie Shortsleeve, Contributing Writer

8 Best Breast Pumps, Tested and Loved by Over 300 Moms Medically Reviewed by Suzanne Chan, D.N.P., C.L.C., C.P.S.T.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window