Why Pregnancy Can Make Sex Hurt — and Simple Ways to Find Relief

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

pregnant couple on bed enjoying moments

Painful sex during pregnancy isn't unusual. Here's what might be behind it and how to ease the discomfort so you can get back to (ahem!) having fun.

Nausea, swelling, back aches — and now sex hurts? Alas, pregnancy discomforts can actually extend to the bedroom for some women. But the good news is that you can ease soreness with some smart tweaks to your routine and treat certain conditions behind the pain.

Here's what to know.

Key Takeaways

Painful sex happens. Vaginal dryness, your bigger belly, anxiety, and surging hormones all factor into this common pregnancy symptom.

It could be an infection. Check in with your physician because sex that hurts could be due to a UTI, yeast infection, or other treatable condition.

Easy fixes. You can soothe the discomfort with lube, different positions, and talking it over with your partner.

What causes pain during sex while pregnant?

There are a number of reasons you might experience painful sex during pregnancy . Here's what can cause the soreness and discomfort you're feeling:

Vaginal dryness

The hormone estrogen promotes lubrication and elasticity in the vaginal walls and lining. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsExperiencing Vaginal Dryness? Here's What You Need to KnowSee All Sources [1] But during pregnancy, changing hormone levels can cause dryness, irritation, itching, soreness, and sometimes bleeding during sex.

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsExperiencing Vaginal Dryness? Here's What You Need to KnowSee All Sources

To help, consider a different, more comfortable sex position or try an over-the-counter water-based lubricant or moisturizer. Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicVaginal DrynessSee All Sources [2]

Vaginal Dryness

Changes to your sex life are a common part of pregnancy. For more answers to your between-the-sheets questions, download the What to Expect app .

Anxiety

Those same pregnancy hormones can also bring on some anxiety, which can crop up during your sessions between the sheets.

You might feel unsettled if you notice spotting , for example. (This is pretty common after pregnancy sex, and it's usually not a sign of anything concerning. Whew!)

Increased sensitivity

Your body's erogenous zones (like the breasts, nipples, and vulva) may swell or feel painful to the touch. While some women enjoy these intense feelings, overly sensitive or tender nipples may hurt others.

To ease the ache, ask your partner to move with care or avoid certain areas altogether for a little while.

What to Expect Community parent annono318 reports some pain during sex: “I had intercourse yesterday and it wasn’t rough at all, but right after I felt sore and this morning I noticed everything just felt swollen, like there’s a lot of pressure.”

Your bump

Your belly can make it harder to maneuver, and other body changes can contribute to some discomfort during sex. The fix here: Try out different positions, or go for oral sex or mutual masturbation.

Hemorrhoids

Pregnancy hormones increase blood volume to better support your baby. This extra pressure on your blood vessels can also cause varicose veins — often in your legs, but also sometimes in the vulva or rectum (aka hemorrhoids ).

If you feel pain during sex, along with vaginal swelling, tell your doctor as you might have varicose veins.

Ectopic pregnancy

When a fertilized egg implants outside the uterus, it can cause pelvic and abdominal pain, along with vaginal bleeding. Contact your physician right away if you're experiencing these symptoms, as an ectopic pregnancy requires immediate treatment. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBleeding During PregnancySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsBleeding During PregnancySee All Sources

What causes pain or burning after sex while pregnant?

A urinary tract infection (UTI) or yeast infection can lead to uncomfortable sex and burning, notes Katie Propst , M.D., a urogynecologist and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board , and you're at a higher risk for both when you're pregnant.

You'll want to watch out for other symptoms that can accompany these infections, and report any you notice to your doctor. Some common causes include:

A yeast infection

Thanks to higher estrogen levels, the risk of yeast infections increases during pregnancy. In addition to burning after sex, you may notice a red, swollen, or itchy vulva; painful urination; and white, lumpy, odorless discharge.

A urinary tract infection (UTI)

A UTI can cause burning while peeing, a frequent need to pee, cloudy urine, low-grade fever, and lower belly pain. If you notice these symptoms or sex remains painful over time, call your practitioner, says Dr. Propst.

An STI or STD

Painful sex or burning after sex might also point to a sexually transmitted infection (STI) or a subsequent sexually transmitted disease (STD) . An STD can bring on pain while urinating, body aches, vaginal discharge, genital sores, swollen glands, and fever.

When should I talk to my doctor about painful sex during pregnancy?

Keep in mind that you can always talk with your doctor about pain during sex so you can find both reassurance and a solution. Some discomfort during sex is common, though it's often short-lived and treatable.

"Many of these issues can be treated, and there's no reason to be embarrassed, either," Dr. Propst says.

You should definitely call if you have serious symptoms or red flags such as heavy bleeding (with or without cramps), intense stomach pain or painful, burning urination.

How can I prevent pain during or after sex while pregnant?

You don't have to put up with painful sex. To help ease aches, tenderness, and discomfort, consider the following ideas:

Talk it over. Be upfront with your partner if you have pain, feel anxious, or enjoy sex less than before you were pregnant. Having an honest discussion will get the issues on the table and lead to solutions.

Be open-minded. Different positions, massage, oral sex, or lubricants are all some ways to allay discomfort. Experiment to see whether any make a difference.

Go slowly. Busy days and an ever-changing body can sap your energy for sex. Set aside enough time to unwind beforehand (take a bath, read a book… ) so you don't have to rush.

Check with the doctor. Don't be shy about mentioning painful sex during pregnancy to your doctor, and be sure to list all of your symptoms in case an infection is the cause. Together, you can come up with a plan to ease the pain.

Just like other pregnancy symptoms, this too shall pass. In the meantime, speak up — to your partner and your doctor — about what would make you more comfortable.