Why Pre-Registering for Labor and Delivery Can Make Your Life Easier

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

Labor and Delivery Preparation

Planning on delivering at a hospital or birthing center? You could just show up, but it's better to come prepared — so here’s what you need to know about pre-registration.

The last thing you’ll want to do when you’re in the throes of labor is fill out multiple forms with your name, address, date of birth, and other pesky details. Frankly, those tiny boxes can be maddening and you’ve got bigger things to do at this point (like have a baby!). Your best bet: Get ready ahead of time by pre-registering at the hospital or birthing center where you plan to deliver.

By pre-registering, you’ll get a bunch of paperwork out of the way and possibly create a less stressful delivery experience — and who doesn’t want less anxiety when those contractions are coming fast and furious?

"I did it [pre-registered] weeks ago as soon as I got the packet from my OB," says What to Expect Community user tr0708. "It just means you dont have to fill out as much paperwork whenever you go into labor, no reason to hold off on doing it."

For some help with this process, here are some of the typical pre-registration steps, the various documents you’ll need and a few other things to prepare for your hospital stay.

Key Takeaways

Pre-register early. Completing hospital or birthing center paperwork ahead of time saves stress during labor and speeds up admission when contractions start.

Have key documents ready. Bring photo ID, insurance info, and pre-registration forms (plus your birth plan if you have one) to streamline check-in.

Prepare logistics in advance. Know which entrance to use, map your route, pack your hospital bag, arrange childcare/pet care, and install your baby’s car seat before labor begins.

What is hospital pre-registration for labor and delivery?

Hospital pre-registration for labor and delivery is basically the business end of giving birth. It’s your chance to fill out the various forms required by your health care facility with the goal of speeding up your admission process.

While pre-registration doesn’t eliminate all the paperwork you'll need to fill out, it does ensure your name, your doctor’s name, and insurance info are ready and waiting for you when you arrive. Theoretically, doing so minimizes the paperwork you’ll need to complete and gets you checked in faster. Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Health & Human Services Office on Women's HealthLast-minute to-dosSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceU.S. Department of Health & Human Services Office on Women's HealthLast-minute to-dosSee All Sources

What is the typical hospital pre-registration process for labor?

Keep in mind that not every hospital or birthing center has a pre-registration option and you may not need to pre-register if your doctor is already a part of a hospital network (sort of like one-stop shopping). But for those that do, here’s the typical process, trimester by trimester:

First trimester. Check in with your practitioner to learn which facility he or she has admitting privileges to so you can take a tour and learn about the amenities.

Second trimester. Contact your birthing location to learn about the forms you need to have on file before you arrive — and then fill them out online or on paper.

Third trimester. Haven’t completed your pre-registration homework? You’ve still got time. Also, save the link to your details or tuck a copy of it into your hospital bag in case you need to refer to it or hand it over when you arrive.

Once you get to the hospital to check in, you’ll probably be seen by a nurse who will assess your condition, ask about your contractions and their timing, and then go over your personal info (which should already be on file if you pre-registered). Your doctor will be contacted, if they weren't already, and you’ll be moved into a labor room if you’re deemed ready to go. Trusted SourceNew York PresbyterianLabor & DeliverySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceNew York PresbyterianLabor & DeliverySee All Sources

Keep in mind that the best laid plans can sometimes go awry, and you may be asked to fill out some of the same forms you already faced several weeks ago. If this is the case, take a deep breath and redo them or have your labor partner help out while you focus on breathing through your contractions.

Have more questions about your upcoming labor? You can learn more about labor and delivery in the What to Expect app , plus talk to other moms who have been there.

What paperwork do you usually need to pre-register for labor and delivery?

Here are the documents you’ll likely need to pre-register. You can also pack these in your hospital bag so you can grab it and go when the big day arrives: Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusWhat to bring to your labor and deliverySee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusWhat to bring to your labor and deliverySee All Sources

Photo ID (driver’s license or passport)

Health insurance card or plan number

Pre-registration or admissions paperwork

Your birth plan , if you wrote one (optional)

What else can you do to prepare for your hospital stay?

It never hurts to be extra prepared, especially when you’re going into labor — and especially for first-time moms. To help you get ready for your hospital stay, consider the following:

Find the entrance. It sounds obvious, but if you go into labor in the middle of the night, which door will you need to use? Some hospitals require that you to enter through the emergency room, so take note of your options by scheduling a tour before D-day. If you'll be arriving in your own car, it's also a good idea to know where you should park.

Map it out. If you’re lucky, you’ve never rushed to your local hospital before. You know the way, of course — or at least you did before the latest highway construction project tore up the nearest exit. Now’s a great time to map out the most direct route and then do a dry run by driving it with your partner. Plan an alternate route too, just in case the exit is closed or traffic is at a standstill.

Check your bag. You may have unpacked and repacked your overnight bag 10 times, but are you sure you have the essentials? We’ve got a handy checklist of everything you’ll need for yourself, your partner and, of course, for that sweet bundle of joy you’ll be bringing one.

Line up caretakers. Have older children at home? Figure out who will be on babysitting patrol while you’re in labor. Make sure they’re in the know, too, on call, and easily tracked down, day or night. Ditto for pets — sign someone up to walk the dog or feed your cat.

Buy (and install) the infant car seat . You need a car seat to take your baby home — and since installation isn’t rocket science — but comes pretty close, spend time perfecting your technique. Install the seat in advance and then make sure you’ve done it properly by visiting a car seat clinic at your local fire station or baby store. Find one near you at National Child Passenger Safety Certification .

If you’re taking a taxi or car service home, you’ll still need a car seat for your littlest passenger. Make sure you understand the seat’s instructions now so you’re not fumbling with straps on that wonderful, nerve-wracking, overwhelming day you bring your baby home. Better still, practice, practice, practice.