Why the Tdap Vaccine During Pregnancy Is So Important

Updated with latest expert recommendations.

tdap vaccine during pregnancy, pregnant woman getting a vaccine

Not only is it safe to get the Tdap vaccine when you're pregnant, but it protects both you and your baby from getting whooping cough.

You're attending all of your prenatal appointments, taking your prenatal vitamins , and getting plenty of sleep, but did you know one of the most important tools for staying healthy during pregnancy is making sure you're up-to-date on your vaccines ?

On the list: the Tdap vaccine (short for tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis), which not only protects you from catching whooping cough (aka pertussis), but also keeps your newborn baby safer until she can get her own vaccine. And that's ultra important considering how serious whooping cough can be, especially in newborns and young infants.

Here are some common questions you may have about the Tdap vaccine during pregnancy, plus when you should get this crucial shot.

Key Takeaways

Tdap protects against tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis, aka whooping cough. Experts recommend getting it during the third trimester of every pregnancy, between weeks 27 and 36.

It helps protect you and your newborn. Tdap is considered very safe during pregnancy and passes protective antibodies to your little one before birth.

That protection matters. Whooping cough is highly contagious and can be especially dangerous for newborns, who can’t get their own vaccine until 2 months old.

Do I need the Tdap vaccine when I'm pregnant?

Yes, all moms-to-be should get the Tdap vaccine in the third trimester (between weeks 27 and 36) of every pregnancy, according to leading expert groups including the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG). This vaccine is so important because it protects the health of both mothers and their newborn babies. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsThe Tdap Vaccine and PregnancySee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsThe Tdap Vaccine and PregnancySee All Sources

"I urge pregnant women to get the Tdap vaccine," says Jennifer Wu , M.D., an OB/GYN with her own practice, Women's Health of Manhattan, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board . "Most patients are not up-to-date with their tetanus vaccines and this is so important for their general health. Because it is a vaccine that is given every 10 years, it often gets forgotten."

Why should pregnant women get the Tdap vaccine?

When you get the Tdap vaccine during pregnancy, it helps protect your baby from whooping cough through passive immunity, meaning immunity that's passed from mom to baby.

This is critical, since if a baby gets pertussis as a newborn, it can be extremely serious and even life-threatening.

Newborns are the most likely age group to be hospitalized because of whooping cough and suffer potentially fatal complications from it, and babies can't get vaccinated themselves until they are 2 months old.

“[I] got [the Tdap vaccine] with my first and just got mine again this morning at 29 weeks,” says What to Expect Community mom kathyyyyyy. “If I can offer my baby protection for the first few weeks of life, I will do it.”

Your vaccination during pregnancy passes protective antibodies to your baby so she’s safer until she can get her own vaccine.

Want to stay on top of every pregnancy must-do — from vaccines to checkups? The What to Expect app helps you track it all, get expert guidance, and connect with parents who’ve been there.

What does the Tdap vaccine protect against?

The Tdap vaccine protects against three serious illnesses: tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis. Here's what you need to know about each one.

Tetanus

Also known as "lock jaw," tetanus is a condition caused by a puncture or deep cut that leads to a bacterial infection. Though very rare due to vaccines, it causes tightening of the muscles in the face and neck, making it difficult for people to open their mouths or even breathe. Trusted SourceWorld Health OrganizationTetanusSee All Sources [2]

Tetanus

Though it’s uncommon, vaccination is critical because tetanus can be very dangerous should you contract it. This infection can be fatal if you get it and are unvaccinated, even if you have high-quality medical care.

Diphtheria

Diphtheria causes a thick coating to form on the back of the throat, making it hard to breathe. Though it's exceedingly rare in the U.S. thanks to vaccines, this condition can cause heart failure and paralysis.

Without vaccination, diphtheria can be fatal, and young children are particularly at risk. Around 30% of unvaccinated people will die from the infection without proper treatment. Trusted SourceWorld Health OrganizationDiphtheriaSee All Sources [3]

Diphtheria

Pertussis

Also known as whooping cough, pertussis causes intense coughing spells, vomiting, problems breathing, difficulty sleeping, and sometimes even death. The Tdap vaccine you receive during pregnancy provides protection for your baby-to-be against whooping cough, which can strike newborns before they're able to get their first dose of the DTaP vaccine starting at 2 months old.

"Babies really need the protection against pertussis because of their small airways and higher risks of serious disease needing ventilation," Dr. Wu says.

Widespread vaccination has greatly reduced how many people get tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis in the United States. Before the Tdap vaccine was available, 200,000 people a year came down with pertussis, compared with 5,000 cases in 2023. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicHistory of whooping cough: Outbreaks and vaccine timelineSee All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicHistory of whooping cough: Outbreaks and vaccine timelineSee All Sources

However, pertussis is still quite common since the vaccine does not protect you for a whole lifetime. That's why it's so important that expectant women get the Tdap vaccine during each pregnancy.

When should pregnant women get the Tdap vaccine?

Pregnant women should get the Tdap vaccine between 27 and 36 weeks of each pregnancy, preferably during the earlier part of that window. If you miss that timeframe, though, don’t worry: You can still get it before delivery or immediately postpartum. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists2026 Maternal Immunization ScheduleSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists2026 Maternal Immunization ScheduleSee All Sources

And if you're in an area where an outbreak of whooping cough is currently going on or if you have a deep cut in your skin and it's time for a tetanus booster, you can get the vaccine even earlier than 27 weeks. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsUpdate on Immunization and Pregnancy: Tetanus, Diphtheria, and Pertussis VaccinationSee All Sources [6]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsUpdate on Immunization and Pregnancy: Tetanus, Diphtheria, and Pertussis VaccinationSee All Sources

Adults and kids 11 years and older should also make sure they are up-to-date with the Tdap vaccine to create a "cocoon" of protection against whooping cough when your baby is the most vulnerable. Cocooning does not completely protect babies from whooping cough on its own, however, which is why it is still important that you get the vaccine while you are pregnant.

Cocooning, in combination with getting the Tdap vaccine during your pregnancy and making sure your little one gets all vaccines on time, provides the best protection possible to your baby.

I urge pregnant women to get the Tdap vaccine to protect themselves and their babies.

Dr. Jennifer Wu, OB/GYN in New York City and Member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board

Is the Tdap vaccine safe during pregnancy?

Yes, the Tdap vaccine is safe for both you and your baby during pregnancy. You may experience some minor side effects, including:

Soreness at the site of the shot

Redness

Body aches

Headaches

Mild fever

Nausea

Chills

Fatigue

Serious reactions such as fainting, severe pain, and bleeding are extremely rare. You cannot get whooping cough, tetanus, or diphtheria from the vaccine.

“I got the TDAP vaccine,” says What to Expect Community user Coffeemages. “It’s safe, and it helps protect baby against whooping cough, which can be super dangerous to infants. I didn’t even have a sore arm after it.”

How often should pregnant women and other adults get Tdap?

Pregnant women should get one dose of Tdap during each pregnancy. Adults who are not pregnant only need one dose of Tdap in a lifetime. All adults should get a Td (tetanus and diphtheria) booster every 10 years.

"I advise families that anyone taking care of the baby for an extended period of time should also get the Tdap vaccine," Dr. Wu says.

What if you've already received the Tdap vaccine before you were pregnant — do you still need it?

Yes, even if you got the vaccine at some point before you were pregnant, you should get the Tdap shot again in the third trimester of every pregnancy.

Some moms-to-be might feel concerned about the safety of the Tdap vaccine during pregnancy. But rest assured that this vaccine is very safe and is a crucial way to protect your child from the very real risk of catching whooping cough at a time in her life when she’s most vulnerable.

As always, bring up any questions or concerns you have with your doctor — they’re there to help.