Why You Might Feel Bloated When You're Pregnant — and What You Can Do About It

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

bloating during pregnancy

What causes that bloated, gurgly, gassy, full-of-it feeling during pregnancy — and what every pregnant woman can do about pregnancy bloating.

In the dictionary, "bloating" means "to cause abdominal distension." (Ah, so that's why you've been feeling like a hot-air balloon during pregnancy.) And having gas while you're pregnant means discomfort — and lots of it.

"I’m 6 weeks, 4 days and am soooo bloated most of the time," says What to Expect Community user mk1231. "It’s so uncomfortable."

Here's why you might feel especially bloated when you're pregnant, plus some strategies to help ease your symptoms.

Key Takeaways

Bloating is common in pregnancy. This symptom often starts around week 11 of pregnancy (sometimes earlier) and can last until delivery, caused mainly by the hormone progesterone, which slows digestion and increases gas.

To get relief from pregnancy bloating, stay hydrated, eat fiber gradually, choose smaller meals, eat slowly, manage your stress, and limit gas-producing foods like beans, cabbage, and onions.

It may also help to do some light walking, take probiotics, consume warm drinks, or take any doctor-approved medications (like Gas-X) to ease discomfort safely during pregnancy.

When does bloating happen during pregnancy?

Bloating may be one of your most frequent and least charming early pregnancy symptoms, first showing up around week 11 and likely lasting throughout your pregnancy up until delivery day. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSymptoms of pregnancy: What happens firstSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicSymptoms of pregnancy: What happens firstSee All Sources

You can keep track of bloating throughout your pregnancy using the My Journal tool in the What to Expect app , plus get tips for managing other frustrating early pregnancy symptoms.

What causes pregnancy bloating?

It might seem as though your jeans start to feel snug as soon as the pregnancy test comes back positive — and you can thank the pregnancy hormone progesterone for that puffy phenomenon.

While progesterone is essential for maintaining a healthy pregnancy (it is, after all, the pro-gestation hormone), it also triggers that oh-so-delightful trio: bloating, burping, and passing gas.

Why? Progesterone causes the smooth muscle tissue in your body (including the gastrointestinal tract) to relax. This slows down digestion, giving the nutrients from food you eat more time to enter your bloodstream and reach your baby. Trusted SourceUniversity of Rochester Medical CenterPregnancy: How Your Digestion ChangesSee All Sources [2] That's the good news.

Trusted SourceUniversity of Rochester Medical CenterPregnancy: How Your Digestion ChangesSee All Sources

The bad news is this slower digestion when you're pregnant can cause you to feel bloated and bring on a cramp or two (or seven).

What’s more, your expanding uterus places increasing pressure on your rectum, which can wreak havoc on muscle control and lead to the passing of some serious wind.

How long does pregnancy bloating last?

Sorry, but that ate-too-much feeling you've been experiencing is a pregnancy symptom that's likely to get worse as your uterus keeps expanding and pressing on your stomach and intestines.

It's a bit of a pain for you (literally), but take comfort in knowing that your baby is oblivious to the discomfort of pregnancy bloating and the other pregnancy symptoms you're experiencing (hello, nausea ).

How to get rid of bloating during pregnancy

While there’s a pretty good chance you’ll experience some amount of bloating no matter what you do throughout pregnancy, managing constipation can minimize the buildup of painful gas. Here are a few tips that can help: Trusted SourceInternational Foundation for Gastrointestinal DisordersUnderstanding Bloating and DistensionSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceInternational Foundation for Gastrointestinal DisordersUnderstanding Bloating and DistensionSee All Sources

1. Drink plenty of water

Staying hydrated helps keep things moving through your digestive system to avoid constipation , which is a common cause of gas and bloating.

2. Fit in fiber

Eating plenty of fiber is another way to curb pregnancy constipation — think leafy greens, legumes, whole grains (like whole wheat bread or pasta), and fruits. On the flip side, suddenly adding tons of fiber to your diet can be a recipe for gas. If you're not already regularly noshing on fiber, introduce it to your diet gradually.

"The constipation and bloating were the worst symptoms so far for me! I’m happy to report at just over 11 weeks I’m nearly back to a regular system," says What to Expect Community user cristan2126. "I followed the recommendations of lots of water, dried prunes, more fiber."

3. Opt for smaller meals

The more food you pump into your stomach at a sitting, the more gas you'll be pumping out. Fueling up on six small meals a day or three moderate ones plus two or three snacks will not only keep your nutrition levels constant to better nourish your baby, they'll prevent your digestive system from getting overloaded, keeping gas pains and heartburn in check.

4. Slow down

If you typically scarf down your lunch in five minutes flat, you're probably swallowing a lot of air along with that food. The air will end up settling into your stomach in the form of painful gas bubbles (no pain to your baby, just you) and bloating.

No matter how busy you are, do your best to eat at a leisurely pace during pregnancy. Not only will you cut down on your abdominal discomfort , but you'll be giving yourself a well-deserved break.

5. Try to relax

Anxious eating during pregnancy (lunch gobbled while you're finishing a report; dinner devoured when you're having an argument with your mom on the phone) also leads to air swallowing and — you guessed it — bloating.

Try not to eat your sandwich with a side of stress. Stop and take a few deep breaths to calm yourself before and during your meal — and remember that "lunch break" means you're actually supposed to take a break.

6. Cut back on the beans

Their (well-deserved) reputation precedes their entrance … and exit. You don't have to give them up entirely (they're a great source of protein and other nutrients), but try not to overdo them in your pregnancy diet .

Other foods in the gas club include cabbage, onions, fried foods, sugary foods, and rich sauces. Avoid those that you're probably better off steering clear of anyway (like the onion rings), and moderate your intake of the others (a side of slaw, not a mound).

7. Skip the mannitol and sorbitol

While these sweeteners are safe (in reasonable amounts) during pregnancy, they can cause upset stomach and gas. So check the label of packaged products and steer clear.

8. Try probiotics

Eating foods with probiotics (like yogurt, kefir, sourdough bread, pickles, sauerkraut, miso, kimchi) helps support good bacteria to keep your gut happy, which may help fight constipation and gas. (Ask your provider before popping a prebiotic supplement.)

9. Take a walk

Even a brisk 10-minute stroll outside can help keep things moving before gas has a chance to make an appearance.

10. Talk to your doctor about OTC medication

An over-the-counter remedy can sometimes beat bloat during pregnancy . Talk to your doctor about a gas medication (like Gas X) or laxative (like Phillips’ Milk of Magnesia) to help with constipation and gas.

11. Sip on a warm drink

A mug of chamomile tea can help with all sorts of pregnancy GI woes, as can a glass of hot water with lemon.

12. Massage your abdomen

This tip may really only work early on in pregnancy, before your baby bump eclipses your intestines. But (a very gentle) abdominal massage can help ease constipation: Trusted SourceMichigan MedicineAbdominal Self Massage See All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceMichigan MedicineAbdominal Self Massage See All Sources

Begin gently rubbing in a circular motion by your right hip bone.

Move up to your right ribs, across your ribcage, down to your left hip, and over to your belly button.

The whole circuit should take two to three minutes.

Repeat for about 10 minutes total.