Why Is My 7-Month Old Going Through a Sleep Regression?

7-month sleep regression, mom holding baby to get back to sleep

Your sweetie seemed like a great sleeper — and then she wasn’t. Learn about sleep regression, a common snag in a baby’s night and naptime schedule.

Finally nailing your baby’s sleep routine can feel like a triumph. But when it goes off the rails, you might be left scratching your head. Out-of-the-blue waking at night or cheating the nap by a full 45 minutes can be a surprise when your baby had been snoozing so nicely before.

Enter the 7-month-old sleep regression, a setback in your baby’s regular nighttime or nap routine that can occur as early as 6 months and also at 8 months. And sleep regression can take place at 12 months and again a few times in the toddler years. Trusted SourcePenn Medicine, Lancaster General HealthUnderstanding and Navigating Sleep RegressionsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourcePenn Medicine, Lancaster General HealthUnderstanding and Navigating Sleep RegressionsSee All Sources

“Help! I have a soon-to-be 7-month-old and I'm not sure what we're going through. Another regression??” laments What to Expect Community mom peimama. “Now she's fighting her last nap, fighting bedtime, waking up for hours in the middle of the night, and waking up for the day two hours early. It's been a colossal mess.”

Fortunately, these phases are temporary, usually lasting only a few weeks, though it can vary. Here’s more about the 7-month sleep regression, plus tips on handling it at your house.

Why is my 7-month-old in a sleep regression?

The reasons for a 7-month sleep regression are often related to a baby's developmental milestones , says What to Expect Medical Review Board member Dr. Kyle Monk , a board-certified pediatrician at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.

“Around 7 months, babies are learning a lot of new skills, particularly gross motor skills like rolling over ,” she explains.

Your little one may also be creeping, crawling , and pushing herself into a sitting position. And with all of these fascinating new tricks in her repertoire, your baby may be keen to practice them, making it harder for her to settle down at night and for naps.

Other big changes happening around the 7-month mark that may contribute to a sleep regression include separation anxiety and the growing ability to babble . Your baby may now realize you’ve left her alone when she learns about object permanence and then wails as a result. And her ba-ba-ba-ing is adorable, of course, but when she’s “talking,” she’s definitely not getting her Zzzs.

Finally, teething pain might also conspire to rob your baby of sleep at night or during her naps. In general, teeth can start to emerge in those pink gums between 4 and 7 months of age. An achy mouth can cause a baby to wake and cry, in search of cuddles or an extra nursing session.

“I’m pretty sure baby is going through a sleep regression and possibly teething pain,” says What to Expect Community member MeganAnnKblk. “For the past few weeks, it has been such a struggle to get her down in her crib for bedtime.”

Some experts, including those from the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), hold off on calling these sleep setbacks "regressions," and instead say they're normal changes in baby sleep patterns .

"The term 'sleep regression' is not actually a medical term or a predictable developmental stage that all infants go through," says Lauren Crosby , M.D., a Los Angeles pediatrician, spokeswoman for the AAP, and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board. Instead, it's used to "describe the feeling parents have that they're going backwards after putting time and effort into developing a sleep routine that worked for them."

Signs of the 7-month sleep regression

You’ll recognize sleep regression in your 7-month-old if you spy these common signs: Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicInfant Sleep Regression: What Parents Need to KnowSee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceCleveland ClinicInfant Sleep Regression: What Parents Need to KnowSee All Sources

More crying at tuck-in or naptime

Waking up earlier than usual from a nap or at night

Taking longer to drift off to sleep

Skipped or interrupted naps

New milestones, like crawling or babbling

Tips for managing the 7-month sleep regression

The 7-month sleep regression, like any other similar blips, can be hard to handle if you were getting used to a solid chunk of shut-eye and reliable naps.

To help, check out these smart tips for managing the 7-month sleep regression.

Try not to worry. Dr. Monk urges calm and a good dose of patience. “Going through a sleep regression is a great sign that a baby is learning many new skills,” she says.

Trust your baby. Dr. Monk also reminds parents that despite the regression, “clearly your baby knows how to get long stretches of sleep.” Rely on her to get back to it very soon.

Watch for sleepy signs. What to Expect Medical Review Board Member Jesil Pazhayampallil , M.D., a pediatrician in Long Island, New York, suggests parents “look for and address signs of tiredness during the day and consider putting your baby to sleep earlier.” Contrary to what you might think, an overtired baby can actually have a harder time drifting off, she adds.

Lean on routine. Your baby will hopefully have come to expect a reliable bedtime routine , so be sure to keep up the good work. Follow your same routine of a feeding, a bath, stories, and some snuggling.

Let her fuss a little. “Don't rush to her side if she does wake up in the night, but instead wait a few minutes to see if she settles on her own,” suggests Dr. Pazhayampallil.

Remember that the 7-month sleep regression, like any others you may encounter as your baby grows and develops, is perfectly normal and not cause for concern.

“Sleep regressions are not a sign something is wrong,” says Dr. Monk.

So hang in there and know that this stage will be a thing of the past sooner than it may seem. In a few weeks, your baby will be back on track. And as always, if you have any questions or concerns, don’t hesitate to check in with your practitioner.

Key Takeaways

Sleep regressions are normal and in no way your fault. Instead, this blip on your baby’s radar is a normal reaction to the many developmental changes she’s experiencing.

Sleep regressions are temporary. Like many stages during the first year of life, these blips in the routine aren’t long-lasting. Before you know it, your little one will be back to snoozing like a champ.

Talk to you doctor if you're concerned or need help. You don’t have to sit and wonder why your infant is suddenly protesting her nap or bedtime. Your baby’s doctor is an excellent resource for all your concerns, so reach with any questions you may have about the 7-month sleep regression or any of the others.