Will You Need an IV During Labor? Understanding Routine IVs and Your Choices

Light copy updates, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

Labor procedures and interventions

While many hospitals require an IV during labor, routine intravenous lines may not always be necessary. Here's why they might be placed.

In some hospitals, it's routine to give all women intravenous lines (an IV) during labor, but other hospitals may not give moms-to-be an IV unless the need materializes. Here's what you need to know about IVs, plus what to do if you'd prefer not to have one during your labor.

Key Takeaways

IVs during labor deliver fluids and medication through a vein, helping prevent dehydration and allowing quick access if emergencies arise.

They’re often required before an epidural to stabilize blood pressure and make it easier to administer medications like Pitocin if needed.

Alternatives include requesting a heparin lock, which keeps a vein accessible without being tethered to continuous IV fluids or an IV pole.

What is an IV?

An IV is a flexible catheter placed in your vein (usually in your hand or lower arm) to drip in fluids and medication.

Why are IVs placed during labor?

The rationale behind an IV during labor? It's a precaution — to prevent dehydration (especially important if drinking isn't allowed during labor), as well as to save a step later on should an emergency arise that would necessitate medication (there's already a line in place to administer the necessary drugs — no extra poking or prodding required).

However, other practitioners may prefer to wait to see if there is a need for an IV — and oftentimes that need never materializes. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsApproaches to Limit Intervention During Labor and BirthSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsApproaches to Limit Intervention During Labor and BirthSee All Sources

Have more questions about your upcoming labor? Connect with other parents, explore birth stories, and get personalized tips in the What to Expect app .

When are IVs necessary during labor?

One time that need does arise is if you opt to get an epidural. IV fluids are routinely administered before the placement of an epidural to reduce the chance of a drop in blood pressure — a very common side effect of this pain relief route. The IV also allows for easier administration of Pitocin if there's a need for labor augmentation, as is sometimes the case following an epidural. Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMedications for Pain Relief During Labor and DeliverySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican College of Obstetricians and GynecologistsMedications for Pain Relief During Labor and DeliverySee All Sources

Although some people associate an IV with an unsettling reminder of illness — which childbirth definitely is not — it might help to consider it a small intervention in keeping you and your baby safe during labor.

Are there alternatives to IVs during labor?

In a hospital setting, an IV is usually recommended, even for women choosing an unmedicated birth. However, ask your practitioner if they can make any accomodations for you, such as not to tether you to the bed or a rolling IV pole.

If your practitioner or hospital policy requires a routine IV, you may be able to compromise. A heparin lock (in which a catheter is placed in the vein, and then a drop of heparin is added to prevent blood clotting and the catheter is locked off) is an option that gives hospital staff an open vein should an emergency arise, but doesn't hook you up to that IV pole unnecessarily.

"I plan to ask for a heplock, which means inserting an IV but locking it off so it's there if needed but not giving me fluids/being attached to anything," says What to Expect Community user blessedlilmama.

If you do wind up needing to have a routine IV during labor, know that it's for the safety of you and your baby and is temporary. Talk to your practitioner about your options so you know what to expect before delivery day.