Winter Skin Care for Babies and Toddlers

mom caring for baby's skin

Cool temperatures can cause extra dry, chapped skin — especially in babies and toddlers. Here's how to protect and care for your little one's extra sensitive skin this season.

Your little one’s skin may be kissably soft most of the time, but it’s bound to get dry every now and then. Some kids are genetically predisposed to dryness, but all kids have skin that's more sensitive and delicate than yours, making it more vulnerable to changes in the weather.

There are plenty of other culprits that can contribute to dry, chapped skin, including spending too much time in the tub or pool, being outside in cold weather or inside in dry heat, and sensitivity to chemicals and fragrances in some soaps and lotions. Teething drool and irritating foods that end up smeared across baby's cheeks can also trigger a rough patch.

Don't know what to do about common winter skin problems? There are lots of simple skin care strategies to help restore your baby or toddler's smooth, silky skin.

Tips for protecting your baby or toddler's skin in the winter

The winter air is tough on everyone’s skin, but babies and toddlers are extra susceptible to the harsh, dry climate. A few simple steps can help prevent dry skin, chapped cheeks and other winter skin discomforts.

Keep baths lukewarm. Babies, especially newborns, do not always need to be bathed every day. Three times a week is usually plenty, and much of the bath can be focused on the diaper area. Babies and young children can take a 15-minute soak in lukewarm water, then quickly pat dry and immediately moisturize all over.

Get soap-smart. It’s hard to resist the temptation of sweet-smelling soaps or the promise of a cleaner clean, but a cleanser that’s soap-free and fragrance-free is best to retain moisture in your child’s dry skin. You don’t need gobs to get the job done — a little goes a long way. And remember not to scrub kids clean, but to wash gently and pat (not rub) dry with a soft towel.

Hydrate on the inside. Babies do not need any additional liquids beyond breast milk or formula until they're between 4 and 6 months old. Focusing on breast milk and formula keeps your baby plenty hydrated and helps ensure he gets all the extra important nutrients he needs. Toddlers, on the other hand, should be drinking plenty of water . It’s especially important to load your little one up on water if your child’s been ill or if he’s just been weaned. And don’t forget that a nutritious diet is also important for a good complexion — for tots and grown-ups — especially one that includes healthy fats like avocados and salmon.

Use the right moisturizer. Moisturizers can be enormously helpful in preventing and treating a baby's dry skin. For kids with very dry or sensitive skin, stick to products that contain both water and oils but no fragrances and few chemical additives. For the best results, apply moisturizer generously after bathtime, when your child’s skin is still slightly damp. For dry skin with particularly rough patches, opt for a super-emollient ointment. If your child has really dry skin, use a cream instead of a lotion and hydrate twice daily, if necessary.

Don’t overheat the house. Low temps and chilly winds can result in chapped skin for both you and your baby. To combat the cold, you may be tempted to make your house super toasty with a turbo-blast of heat, but overheated air can dry out skin even more. Keep the house comfy but cool enough that your child will want to bundle up a bit for sleep. If you do have the heat on, putting a humidifier in baby's room can help minimize the drying effect of the forced heat.

Choose skin sensitive laundry soap. Laundry soap can make baby’s skin dry and irritated if it includes harsh chemicals and fragrance. Switch to a fragrance-free, baby-friendly brand to eliminate skin-drying agents.

Top winter skin care problems in babies and toddlers

Dry winter skin in babies and toddlers

Sometimes baby’s skin is prone to dryness no matter what you do, especially in the winter. It may look taut and flaky and downright thirsty.

How to treat: In most cases, it’s no big deal. Make sure that baby’s skin is always protected from the harsh winter air with layers of clothing, mittens and a hat. Add a second skin moisturizing session daily and abide by the tips noted above. Also consider adding a humidifier to baby’s nursery during naps and nighttime.

Chapped lips, cheeks and hands in babies and toddlers

Don’t forget your little one's lips and cheeks: Dry air and windy weather can make exposed lips chapped and cheeks windburned, which looks and feels like sunburn.

How to treat: At least twice a day, smooth fragrance-free, hypoallergenic ointment on your baby’s cheeks and apply baby lip balm or ointment on his lips.

How to prevent: Always moisturize (see above) before you step out with your baby. On blustery days, use a plastic rain cover to keep the wind out of the stroller.

Frostbite in babies and toddlers

You’d think all that baby fat would help tots stay warm, but infants lose body heat a lot faster than adults do. As a result, they’re more prone to frostbite — especially on their tiny fingers, toes, ears, nose and cheeks.

How can you tell if your tot has been bitten? With frostbite, or tissue damage caused by extreme cold, the affected area will feel very cold and look white or pale gray.

How to treat: If you spot signs of frostbite, there’s no time to waste. Open up your coat and shirt and tuck your baby next to your skin for warmth. Then get to a doctor or emergency room stat.

If that’s not immediately possible, go inside and begin gradually warming your baby. Never put your infant next to a radiator, stove or heater. Instead, soak the affected area in warm-to-the-touch (not hot) water, about 104 degrees Fahrenheit or slightly warmer than body temperature; use your wrist or elbow to gauge how warm it is.

If the area is too difficult to soak, apply a warm, wet washcloth until the color returns to your baby’s skin for about 20 to 30 minutes. And be prepared: As his skin warms, it may become red, swollen or blistered. If you haven’t already by then, call your baby’s pediatrician.

How to prevent: Air is the best insulator, so dress your little one in several layers of light- to medium-weight clothing — think cotton and fleece — rather than one big heavy outfit . Make sure your baby’s cold weather gear includes a hat, mittens, cozy socks, boots and a warm coat or snowsuit . When your toddler is playing outside, head inside for a temperature-controlled break every 20 to 30 minutes. Babies should only be in the cold weather for a few minutes at a time.

Snow burn in babies and toddlers

It may be cold outside, but the sun still plays a big role in your baby’s winter skin care. Because snow reflects up to 85 percent of the sun’s harmful rays, sunburn is still a risk.

How to treat: Since snow burn is actually caused by the sun, treat it the same way you would sunburn.

How to prevent: Make using sunscreen a regular part of your little one’s skin-care regimen all year long. Slather on baby-safe sunscreen with an SPF of 30 to 50 (and no lower than SPF 15), applied 15 to 30 minutes before you head outside.

When to call the doctor

If dry skin begins to crack, spread or become painfully itchy, it’s time to call a doctor. In the case of frostbite, immediately call your pediatrician or head to the ER.

Practicing a few key grooming techniques in the winter and being extra vigilant against frostbite and sunburn helps shield your little one from the winter elements to bring back that super soft baby glow.