Wondering if Twins Are Hereditary? Here’s What Really Affects Your Chances

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

do twins run in families?, parents with twin babies

There’s both fact and fiction to the rumors that twins run in families and tend to skip a generation. Here’s how heredity impacts your odds of conceiving twins.

If you or your partner comes from a family that's brimming with twins, you may be wondering whether that might influence your chance of having twins or multiples . The answer: It does — but only in certain cases.

Here's what you need to know about the science behind family heredity and twins.

Key-Takeaways

Twins are more of a maternal thing. Fraternal twins may be more likely if your mom or grandma had them, due to a genetic link that causes an extra egg in ovulation.

Identical twins are a fun surprise! This twin type doesn’t seem to be hereditary — it occurs when a single egg happens to split in two out of the blue.

Twins don’t skip generations. This is pretty much a myth even though it looks like twins may dot the family tree with this pattern.

Are twins hereditary?

Yes, some types of twins are hereditary, meaning that twins run in families.

Heredity on the mother's side ups a couple's odds of conceiving fraternal twins. Fraternal twins are two babies from two different eggs that were released from the ovaries simultaneously.

Some research has found that having fraternal twins in a mother's immediate family may double the chances of conceiving fraternal twins . One theory is that it's because a certain gene may predispose some women to "hyperovulation," or releasing more than one egg during each menstrual cycle. Women with this gene appear to have naturally higher levels of particular hormones , including those related to the regulation of releasing eggs.

However, few genes appear to be definitively linked to hyperovulation, so it could just be that genetics in general on the mother's side contribute to the probability of having fraternal twins.

"I can’t help but shake the feeling it’s twins," says What to Expect Community mom Breeser4810 before an ultrasound confirming her pregnancy. "Twins do run in our families a little bit."

Heredity on the father's side, on the other hand, does not increase a couple's odds of having twins. This is true even if his family is packed with multiples.

What about identical twins, or two babies who have an identical set of genes because they're from one fertilized embryo that splits in two? Most cases of identical twins don't appear to run in families and instead seem to be a spontaneous occurrence, say experts. But there are some families with a larger-than-usual number of identical twins, suggesting there may be a genetic link.

But such a link hasn't been proven definitively. In other words, there's no hard evidence that being from a family with identical twins has an impact on your probability of having identical twins yourself.

Do twins skip a generation?

If you've heard that twins skip a generation, the theory goes like this: If there is a hyperovulation gene and a man inherits it from his mother, he may pass this gene on to his daughter. His daughter, in turn, is then more likely to release more than one egg when she ovulates and therefore could conceive fraternal twins. So the twins could have, in essence, skipped a generation.

However, because there aren't any definitive links between genes and hyperovulation and because twins don't predictably always skip a generation, it's likely just a coincidence when it does occur. In reality, there is no solid evidence that twins skip a generation. So that notion is nothing more than a colorful myth.

Head to the What to Expect app with the rest of your twin questions and find solid support and advice from other parents of multiples.

How likely is it that you'll have twins?

As for how likely it is that you’ll have twins, the 2025 twin birth rate in the U.S. is 30.7 per 1,000 live births. But a few factors — not just heredity — can increase the chances of having twins , including the following characteristics in the mother:

She is 35 or older

She is overweight

She's taking fertility treatments

She's Black

This is not her first pregnancy, especially if she's previously been pregnant with multiples

So take a good look at your family tree. If it's full of identical twins, or there are twins on the father's side but not the mother's, twins may not be in your future. But if there are fraternal twins on the mother's side, you may want to start stocking up on two of everything on your baby registry .