Everyone Has an Opinion About Your Bump — Here's Why They're (Probably) Wrong

pregnant woman wearing a bra and pants looking at her bump in the mirror

Getting "You're so big!" at 25 weeks or "Are you sure you're that far along?" at 31? Deep breath, mama.

When you're pregnant, it's almost guaranteed that someone (a family member, a complete stranger, or more likely both) will comment on the size of your bump.

"I'm 25 weeks but getting comments on how big my bump is," one What to Expect Community member shared. "I'm trying to tell myself not to worry, but everyone comments on how big it is for how far along I am."

What's more, in these uber-connected times, it's all too easy to compare your bump to others. "It's definitely a bump, but not like other women I know," another Community member wrote about her 31-week belly. "It makes me scared [the baby] will be tiny!"

It's totally normal to worry about your bump size, but there's likely no cause for concern. "Just as people come in all shapes and sizes, the way we carry our babies varies widely," says Sara Holt , certified nurse-midwife and owner of Byenveni Baby . "Many factors influence how a pregnancy bump looks, and it’s nearly impossible for a layperson to determine whether someone is 'too big' or 'too small.'"

Key takeaways

Every bump is beautifully unique. Your belly's size and shape can be influenced by everything from your height to your baby's position.

Bump comparisons? Not helpful. Your bump size likely has zero bearing on your baby's health.

If you're feeling unsure, you're not alone. If you ever have questions or worries about your bump, your provider is there to help — no judgment, just support.

Why bumps come in all shapes and sizes

Here's a deeper look at the factors that have the biggest effect on the appearance of your bump:

Height and torso length

In general, the size of a pregnant belly depends on the size and position of the uterus, says Sasha Andrews, M.D. , a board-certified maternal-fetal medicine specialist at Pediatrix Medical Group in Denver, Colorado. "If there is more room within the abdomen, either due to the person’s height, torso length, or build, then their bump may appear smaller," Dr. Andrews says.

Likewise, "Shorter individuals or those with shorter torsos may appear larger," because the uterus is distributed over less vertical space, Holt says.

"I have a short torso, so my bump with my first was very big and noticeable," one Community member shared. "I kept getting asked if it was twins."

Core strength

Especially early in pregnancy, stronger muscles in your abdomen may prevent your bump from protruding as much, Dr. Andrews says.

This is especially true if it's your first pregnancy . "First-time parents often have tighter abdominal muscles, which can make the bump appear smaller and more compact," Holt says.

"In subsequent pregnancies, bump size may increase more rapidly because the abdominal muscles have been stretched previously," Dr. Andrews says.

This is one reason why your bump's appearance may change from one pregnancy to the next.

Uterine and placental position

The position of the uterus, especially in early pregnancy, can affect bump size, Dr. Andrews says. "A uterus that is tilted backwards (retroverted or retroflexed) may protrude less than a uterus that is tilted upright or forward," she notes.

Likewise, an anterior placenta (one that's in the front of the uterus), can make a bump appear larger, she says.

Pre-pregnancy weight and body composition

A person's body composition and fat distribution can influence when and how a pregnancy becomes visible. "For some people, it may take longer for a bump to be noticeable," Holt says, especially if they have more body fat.

On the other hand, someone with a lower pre-pregnancy weight and a slimmer frame may "show" sooner, Dr. Andrews says.

The baby’s position

Fetal position, or how your baby is lying in your belly, can significantly affect the appearance of your bump, Holt says.

"A baby lying sideways (transverse) may make the uterus appear smaller, while a head-down baby with the chin untucked may result in a larger measurement," she notes. Your provider can let you know which position your baby's in via ultrasound.

Amniotic fluid levels

Higher amniotic fluid volumes may increase uterine size and, therefore, bump size, Dr. Andrews says. Keep in mind that there's a wide range of normal when it comes to amniotic fluid levels.

At term, normal fluid levels (measured by depth on ultrasound), can range from 5 to 25 centimeters, Holt says. Some skilled providers can also estimate your fluid levels just by feeling your belly.

Genetics

If you look at a photo of your mom while she was pregnant, you might notice you carry similarly. There's a good reason for that: Your genes have a say in most of the above characteristics that affect bump size.

"Family traits can influence body shape, muscle tone, and how pregnancies tend to present," Holt says.

Single vs. multiples

It almost goes without saying, but "Of course, the number of fetuses can increase bump size," Dr. Andrews says.

"Carrying twins or higher-order multiples will naturally affect uterine size and appearance," Holt confirms.

When to ask your provider about your bump

If you have concerns about your bump size, talk to your provider, Dr. Andrews says. They'll be able to confirm that your pregnancy is progressing normally and measure things like fetal size and amniotic fluid volume.

"When it comes to the health of the pregnancy, your midwife or OB relies on objective measurements rather than appearance," Holt says.

One important tool they use is fundal height , which helps assess whether the baby is growing appropriately. After about 20 weeks of pregnancy, your provider can measure the size of your uterus using a tape measure. This measurement is taken from the pubic symphysis (the joint at the front of the pelvis where the two pubic bones meet) to the top of the fundus (the uppermost part of the uterus).

"Fundal height in centimeters generally corresponds to the number of weeks pregnant you are," Holt says. "For example, at 30 weeks, a typical fundal height would fall between 28 and 32 centimeters."

You should also see your provider ASAP if you notice a sudden increase or decrease in bump size, which is most commonly caused by changes in amniotic fluid volume, Dr. Andrews says.

"Later in pregnancy, especially during the third trimester, a change [in bump size] can be caused by changes in fetal position," Dr. Andrews says. "If there is a concern that a fetus may have changed from cephalic (head down) to breech (bottom down) position, people should not hesitate to contact their provider, especially if it is near their due date ."

Finally, if concerns about your bump size are causing anxiety or depressive symptoms, or leading to disordered eating, excessive exercise, or any other concerns, contact your provider right away.

And as for dealing with bump-size comments from other people? Holt says she tells her patients to respond with: "My midwife says I'm perfect."