Yellow Discharge in Pregnancy: What’s Normal, What’s Not, and When to Call Your Doctor

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

yellow discharge during pregnancy, yellow line on clam shell

Here's why your discharge might be yellow during pregnancy, plus when to call the doctor.

If you're familiar with typical pregnancy symptoms, you might already know that increased vaginal discharge is totally par for the course. But what if the discharge is yellow?

Normal pregnancy discharge tends to be clear or milky white. So if you notice that your discharge is yellow, it could signal that something is up.

Here’s what you need to know, plus whether your symptoms warrant a call to your healthcare provider.

Key Takeaways

Discharge comes in a few colors. Check the shade, ladies. Clear, whitish liquid is normal and caused by changing hormone levels, but yellow should be checked out.

Get a close look. Yup, give the discharge a once over and a good sniff. Pale, odorless yellow liquid could mean it’s amniotic fluid, while darker, thick, smelly discharge could point to an infection, which is common and treatable.

Not sure? Make a call. For peace of mind, ask your OB about what you see, especially if the discharge isn’t what you normally find down there.

What is yellow discharge during pregnancy?

When you’re pregnant, you produce leukorrhea — a harmless vaginal discharge caused by an increase in estrogen levels. Leukorrhea is thin, clear, or milky white, and mild-smelling, and it’s normal for the amount to increase as your pregnancy progresses.

Yellow discharge is vaginal discharge that's either darker yellow and thick or lumpy, or pale yellow and watery.

What does yellow discharge during pregnancy mean?

Darker yellow discharge could stem from an infection like bacterial vaginosis or a yeast infection , especially if the discharge is thick, smells bad, or comes with itching or burning.

Watery, pale yellow discharge could potentially be amniotic fluid — the liquid that nourishes and safeguards your baby in the amniotic sac.

Wondering if what you spy is normal — or not? Go to the What to Expect app for the answers from experts who deal with discharge and other symptoms all the time.

What does yellow discharge look like?

Yellow discharge that could potentially signal an infection is typically a darker or deeper shade of yellow with a thick or lumpy texture and a bad smell. You may also experience itching or burning. Discharge that's greenish or grayish could also be a sign of infection.

What if you suspect the yellowish discharge is amniotic fluid? It’s usually easy to tell the difference. Unlike actual yellow discharge, amniotic fluid is very thin and clear or pale yellow in color — like urine. And it’s usually odorless or slightly sweet-smelling.

Causes of yellow discharge during pregnancy

A few things can cause yellow discharge during pregnancy, including:

An infection. Sometimes, an infection like vaginosis, trichomoniasis, or a yeast infection causes yellow discharge. The discharge might also look thick or lumpy, have a bad smell or be accompanied by other vaginal symptoms like itching or burning. What to Expect Community parent JEO has dealt with this issue a lot. “I’ve struggled this entire pregnancy with yeast and bacterial vaginosis. My doc recommended a probiotic, which I did, and that seems to have helped some.”

Leaking amniotic fluid. Yellow "discharge" could also be amniotic fluid. If you’re still far from your due date, it’s possible that you’re leaking amniotic fluid prematurely . If you're close to delivery day, your water may have broken . In either case, the yellow discharge will look very light yellow (or clear with a yellowish tint), thin, or watery. It may come out as a trickle or gush, and it might also smell sweet or have no odor at all.

Is yellow discharge during pregnancy a sign that something is wrong?

During pregnancy, it's always worth paying attention to any discharge that seems different from your usual.

If the discharge is a sign of a vaginal infection, it could potentially lead to pregnancy complications, so it’s a good idea to contact your doctor. But don’t worry too much. Most of these kinds of infections during pregnancy resolve easily with treatments like creams or oral medications.

If the discharge is pale yellow and watery like urine, your water may have broken. If you’re within a few weeks of your due date, get ready! You’ll likely meet your baby soon. If your due date is further off, though, you could be leaking amniotic fluid prematurely. Regardless of when you're due, you should contact your doctor if you suspect your water has broken.

When to call the doctor

You should call your doctor anytime you have discharge that looks, smells or feels significantly different than typical leukorrhea.

Whether the discharge is darker yellow, lumpy and foul-smelling (suggesting a possible infection) or pale yellow and watery with a sweet or nonexistent smell (like amniotic fluid), it's a good idea to get checked out by your provider.

Your practitioner can determine whether you need treatment for an infection or whether your baby is ready to be delivered if you're leaking amniotic fluid (and, if not, take the steps needed to keep your little one protected until it’s time to make her debut).

If you notice that your discharge has turned yellow during your pregnancy, give your doctor a call. He or she can pinpoint the cause and come up with the appropriate treatments or next steps to keep your pregnancy and baby safe and healthy.