Yes, Target Wants Your Expired, Crumb-Filled Car Seat—and They’ll Even Give You 20% Off a New One

Target's Car Seat Trade In Event

Just so you know, What to Expect may earn commissions from the shopping links included on this page. All sales and prices are accurate at the time of publishing.

If you're in the market for a new car seat (or just want to ditch your old one), you're in luck! Target's Car Seat Trade-In Event starts on Sunday, April 19 and runs through Saturday, May 2. During the event, you can pop into your local Target store, drop off any car seat and leave with a 20 percent off coupon!

The bi-annual event is starting this weekend nationwide at all of Target's stores, excluding the small format locations. That being said, you should double-check that your local store is participating before you head over. And there's one other catch: In order to participate, you'll need to be enrolled in Target Circle (which you can join for free) to receive your coupon.

According to Target's website , you can trade in any type of car seat during the event, including models that are expired or have been damaged. Material from your old car seat will be recycled to make new metal and plastic products, making this an eco-friendly way to get rid of seats that are no longer safe to use. The program, which launched back in 2016, has helped recycle more than 3.5 million car seats to date.

How to take part in Target's car seat trade-in event

It's incredibly easy to participate in Target's car seat trade-in event:

Between April 19 and May 2, head to your local Target store and bring your old car seat to the designated box inside.

Open your Target app and scan the code that's on the box.

Then, look for the offer in the Baby category.

Click the "+" sign to save the coupon to use it for an order online or scan your barcode at the register to use it in person.

These coupons can be redeemed toward a new car seat, booster seat or stroller, and even some baby gear including playards, high chairs, bouncers and more. The coupon is valid until May 16, 2026, and you can use it in the store or online by following the previous steps. You can also redeem this offer twice, so bring up to two old car seats when you head over to the store.

What's on sale during Target's car seat trade-in event

Target has a wide range of car seats and strollers available for purchase with the 20 percent off coupon. You can check out their full range of car seats , including infant car seats , convertible car seats and boosters .

Not looking for another car seat at the moment? Check out Target's full range of qualified items .

Your Next Read

What Should You Do With an Old or Unsafe Car Seat? Medically Reviewed by Micah Resnick, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Car Seat Expiration Dates, Explained Medically Reviewed by Lauren Crosby, M.D., F.A.A.P.

Your Month-by-Month Guide to the Best Baby Sales Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

7 Best Convertible and All-in-One Car Seats, Tested and Reviewed by Real Parents Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Is Your Baby's Car Seat Safe and Up-to-Date? Check These Infant Car Seat Safety Tips Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Target Baby Registry Review Fact Checked by Leah Rocketto, Associate Commerce Director

Meet the Winners of the 2025 What to Expect Mom Must-Have Awards Fact Checked by Morgan Bulman, Commerce Editor

What to Know About Your Toddler's Car Seat: Get the Latest Safety Tips and Guidelines Medically Reviewed by Joyce Slaton, C.P.S.T.

Is It Safe to Buy Used Baby Gear? Medically Reviewed by Gina Posner, M.D., F.A.A.P.

How to Clean a Car Seat Medically Reviewed by Jesil Pazhayampallil, M.D., F.A.A.P.

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window