Yes, You Might Poop During Labor: Why It Happens and Why No One Cares

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

poop during labor, woman in labor at hospital

You may do a number two as you labor — but it’s completely normal and very common, so there’s no need to feel embarrassed.

Ever hear the phrase "What happens in labor, stays in labor?" Alas, it's not a real thing (yet), but it definitely should be, especially when it comes to pooping. Indeed, one of the nitty-gritty details that your friends likely omitted from the labor stories they've related is the fact that you'll probably poop during the process.

While it doesn't sound like a grand time, pooping during childbirth is very normal and even expected. Here's a bit more about this less-than-fun topic, why it happens to so many women, and possible ways to avoid it (or not worry about it) altogether.

Key Takeaways:

Poop is so normal in labor. Yup, most women do it. And your doctor and nurses won't even mention it since they see it all the time.

The pushing phase is kinda like pooping! You use the same muscles for both acts, plus the baby can put pressure on your rectum, which means pooping is likely.

Clean-up's a breeze. Don't sweat a little poo. Your medical team will wipe it up fast so you can focus on labor and meeting your new baby.

Is pooping during labor normal?

It's completely normal to poop during labor, and most women do experience it.

Ever worry whether doctors care if you poop during labor? It's actually one of the top childbirth fears that expectant women harbor. But rest assured that your health care provider is solely focused on the wellbeing of you and your baby on the way — and almost nothing else. A safe and healthy delivery is all that really matters to doctors and nurses.

A little escaping poo may even occur more than once, but everyone in the labor and delivery room is ready for it because it happens all the time. The hospital staff is trained to quickly and efficiently clean up the mess, so you might not even notice it. The fix: One of the labor team nurses will whisk it away, without announcing its arrival, with a bit of gauze or a clean towel.

What to Expect Community parent mod2023 tells her fellow posters not to be embarrassed in the least. "They clean it up so fast, you hardly even notice it. I pushed for 2 hours with my son and the pooping part was only in the beginning," she says.

Got more burning questions about what really happens during labor? Download the What to Expect app , your trusted guide from first contraction to first cuddle.

Why do you poop during labor?

Women often poop during labor for a number of normal, natural reasons:

Changing hormones

As your body preps for labor , your hormones are in flux, causing the muscles of your uterus, cervix, and rectum to loosen. Some pre-labor diarrhea and pooping during labor can result.

Baby's position

Certain movements during labor can shift your baby around and put extra pressure on your rectum, especially if she's head down but facing out towards your front (called the occiput posterior position ).

Bearing down

Truth: Pushing a baby out kind of feels like having a bowel movement since the muscles you use for both are exactly the same. And, of course, as you bear down, anything in the general vicinity will get eased out along the way.

Can you avoid pooping during labor?

Back in the day, nurses had women empty their bowels before labor via enemas. But it turns out that this practice didn't offer any medical benefits — and if you've ever had one, it's not very pleasant to, um, sit through.

Luckily, science backs up the change in practice. A review of studies found that enemas didn't reduce infection rates, and many women weren't keen on them either.

Of course, you can ask for an enema when you arrive at the hospital to try and prevent pooping during labor. And you can stay hydrated and eat lightly as your day approaches in the hopes of avoiding large bowel movements. But even with those efforts, keep in mind that it's pretty likely you'll still pass some poop when you push.

Pooping during labor happens to many women, which means not only is it a normal occurrence, you're also in very good company. The best advice is to try not to focus on this little sideshow since the main event is what labor and delivery is all about: the birth of your beautiful baby.