Your Guide to Your 4-Month-Old's Sleep Schedule

Light copy changes, updates to sourcing, and fact-checked for accuracy.

4-month-old sleep schedule

Wondering how much sleep a 4-month-old needs? Here's how to establish a sleep schedule for your baby.

By 4 months, you may have noticed that your baby doesn't sleep quite as much as she once did. That teeny newborn who used to nap so often? She's now more active and social, and increasingly interested in exploring the world around her. For many 4-month-olds, that means less daytime sleep and more hours logged in their cribs at night.

Every baby is different, but your little one's sleep routine may start to become somewhat more predictable this month. However, the dreaded 4-month sleep regression can also appear around this time, making parents feel like they're right back in the newborn days. (Don't worry — as exhausting as it is, this stage will pass!) Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsGetting Your Baby to SleepSee All Sources

Here's what you should know about your 4-month-old's sleep schedule, plus how much sleep your baby needs at this age.

Key Takeaways

At 4 months old, most babies sleep 12 to 17 hours total (including three to four naps that last between 30 minutes to two hours) and may sleep six to eight hours overnight, though the 4-month sleep regression can cause more frequent night wakings.

Routines may become more predictable, with wake windows of 75 minutes to two hours. Some parents begin sleep training at this age, using methods like Ferber, cry-it-out, or the chair method, while still offering at least one night feeding if needed.

If your little one is struggling with sleep challenges, maintain a consistent bedtime routine, offer tummy time during the day to support developmental milestones, and continue putting your baby down drowsy but awake.

How much should a 4-month-old sleep?

A typical 4-month-old should get between 12 and 17 hours of shut-eye a day, including nighttime sleep and three or four naps. Still, every baby's sleep needs are different, and it's normal if your child snoozes a little more or less than that. Trusted SourceKidsHealth From NemoursNapsSee All Sources [2]

Naps

Your 4-month-old has a stronger grasp on day and night now and may be able to sleep for six to eight hours overnight (although, again, this varies).

What's the best sleep schedule for a 4-month-old baby?

Some babies start to settle into a more predictable schedule this month, but keep in mind that the 4-month sleep regression can cause poor sleep for a period of time. Naps can last between 30 minutes and two hours, and it's also common for babies to start transitioning from four to three naps. Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusBedtime Habits for Infants and ChildrenSee All Sources [3]

Trusted SourceNational Institutes of Health, MedlinePlusBedtime Habits for Infants and ChildrenSee All Sources

Depending on how many naps your 4-month-old is taking, a typical day may look something like this:

Sample sleep schedule for a 4-month-old taking four naps

This schedule assumes your little one is awake for 75 minutes to two hours at a time and naps four times during the day. Trusted SourceThe Sleep FoundationHow Much Sleep Do Babies and Kids Need?See All Sources [4]

Trusted SourceThe Sleep FoundationHow Much Sleep Do Babies and Kids Need?See All Sources

7:00 a.m.: Awake

8:15 a.m.: Nap

9:45 a.m.: Awake

11:15 a.m.: Nap

12:45 p.m.: Awake

2:15 p.m.: Nap

3:15 p.m.: Awake

4:30 p.m.: Nap

5:00 p.m.: Awake

6:30 p.m.: Bedtime routine

7:00 p.m.: Bed

Sample sleep schedule for a 4-month-old taking three naps

This schedule assumes your little one is awake for 75 minutes to two hours at a time and naps three times during the day.

7:00 a.m.: Awake

8:45 a.m.: Nap

10:45 a.m.: Awake

12:30 p.m.: Nap

2:30 p.m.: Awake

4:30 p.m.: Nap

5:00 p.m.: Awake

6:30 p.m.: Bedtime routine

7:00 p.m.: Bed

Can you sleep train a 4-month-old?

Although it's not necessary to sleep train your baby, many parents find that these methods help their little ones learn how to sleep through the night, and pediatricians often give parents the green light to try sleep training at 4 months. By this age, your child can learn how to self-soothe and fall back asleep without your help. Trusted SourceMayo ClinicHelping Baby Sleep Through the NightSee All Sources [5]

Trusted SourceMayo ClinicHelping Baby Sleep Through the NightSee All Sources

While there's no right way to sleep train, there are a few different methods, and the best one for your family depends on your comfort level. A few of the more popular methods are cry it out (or "extinction," which involves letting your baby cry until she falls asleep without any intervention), the Ferber method (checking on your baby at increasingly longer intervals), and the chair method (parents sit in a chair in baby's room, gradually moving it closer to the door).

Keep in mind that sleep training isn't necessarily the same as night weaning and your 4-month-old may still need to eat at least once during the night. Your pediatrician can offer guidance on the best time to drop one of her nighttime feeds.

What is the 4-month sleep regression?

In general, sleep regressions are phases when a baby wakes up more during the night or struggles to nap during the day — and the 4-month sleep regression can be especially challenging for parents. Your baby may have finally started sleeping for solid periods of time, then she's suddenly waking up more frequently again.

Sleep regressions often coincide with developmental milestones. At 4 months, your little one is becoming more aware of her surroundings and may be learning how to roll over . She might wake up in the night and want to practice this exciting new skill — then struggle to fall back to sleep.

"I feel like I’m back in the newborn trenches!" said What to Expect Community user ttcstolemyidentity. "Baby was sleeping six to eight hour stretches and was up every two hrs last night. His nap schedule is also all over the place."

Luckily, these regressions are normal and typically don't last long. If you stick to your baby's bedtime routine (more below), most little ones get through the 4-month sleep regression in about two weeks.

4-month-old sleep tips

This month, continue to focus on establishing healthy sleep habits.

Make time for tummy time. Because sleep regressions often occur as baby is mastering a new developmental milestone — at 4 months, that's learning how to roll or flip over — make sure she has plenty of tummy time during the day to practice rolling.

Stick to your bedtime routine. It's more important than ever to follow the same calming routine every night. Giving your baby a bath, putting on her pajamas, listening to music, and reading a story together before you turn off the lights helps her unwind and signals that it's time to sleep.

Start the routine at the same time every night. You'll want to get your little one's bedtime routine going about 30 minutes before she nods off. So if bedtime is 7 p.m., aim to start her wind-down routine at 6:30 p.m.

Have an abridged bedtime routine for naps. You don't need to go through the full 30-minute bedtime routine before every nap, but a shorter version that contains some elements (like a cuddle or book) will help signal to your baby that it's time to snooze.

Put your baby to bed when she's awake but sleepy. Holding your baby until she falls asleep can make it hard for her to learn how to doze off on her own. Instead, make an effort to put her down when she's drowsy but still awake .

4-month-old baby sleep problems

Even when you follow the advice above, sleep problems can occur. Here are some of the most common ones you might face at this age — and what to do about them.

Your baby fusses during the night. Wait a few minutes before you respond to give her a chance to calm herself down. If she continues to cry, check on her but don't pick her up, turn on the light or play with her. Continued fussing may be a sign that she's hungry, needs a diaper change, or isn't feeling well.

Your baby isn't napping as well as she used to. Babies need less sleep as they get older and that means fewer naps, too. A typical 4-month-old takes three or four naps a day that are 30 minutes to two hours each. However, every baby is different. The 4-month sleep regression can also cause nap troubles. If your baby is napping less but fussing more, try an abbreviated version of your bedtime routine at naptime, put her down to nap when she starts showing signs of sleepiness (droopy eyelids, yawning, rubbing her eyes), and try to make sure most naps happen in her crib.

Your baby has trouble falling asleep at night. This could be due to the 4-month sleep regression or your baby could be overtired from spending too much time awake during the day. Be consistent with her daytime naps and with her bedtime routine (starting it before she becomes overtired).

Struggling with the 4-month sleep regression? The What to Expect app has tons of sleep tips to help you maintain a consistent routine, plus a community of parents who have been through it too.

Remember: Every baby is different and some little ones need more time than others to fall into a sleep schedule. Continuing to follow a bedtime routine and maintaining healthy sleep habits will help your baby get there before long.

More sleep schedules for babies: