Your Guide to a Calmer, Cozier Holiday Season During Pregnancy

by Heidi Murkoff , author of What to Expect When You're Expecting.

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Ask Heidi Murkoff

"I'll be pretty pregnant during the holidays this year. How can I make the most of the season?"

What's the trick to savoring the holidays while pregnant? For many moms-to-be, it's slowing down while everyone else is speeding through the season. This holiday season growing a healthy baby-to-be is likely your top priority. So it's okay to let your friends and family know that parties, marathon shopping sessions, and long-distance travel will be taking a backseat this year (if that's what you prefer!).

Key-Takeaways

Prioritize rest and relaxation. This season, it’s more than okay to slow down, skip the stress, and savor the calm moments your body is asking for.

Let others lend a hand. Lighten your load by accepting help with chores, hosting, and holiday tasks (or just saying no thanks!) so you can focus on feeling your best.

Keep things simple and enjoyable. Pace yourself, indulge in your favorite festive treats in moderation, and do only what truly brings you joy.

If calm, quiet moments are at the top of your wishlist this year, skip the hubbub and treat yourself to the gift of some serious relaxation. You can:

Make the holidays about you — especially if this is your first baby. After you become a mom, your little one(s) will be the main focus this time of year (well, all the time, really). So spend the holidays while pregnant doing what makes you happy, whether it's cuddling on the couch with your partner, reading a great book by a roaring fireplace, or hitting up a restorative prenatal yoga class. Be self-indulgent now — before you have a little someone who'll need your constant indulging (at least for those first few months). “My husband and I are planning on having Christmas just us to relax and enjoy. Don't feel obliged to do anything you don't want to do!” says What to Expect Community mom bmcgr00.

Sleep, sleep, and sleep some more. Getting the shut-eye you need isn't easy with heartburn and bathroom runs interrupting your precious Zzzs. So on weekends and holidays, snooze when you can. Sleep late, take naps in the afternoon, or turn in early when it suits you — without feeling as if you should be partying hard or getting up early to battle the airport security lines. Looking for more ways to savor this special time? The What to Expect app offers guidance and support to help you feel your best throughout pregnancy.

Get some holiday help. Your loved ones want you to take care of yourself, so let them help you do just that. Take a backseat on the chores and cleaning this year — don't feel guilty if others clear the table or wash the dishes more often than you do. If you don't feel comfortable camping out on the couch, pitch in in spurts and take frequent feet-up breaks. Or volunteer to keep the littlest guests engaged by reading them a story (good practice for later) or playing a quiet circle game. Running yourself ragged over the holidays while pregnant won't do anyone any favors, so take it easy — you deserve it.

Pace yourself. Even if you give most of those holiday to-dos the heave-ho, you might still opt to buy gifts, get them wrapped, decorate a bit, and maybe bake a batch of cookies. Avoid wearing yourself out when you're pregnant during the holidays by tackling your to-do list early and focusing on one or two manageable tasks at a time. That way, you'll accomplish your goals without getting frazzled or fried. “I find lowering my expectations for each day helps. So if I only get half done of what I wanted to, so be it.” says What to Expect Community mom borntomom2.

Eat, drink, and be merry. Moderation is the key to enjoying the treats of the season if you're pregnant during the holidays. Of course, you'll need to skip the spiked eggnog and turn down the champagne , but there are still ways to indulge in the holiday spirit — and the goodies — without overdoing it. Have a mocktail or a mug of mulled cider, and don't deprive yourself of your mom's biscuits or Grandma's famous cookies. But keep a balance — make time (and leave room) for eating well during pregnancy, which you and your growing baby really need right now.

Here's to making the most of the holiday season during pregnancy and beyond!

Heidi Murkoff

What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Heartburn During Pregnancy , October 2022. WhatToExpect.com, 11 Holiday Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy and Safe Alternatives to Enjoy Instead , May 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Can You Drink Any Alcohol While You're Pregnant? , May 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, 18 Best Foods to Eat During Pregnancy , April 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Stress During Pregnancy , January 2022. Mayo Clinic, Pregnancy Nutrition: Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy , November 2023. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Safer Food Choices for Pregnant Women , January 2025.

Updates history

December 11, 2025

Editor: Marygrace Taylor/Catherine Donaldson-Evans

Updates to copy, sources, and formatting.

Jump to Your Week of Pregnancy

Your Next Read

11 Holiday Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy and Safe Alternatives to Enjoy Instead Medically Reviewed by Alexandra Paetow, M.S., R.D.N.

Working While Pregnant: Your Rights, Safety Steps, and Comfort Hacks Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Pregnancy and Meditation Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

15 Ways to Make the Most of Your Maternity Leave Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

5 Surprising Things You Can Still Do When You're Pregnant Medically Reviewed by James Greenberg, M.D.

Keeping Your Pregnancy Secret During the Holidays? Try This Decoy Drink Strategy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Wide Awake While Pregnant? How to Cope With Pregnancy Insomnia Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

Anxiety During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Sipra Laddha, M.D.

Stress During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Shari Lusskin, M.D.

Fitness Fatigue During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

9 (Totally Normal!) Thoughts Every Pregnant Mom Has During the First Trimester Fact Checked by Jennifer Kelly Geddes, Contributing Writer/Editor

The Best Pregnancy Workouts and Exercises That Keep You (and Baby!) Feeling Great Medically Reviewed by Jennifer Wu, M.D., F.A.C.O.G.

How to Support Your Partner During Pregnancy Medically Reviewed by Tarun Jain, M.D.

8 Tips for Managing Pregnancy With a Toddler Fact Checked by Jill Malter

5 Things Every Partner Should Do for a Mom-to-Be Fact Checked by Kathleen Felton, Contributing Writer/Editor

The educational health content on What To Expect is reviewed by our medical review board and team of experts to be up-to-date and in line with the latest evidence-based medical information and accepted health guidelines, including the medically reviewed What to Expect books by Heidi Murkoff. This educational content is not medical or diagnostic advice. Use of this site is subject to our terms of use and privacy policy . © 2005-2026 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company.

Opens a new window