Your No-Nonsense Hospital Bag Checklist: What to Pack and What to Skip

Updates to copy, information, sources, and formatting

pack for hospital pregnancy

You'll want a hospital bag packed and ready to head out the door with you when it's go-time. Here's what to put in it.

Peace of mind goes a long way when you're preparing for a baby. Getting your hospital bag organized ahead of time can help calm any jitters you may have about heading to the hospital or birthing center. You'll want to include items for you, your baby, and your partner or coach (who will likely have some down time).

As for what to bring? Our helpful hospital bag checklist can be your guide.

Key Takeaways

Packing your hospital bag ahead of time can ease stress before labor. It's a good idea to get your bag ready a few weeks before your due date and keep it near the door or in your car, so you’re prepared whenever labor starts.

Focus on comfort and essentials for yourself, your baby, and your support person. Bring important documents, toiletries, comfortable clothes, chargers, and postpartum items for yourself; a simple going-home outfit and blanket for baby; and snacks, toiletries, and extra clothes for your partner or coach.

You don’t need to overpack because the hospital provides many basics. Hospitals typically supply items like diapers, mesh underwear, pads, and gowns. Skip valuables, excess clothing, and unnecessary extras to keep your bag manageable.

What should I pack for myself?

Keep in mind that the hospital will likely provide some basics, including disposable mesh underwear, grip socks, a gown to wear during and after labor, extra-thick sanitary pads, and a few toiletries (soap and a toothbrush). Still, you might prefer your own versions of these items or extras, just in case.

“It’s nice to pack your own toiletries and any other items that may make your labor, delivery, and postpartum time more comfortable,” notes Dr. Jennifer Butt , an OB/GYN at Upper East Side OB/GYN in New York City and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

Here's what to bring for your stay at the hospital or birthing center :

Drivers’ license or other identification

Insurance card and any hospital paperwork

Your birth plan , if you have one (bring multiple copies to give to your practitioner and nurses)

Your phone and an extra-long charger

Comfortable, loose clothing to wear home

Small tote for extra hospital supplies and gifts you might receive

Hair ties, clips, or a headband

Toothbrush, toothpaste, and mouthwash

Brush and comb

Glasses and/or contacts and saline solution if applicable

Lotion, lip balm, and deodorant

Nursing bra and breast pads , if you plan to nurse

Nightgown or pajamas

Lightweight bathrobe to throw on when you have visitors

Slippers or cozy socks with grip soles

Your cord blood banking kit , if you're banking your baby's cord blood

From daily tips to hospital bag checklists, download the What to Expect app to keep your pregnancy organized and on track.

"Definitely bring lotion," says What to Expect Community member thenewzimm. "It's nice to do that little extra for your skin when you don't feel like you."

"Highly recommend a stroller fan that you can attach to the bed railing," says Community member natamitc412. "That thing was my saving grace!"

"One more essential for me is noise-blocking headband/headphones," says Community mom 2ndpreggo. "They saved me last time when I desperately needed to sleep and hospital noises/husband snoring was making it impossible. Popped on my headband and tuned into ocean sound playlist and could finally rest."

Optional hospital bag items for mom

Extra-absorbent maxi pads (the hospital will provide some, but you might prefer your favorite brand)

Shampoo, conditioner, face wash, soap, shower gel, makeup, and anything else that helps you feel refreshed

Massage oils or lotion for labor

Extra pairs of underwear suitable for maxi pads

Cardigan , zip-front fleece, sweatpants, or yoga pants if you want to change out of your pajamas Trusted SourceKaiser PermanentePacking Your Bag for Delivery DaySee All Sources [1]

Snacks

Music or headphones

Diversions for a long labor, such as a juicy novel, crossword puzzles, magazines, a deck of cards, laptop, or video games

A baby care book, like What to Expect the First Year (if you have room to pack it and think you'll have a chance to look at it)

A baby keepsake book so you can pen some first memories

Your favorite pillow or lightweight blanket

Your "who to call" list for sharing the good news

"My luxury items are a portable sound machine and night light!" says What to Expect Community mom emilysy715.

"I'm taking a pack of those single-use face washcloths in case I want to freshen up and can't take a shower yet," says Community member EBand3.

What should I pack for my baby?

Your baby won’t need much, but here are a few items to consider:

Going-home outfit, including socks or booties

Weather-appropriate accessories, such as a knit cap if it’s cold out, or a hat with a little brim if it's sunny and warm.

A blanket

While it won't fit it in your hospital bag, you'll want to have your car seat ready to go. In fact, a few weeks before your due date, go ahead and have it installed and inspected by a certified technician. You can find one through the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsLast Minute Activities Before DeliverySee All Sources [2]

Trusted SourceAmerican Academy of PediatricsLast Minute Activities Before DeliverySee All Sources

“You’ll feel better able to welcome your baby knowing you’re prepared with clothes and swaddling blankets, and that the car seat is ready to go,” says Dr. Kyle Monk , a board-certified pediatrician at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles and a member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board .

What should I pack for my partner or coach?

Labor can be long — and there will be times when your partner or coach doesn't have much to do. Here’s what might come in handy:

Phone and a charger

Gum, mints, lip balm

Toothbrush, toothpaste, deodorant, other toiletries

Spare contact lenses, glasses

A travel pillow or bed pillow and a blanket

Sweatshirt or jacket for quick runs to the drugstore or deli

A change of underwear and fresh shirt in case labor goes on — and on

Pajamas or sweats in case of an overnight stay

Plenty of snacks, especially ones that keep well (pretzels, trail mix, granola bars)

Small bills or change for vending machines and the hospital cafeteria

Reusable water bottle or sports drinks

A camera or video camera, if desired

Books, newspaper, magazines, or games for downtime

Community mom amandadandelion recommends packing a sleeping bag for your partner. "They do not provide blankets for support folks," she notes.

"My husband is who needed a few extra changes of clothes, blankets, and pillows," says Community mom redbullgivesyouwings, who says she otherwise overpacked.

Is there anything I shouldn’t bring to the hospital?

You can certainly overdo it when it comes to packing your hospital bag. Here’s what to leave at home:

Too much clothing for you or the baby . Choose one outfit each and leave the rest at home.

Valuables . Don’t bring diamond earrings, the priceless watch your dad gave you, or anything you’d be sad to lose. Hospitals aren’t hot beds of crime, but better safe than sorry.

Large amounts of cash . Rely on your partner, coach, or relatives with you in the hospital to pay for food, drinks, and snacks.

Diapers . The hospital will provide enough during your stay.

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends keeping your packed hospital bag near the front door or in your car trunk once it's ready.

And don’t forget Fluffy! Arrange for a friend or family member to pop in and check that your pet(s) are taken care of while you're gone.