Your Quick and Easy Guide to Pregnancy-Safe Skin Care Ingredients

Our resident dermatology expert breaks down what skin products are safe to use when you're pregnant and which ones aren't.

Stretch marks, acne, melasma , itchy skin, and more. When you’re pregnant, the skin care woes can start to feel endless. And so can the search for something to provide relief, since finding remedies that work and are safe during pregnancy can be challenging.

Rather than Googling individual ingredients you might see on a product label, just check this list. Here, Jessica Wu, M.D. , board-certified dermatologist and member of the What to Expect Medical Review Board , gives the thumbs-up or thumbs-down to common skincare ingredients.

Key Takeaways

Not all skin care ingredients are pregnancy-approved. Some go-to's, like retinoids and salicylic acid, should wait until after breastfeeding — so always double-check labels before applying.

You’ve got plenty of safe options to keep your glow. Ingredients like niacinamide, vitamin C, and mineral sunscreen can help you care for your skin without worry.

When in doubt, ask your doctor. A quick chat with your provider can help you find products that soothe your skin safely throughout pregnancy and beyond.

Safe skin care ingredients for pregnancy

These ingredients and treatments generally get the green light, though some may need to wait until your second trimester. Remember, always ask your doctor before using a new medication or treatment while you’re pregnant.

Azelaic acid

Benzoyl peroxide (in small amounts after the first trimester)

Vitamin B6

Vitamin C (topically)

Vitamin E (topically)

Glycolic acid or fruit acid

Lasers (if they’re mild, but no numbing cream)

Mineral sunscreens like titanium dioxide and zinc oxide

Niacinamide

Blue light for acne

Find out more about what's safe and what isn't in the What to Expect app .

Skin care ingredients to avoid during pregnancy

Steer clear of these ingredients, which are known to be unsafe during pregnancy, and in some cases, during breastfeeding.

Antibiotics including tetracycline, doxycycline, and minocyclin

Anti-aging creams (until after breastfeeding)

Bio oil

Botox and other fillers (until after breastfeeding)

Chemical peels (except for mild glycolic acids)

Essential oils

Finasteride

Hydroquinone

Retinoids including retinol, retin-a, isotretinoin, tretinoin, adapalene, and tazarotene (oral and topical)

Salicylic acid (until after breastfeeding)

Spironolactone

Pregnancy-approved skin care picks

Need some specific suggestions? These doctor-approved skin care treatments moms swear by are a great place to start. And if you have questions about a particular product or skin concern, let your practitioner know. Together, you can find options that work for you.