Your Questions About Sex During Pregnancy, Answered

Updated with Ask Heidi video.

benefits of pregnancy sex

Sex during pregnancy is good for both you and baby: It can help you sleep better, lower your blood pressure and even make you happier! Here are some of the biggest benefits of pregnancy sex.

You and your partner might’ve had plenty of bedroom sessions while you were trying to conceive. But now that you’re pregnant, your feelings towards sex may not be quite so straightforward.

It’s completely normal if you feel uneasy about having sex during pregnancy, and it’s also understandable if you have lots of questions. Is it safe? Is it possible to do it comfortably? And above all, is it even worth it if you’re feeling tired and would rather just conk out early?

Fortunately, there are plenty of guidelines regarding sex during pregnancy — and some amazing benefits, too.

Is sex safe during pregnancy?

The short answer: yes. However, it’s always a good idea to get the green light from your practitioner first, just to ensure you don’t have any complications.

Another reason to discuss sex with your practitioner is if you have a history of miscarriage or are at a higher risk for one. If that's the case, they may suggest avoiding sex for the first few months.

Although the amniotic sac protects your baby from infectious organisms, sexually transmitted infections remain a significant health risk during pregnancy. There are some STIs that can be dangerous for babies, including chlamydia, gonorrhea and HIV, so if you think you’re at risk, talk to your practitioner about getting tested. Make sure any sex toys are cleaned well with soap and water before you hop into bed, too.

Make sure any sex toys are cleaned well with soap and water before you hop into bed, too.

This goes for any new partners as well. It’s recommended that you use condoms or dental dams during pregnancy if you’re not in a mutually monogamous relationship.

As for particular sexual acts or positions, do not engage in any form of oral sex where a partner blows air into a woman’s vagina. It can cause a life-threatening air embolism to both you and your baby.

Is oral sex safe during pregnancy?

Oral sex — licking, sucking and tongue penetration — are all perfectly fine when you’re expecting as long as you have your practitioner's approval to orgasm.

But avoid blowing into the vagina during pregnancy, since it can lead to an air embolism (when an air bubble enters a vein or artery and blocks it, which can cause a heart attack, stroke or respiratory failure).

Oral stimulation of the penis is also safe during pregnancy, as is swallowing semen.

Is anal sex safe during pregnancy?

As long as your doctor signs off on regular sex and you’re not suffering from pregnancy hemorrhoids , anal sex is probably safe during pregnancy — just proceed through very gently and with caution. That means following the same rules you adhered to before you were pregnant.

The most important one? Never go from anal to vaginal sex without cleaning up first, or you could risk introducing harmful bacteria into your vagina that could infect you and your baby.

When is sex during pregnancy not safe?

Depending on the situation, your practitioner may place restrictions on sex during pregnancy. This could be for a certain period of time or the full nine months if it’s a high-risk pregnancy .

Some of the more common reasons you may be advised to abstain from sex or continue with restrictions include:

A history (or symptoms) of preterm labor or premature birth

Diagnosis of an incompetent cervix or placenta previa

Unexplained vaginal bleeding , discharge or cramping

Amniotic fluid leakage

Carrying multiples (twins, triplets and so on)

Also, don’t have sex if you’re having contractions or your water has broken.

Make sure to ask your practitioner exactly what is safe to do and when. This way you and your partner can engage in pleasurable activities — like mutual masturbation or oral sex — without stress.

Can sex during pregnancy hurt my baby?

If your practitioner has given you clearance to have sex during pregnancy, then it's perfectly safe. The amniotic sac keeps your baby warm and protected while you and your partner heat things up beneath the sheets. And if you’re concerned that penetrative sex might poke baby in the head, let us assuage your fears: Your baby is nowhere near where the main event takes place.

It’s also normal if you’re wondering if sex during pregnancy means you always have an audience. But fear not: Your baby can’t see what you’re up to, and has absolutely no idea what’s going on. Even if she’s kicking up a storm after you orgasm, that’s not a reaction to your pleasure — it’s just a normal fetal response to uterine activity. In fact, baby might be enjoying the undulating motions synonymous with sex.

Can pregnancy sex cause me to go into labor prematurely?

Not unless your practitioner says you’re at high risk for premature labor or have a problem with the placenta. While an orgasm can cause your uterus to contract, it won’t trigger labor.

However, if you’re full-term or past-term, some experts do encourage women in late-stage pregnancy to have sex as a way to jump-start labor .

Is bleeding after sex normal during pregnancy?

Between a more sensitive cervix, an engorged mouth of the uterus and an overall increased blood flow to the genital area, it is possible to experience some spotting after sex . While it shouldn’t be cause for concern, it’s always a good idea to inform your practitioner for your own peace of mind.

Call your practitioner immediately if you’re experiencing pain during sex , painful cramps that don’t quickly subside or any amniotic fluid leakage.

What are the benefits of sex during pregnancy?

Sex during pregnancy can come with some pretty sweet perks. Here are a few benefits of pregnancy sex that just might make your time in bed even better.

It’s a safe, partner-bonding experience. Pregnancy is an emotional roller coaster, for both you and your partner. Being intimate with one another is a great way to stay connected to each other during this exciting time.

It’s great for your physical health. One 30-minute sex romp can burn around 50 calories, and it lowers your blood pressure, too!

It can ease pain and discomfort. Since orgasms signal the release of oxytocin, a hormone that can increase your pain tolerance, they can help with those backaches and other pregnancy-related pains.

It improves sleep. Not only does pregnancy sex help you relax, but it releases the above-mentioned feel-good hormones as well.

It’s a mood-booster. Even if you’re super excited about your pregnancy, those pesky hormones can still cause anxiety and the blues. The release of oxytocin that comes with an orgasm isn’t just beneficial for physical pain — it can help increase your feelings of love and joy, bringing you closer to your partner.

It may help labor along when you’re ready to go. Having an orgasm spurs your uterus to contract. Unless you’re nearing the tail-end of your pregnancy and your body is ready to begin the birthing process, these contractions aren’t strong enough to make you go into labor. But once your baby decides that it’s just about go time, a romp in the sack may be able to help move things along — though it doesn't always, so don't be disappointed if nothing happens. But if you’re up for sex at the 40-week mark, there’s no reason not to go for it.

It may ease your postpartum recovery. Because pregnancy sex can help tone your pelvic floor, you’re preparing your body for both childbirth and recovery — just by having orgasms! You can also try doing Kegels during sex if you want to get those vaginal muscles in shape even more.

Will sex feel different during pregnancy?

It might, as you’re also accommodating surging hormones and a rapidly changing body shape. It can feel uncomfortable, exasperating or awesome. Some expectant mothers will experience an increased sensitivity due to engorged genitals that can result in more intense orgasms. But for other women, those physical changes cause them to feel less satisfied than usual.

If you’re in the latter category, there are a few things you can try: Because the vagina and vulva are more swollen right now, lubricants can help if you’re experiencing discomfort during penetrative sex. You can also use this time to spice things up in the bedroom by trying a new approach, be it oral sex , manual stimulation or different positions.

If you’re experiencing any pain, however, be sure to contact your practitioner.

As for your libido? You may notice changes, but it depends. Some pregnant women experience an increased sex drive during pregnancy thanks to higher levels of estrogen. On the positive side, that extra blood flow to your vulva and breasts makes them more sensitive, which can result in more intense sensations and orgasms.

But a decrease in your sex drive is just as normal in pregnancy, and if you find yourself consumed with symptoms like nausea, fatigue or bloating, it’s totally okay to not be in the mood. Instead, you can stay connected to your partner through non-sexual activities like cuddling, kissing or talking.

What are the best sex positions during pregnancy?

For the most part, whatever feels comfortable to you is okay during pregnancy, but that might mean you’ll have to experiment with some new positions as you accommodate your growing baby bump.

A few caveats? By the second trimester, make sure you’re not engaging in positions that put weight on your belly or have you on your back for long periods of time. Toys like strap-on dildos can stay in your repertoire, as long as they’re clean and feel comfortable (just like in your pre-pregnancy days!).

Some of the best sex positions for pregnancy include: side-lying (a great option because it keeps the weight off both your back and your belly; pregnant partner on top (it lets you be in control of both penetration depth and clitoral stimulation); rear-entry (your partner doesn’t have to maneuver around your belly, which can make things a little easier for you both); oral sex; partner on top (just as long as your partner keeps their weight off you); and mutual masturbation.

Can I still have sex at 40 weeks and beyond?

Yes, unless your doctor has specifically told you otherwise. That said, sex at 40 weeks pregnant and beyond might come with a few surprises. For instance, you might experience slight spotting after penetrative sex now that your cervix has started to soften. Don’t worry — it’s normal.