The 3-Year-Old Checkup

toddler at a checkup

At this doctor visit, your pediatrician will check on your child's health as well as his potty progress, vocabulary development and motor skills.

Ready or not, you’re now the proud parent of a (gulp!) 3-year-old! You already know your child is increasingly independent and articulate and, depending on when his birthday falls, likely to be strapping on a (little) backpack soon and heading off to preschool.

There'll be plenty of fun and learning on tap along with a fair amount of scrapes, bruises and sniffles for you (and maybe the doc) to deal with. With all that to look forward to, here’s a quick guide of what to expect during your child’s 3-year checkup:

The physical checkup

One of the most important measures of your little one’s health is his physical growth. The doctor (or nurse) will measure and weigh him to make sure he’s growing at a healthy and steady rate. To help determine that, the pediatrician will use a pediatric growth chart . Here’s another measurement milestone: This is the last doctor visit at which your child’s head circumference will be measured.

The doctor may also check your child’s blood pressure; order blood work to test for lead, anemia and high cholesterol; and do an eye exam.

To ensure that your soon-to-be preschooler is physically healthy, the pediatrician may ask questions like:

How much and how often does your child eat? Is he eating a variety of foods?

How is potty training going? If your 3-year-old hasn’t shown any signs of being ready to toilet train, be sure to let the doctor know.

Does your child have regular bathroom habits? Any signs that he’s constipated or "holding it"?

Is your child still taking an afternoon nap? (Most still need one.)

Is he left- or right-handed? (By age 3, most have a dominant hand — if not, your doc may check for coordination issues.)

Developmental milestones

The doctor will want to evaluate your preschooler’s behavioral development by asking questions about certain milestones. Children reach these at different rates, and there's a wide range of "normal" — but the pediatrician will probably want to know if your 3-year-old can: Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Child By Three YearsSee All Sources [1]

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionImportant Milestones: Your Child By Three YearsSee All Sources

Have a short conversation with you

Ask questions like "who," "what," "where" or "why"

Draw a circle (after you demo how)

Use a fork

Dress and undress (with a little help)

Calm down within 10 minutes after separating from you (e.g., at day care drop-off)

Show an interest in other kids and play with them

3-year-old vaccines

Unless your preschooler missed some immunizations at a previous well visit (perhaps he had a fever that day), he may not need any shots at his 3-year checkup.

But if it happens to take place in the fall or winter, he should get a flu shot (or opt for the flu nasal mist). The COVID-19 vaccine is also recommended for everyone 6 months and up, so if your child hasn't gotten it yet, ask the pediatrician about getting him immunized. Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCOVID-19 Vaccines for Children and TeensSee All Sources [2] It'll help protect him from serious illness.

Trusted SourceCenters for Disease Control and PreventionCOVID-19 Vaccines for Children and TeensSee All Sources

Questions to ask your doctor

Starting preschool is a big deal — for you and your child. So think of this as an opportunity to ask the pediatrician for tips that’ll make the transition go as smoothly as possible, especially if you think your little one will have trouble separating from you.

Also, preschool is a hotbed for germs, so discuss ways to keep your child as healthy as possible. And remember, your pediatrician is there to answer any questions you might have, no matter how silly you think they are. Just ask.