Russian boys’ names exude strength. As with Russian baby girl names , Russian baby boy names often come with an adorable nickname that can be just as appealing as the full version. 
Aleksander. Often spelled Aleksander in Russian, the derivative of the famous Greek name Alexander means “defender of men.” It was also the name of several Russian czars. A common Russian nickname is Sasha — perfect for your little one. Aleksei. If you’re a fan of Russian royal history, you might know that Aleksei was the name of the last heir apparent to the Romanov throne. It’s a name fit for a prince (or king) that means “defender” and stems from Greek origins, though it’s widely used in Russia and Bulgaria. In Russia, boys named Aleksei are also sometimes known ’s one of the first names that may come to mind when people think of Russian baby boy names — and for good reason. Meaning “battle” or “fight,” this powerful name of Slavic origin is consistently a top choice for parents looking to give their baby boy a traditional Russian name. Dmitri. With roots planted in Greek origin, this sophisticated baby boy name is a popular choice in Russia. It symbolizes “devotion to” or “follower of” Demeter, the Greek goddess of agriculture (also known as “mother earth”). Boys named Dmitri can also go “vigilant and watchful,” so it’s perfect for a future deep thinker. You can opt to shorten Grigoriy to the widely-used nickname Grisha. Igor. This traditional Slavic name given to boys throughout Russia and neighboring countries means “protected,” and in some instances, “warrior of peace.” It’s a cherished and beloved Russian boy name that only grows more appealing with time. Ilya. As the East Slavic form of the male Hebrew name Eliyahu, or Elijah, the simplified Ilya essentially means “the Lord is my God.” While the name may hold more religious meaning than some other names, it’s also used in neutral ways, making it a timeless Russian baby boy name. Konstantin. Depending on where you look, you’ll find different variations of this baby boy name throughout European cultures — including in Russia. Meaning “firm” or “constant,” this unwavering name is popular in Russia, Bulgaria and Serbia. A common nickname for Konstantin is Kostya, pronounced with a long “o” — as in, kohst-ya . Leonid. If you want a fearless name, there’s no better choice than Leonid. It symbolizes “lion strength.” While the name is of German origin, it’s a very popular Russian name too. Some nicknames for Leonid can include Leo, Lenya, or Lova (the last two of which are Russian). Maksim. What’s a perfect choice for a boy born to be a star? Maksim, which stems from the Latin name Maximus, which means “the greatest.” Though Latin in origin, it’s a powerful Russian name that comes with a modern nickname: Max. Mikhail. Like some of its counterparts, Mikhail is another regal name carried “who resembles God.” While Mikhail might be more formal, this name comes with an adorable Russian nickname: Misha (pronounced mee-sha), which can be gender-neutral. Oleg. It’s a short name that packs a lot of meaning. This East Slavic name means “holy,” “sacred,” or “blessed,” and it’s one of the most common boys’ names in Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus. You may see different spellings of the name (including Oleh and Aleg), though pronunciation remains the same. Vladimir. This classic Old Slavic name is a tried-and-true Russian title. Meaning “of great power” or “ruler of peace,” this timeless name also comes with a fresh nickname: Vova. Yevgeniy. More commonly known as Eugene, the Russian variation of “Yevgeniy” quite literally means “well-born.” And if your baby boy is, well, born well, this Russian and Greek name is a perfect fit. If Yevgeniy feels a bit too long, you can shorten it to one of its popular nicknames: Genya or Yevgy. Yuri. As a Russian version of the name George, Yuri means “farmer.” It’s one of the simpler selections for Russian baby boy names, but that doesn’t make it any less beautiful. A unique and classic choice, many parents throughout Russia opt to name their male children Yuri. Searching for more baby name ideas? Find unique names (and their meanings) in the What to Expect app .
Written 
Ashley Zlatopolsky is a writer, editor and content strategist. She is a native Russian speaker and Detroit-based journalist. Zlatopolsky's work has been published in Rolling Stone , National Geographic , The Guardian , The Washington Post and more. Previously, she worked as a branded content strategist at USA TODAY. Zlatopolsky speaks Russian fluently and enjoys writing stories that connect to her culture and heritage.