Key-Takeaways
Prioritize rest and relaxation. This season, it’s more than okay to slow down, skip the stress, and savor the calm moments your body is asking for. Let others lend a hand. Lighten your load (or just saying no thanks!) so you can focus on feeling your best. Keep things simple and enjoyable. Pace yourself, indulge in your favorite festive treats in moderation, and do only what truly brings you joy. 
If calm, quiet moments are at the top of your wishlist this year, skip the hubbub and treat yourself to the gift of some serious relaxation. You can: Make the holidays about you — especially if this is your first baby. After you become a mom, your little one(s) will be the main focus this time of year (well, all the time, really). So spend the holidays while pregnant doing what makes you happy, whether it's cuddling on the couch with your partner, reading a great book — before you have a little someone who'll need your constant indulging (at least for those first few months). “My husband and I are planning on having Christmas just us to relax and enjoy. Don't feel obliged to do anything you don't want to do!” says What to Expect Community mom bmcgr00. Sleep, sleep, and sleep some more. Getting the shut-eye you need isn't easy with heartburn and bathroom runs interrupting your precious Zzzs. So on weekends and holidays, snooze when you can. Sleep late, take naps in the afternoon, or turn in early when it suits you — without feeling as if you should be partying hard or getting up early to battle the airport security lines. Looking for more ways to savor this special time? The  What to Expect app  offers guidance and support to help you feel your best throughout pregnancy. Get some holiday help. Your loved ones want you to take care of yourself, so let them help you do just that. Take a backseat on the chores and cleaning this year — don't feel guilty if others clear the table or wash the dishes more often than you do. If you don't feel comfortable camping out on the couch, pitch in in spurts and take frequent feet-up breaks. Or volunteer to keep the littlest guests engaged (good practice for later) or playing a quiet circle game. Running yourself ragged over the holidays while pregnant won't do anyone any favors, so take it easy — you deserve it. Pace yourself. Even if you give most of those holiday to-dos the heave-ho, you might still opt to buy gifts, get them wrapped, decorate a bit, and maybe bake a batch of cookies. Avoid wearing yourself out when you're pregnant during the holidays “I find lowering my expectations for each day helps. So if I only get half done of what I wanted to, so be it.” says What to Expect Community mom borntomom2. Eat, drink, and be merry. Moderation is the key to enjoying the treats of the season if you're pregnant during the holidays. Of course, you'll need to skip the spiked eggnog and turn down the champagne , but there are still ways to indulge in the holiday spirit — and the goodies — without overdoing it. Have a mocktail or a mug of mulled cider, and don't deprive yourself of your mom's biscuits or Grandma's famous cookies. But keep a balance — make time (and leave room) for eating well during pregnancy, which you and your growing baby really need right now. Here's to making the most of the holiday season during pregnancy and beyond!
View Sources 
What to Expect When You're Expecting , 5th edition, Heidi Murkoff. WhatToExpect.com, Heartburn During Pregnancy , October 2022. WhatToExpect.com, 11 Holiday Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy and Safe Alternatives to Enjoy Instead , May 2024. WhatToExpect.com, Can You Drink Any Alcohol While You're Pregnant? , May 2025. WhatToExpect.com, Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy , November 2022. WhatToExpect.com, 18 Best Foods to Eat During Pregnancy , April 2022. WhatToExpect.com, Stress During Pregnancy , January 2022. Mayo Clinic,  Pregnancy Nutrition: Foods to Avoid During Pregnancy , November 2023. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Safer Food Choices for Pregnant Women , January 2025.