First Year > Newborns 
When Can You Take a Newborn Outside?
Medically Reviewed   Medical  Review Board includes OB/GYNs, pediatricians, infectious disease specialists, doulas, lactation counselors, endocrinologists, fertility specialists and more. 
We believe you should always know the source of the information you're reading. Learn more about  our editorial and medical review policies . 
newborn baby out in public and safely introduce her to friends and family? Here's everything new parents need to know about their newborn's first few outings.
When can I take my newborn outside?
Is it safe to take my newborn outside during the COVID-19 pandemic?
How can I keep my newborn safe in crowds?
How should I dress my newborn safely for outings?
When can my newborn see friends and family?
Once upon a time, a cardinal rule of  newborn care  was that new parents and babies should hole up inside their homes for weeks after birth. Today, we know that it’s perfectly safe to take your newborn on an outing from day one (or two, or three — whenever she’s released from the hospital or birthing center). If you’re up for it, chances are she will be, too. But because viruses, including the coronavirus, are becoming a fact of life, you’ll want to take some extra precautions when you’re out and about with your newborn. Along with these added safety measures, remember to  dress your baby for the weather so she’s warm enough, but not too hot, and protect her delicate skin from the sun’s rays (even on cloudy days) with a hat. 
Start slowly with your outings so neither of you gets overtired. Stash diapers, wipes, an extra blanket and a change of clothes in your bag or stroller, so you have all your supplies on hand. For more on taking a newborn outside and in crowds, as well as the latest COVID-19 advice, read on. When can I take my newborn outside? 
As mentioned, you can head out the door on day one with your newborn if she’s properly dressed, you avoid very extreme weather and you stay out of direct sunlight. Babies and their new parents benefit from a change of scene (yup, it’s boring when you’re cooped up inside all day), so a short stroll on your block or a feeding session on a park bench is a nice respite. When it comes to planning a meet-up with friends and family, they’re probably as excited to get to know your newborn as you are to show her off. But because of COVID-19, the best advice is to restrict visitors, both inside your home and out until the pandemic is behind us. Blame your pediatrician or your own motherly instincts, but get your message across. As for the people who do live in your home, don’t allow your baby near anyone with COVID-19 symptoms or possible virus exposure. Be especially careful with young siblings, and teach them to gently pat the baby’s back, or touch her tiny toes, but never her hands or face. And after any outing or family hug session, clean your baby’s hands with a wipe or wet, soapy cloth.  Is it safe to take my newborn outside during the COVID-19 pandemic? 
Yes, it’s fine to walk outside in the fresh air, but because the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing, it’s critical that you avoid crowds and maintain a safe, physical distance with your newborn. It’s also important that every adult — outside of your immediate household — washes his or her hands well, wears a face covering or mask and avoids touching the mask, too. Some places, such as doctors’ offices, offer parents the option of waiting in the car before an appointment or bringing newborns through a separate entrance and then waiting in a space where they can be safely distanced from other families. If you can avoid it, skip the grocery store, restaurants and other indoor venues where ventilation may be poor, and it can be difficult to socially distance from others. How can I keep my newborn safe in crowds? 
Keeping your newborn safe in crowds is best done ’t get too close. Stay physically distanced as much as possible, wash hands often and wear a mask (infants, however, should not don face coverings). It pays to be extra careful for the first month — the younger your baby, the less time her immune system has had to strengthen. (This is especially important for infants born prematurely or with other health concerns.) In normal times, before COVID-19, pediatricians would generally allow an outing in a crowd after the baby received her vaccine round at 2 months of age. Still, this advice can vary from doctor to doctor as infants remain susceptible to viral illnesses that are not preventable with vaccines. (This is why washing hands and staying away from sick people is so prudent). Not only do newborns have a more difficult time fighting off certain illnesses, such as respiratory infections, but they are at a higher risk for serious bacterial infections. That’s why any fever (or abnormally low temperature) has to be thoroughly investigated.  How should I dress my newborn safely for outings? 
Dressing your baby safely for an outing means paying attention to the weather, of course, but don’t be tempted to place a mask or face covering over her mouth and nose as a way of protecting her from COVID-19. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) warn that children under 2 should not wear a face covering due to suffocation risk. Instead, keep her at a safe distance from others when you’re outside, and be sure that any adults you encounter are wearing masks themselves.  Dressing a newborn for cold weather
When it’s cold out, your newborn will be most comfortable in layers of clothing, such as a long-sleeve undershirt, cozy pajamas or a one-piece outfit and a warm jacket. Older babies should wear one more layer than an adult would in the same weather conditions. Warm booties (or boots if your baby is older), as well as a cozy hat and mittens are also necessary.  Dressing a newborn for hot weather
In hot weather, over 75 degrees Fahrenheit, your baby will only need a single layer of clothing or one more layer than you’d wear at the same temperature. Clothing with a tight weave or that’s made with UV-protective material are the best picks for bright, sunny days.  Babies under 6 months should not be in direct sunlight, so use your stroller’s canopy, an umbrella or stick to the shady side of the street. Always protect your baby’s sweet head with a hat that has a three-inch brim to cover her face, ears and neck, and apply a  baby-safe, broad-spectrum sunscreen 30 to 50 SPF on all areas of exposed skin (for babies 6 months and up) and a minimal amount on small areas like the face (for babies under 6 months) When can my newborn see friends and family?  
As mentioned, most doctors will okay visits to see family and friends after the month-2 round of vaccines, but because COVID-19 is still among us, the recommendation is to stay home with your own immediate family and not socialize with others. But while we need to remain apart, this doesn’t mean we can’t take advantage of technology in order to connect with loved ones. Try to engage ’s safe to mingle again.